Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 3-28-2018]
§ 1-1. Code adopted.
The compilation of the Special Acts and ordinances of a general and
permanent nature of the Town of East Haddam, as revised, codified and
consolidated into chapters and sections by General Code LLC, and
consisting of Chapters 1 through 301, together with an Appendix, is hereby
approved, adopted, ordained and enacted as the "Code of the Town of
East Haddam, Connecticut," hereinafter called the "Code." All provisions
contained in the compilation provided for herein and known as the "Code
of the Town of East Haddam” shall be in force and effect on and after the
effective date of this ordinance.
§ 1-2. Continuation of existing provisions.
The provisions of the Code, insofar as they are substantively the same as
those of the legislation in force immediately prior to the enactment of the
Code by this ordinance, are intended as a continuation of such legislation
and not as new enactments, and the effectiveness of such provisions shall
date from the date of adoption of the prior legislation.
§ 1-3. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code, in loose-leaf form, has been filed in the office of the
Town Clerk and shall remain there for use and examination by the public
until final action is taken on this ordinance, and, if this ordinance shall
be adopted, such copy shall be certified to by the Town Clerk, and such
certified copy shall remain on file in the office of said Town Clerk to be made
available to persons desiring to examine the same during all times while
said Code is in effect.
§ 1-4. Publication; filing.
The Clerk of the Town of East Haddam shall cause to be published, in
the manner required by law, a copy of this Adoption Ordinance. Sufficient
copies of the Code shall be maintained in the office of the Clerk for
inspection by the public at all times during regular office hours. The
enactment and publication of this ordinance, coupled with the availability of
a copy of the Code for inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and
considered to be due and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for
all purposes.
§ 1-5. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code,
when adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of the Town to
make them a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into such
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-5
1:3
Code so that reference to the "Code of the Town of East Haddam” shall be
understood and intended to include such additions, deletions, amendments
or supplements. Whenever such additions, deletions, amendments or
supplements to the Code shall be adopted, they shall thereafter be included
in the Code as amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 1-6. Code to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Town Clerk, or someone authorized and directed
by the Clerk, to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the book containing
the Code required to be filed in the Clerk's office for use by the public. All
changes in said Code and all ordinances adopted subsequent to the effective
date of this codification which shall be adopted specifically as part of the
Code shall, when finally adopted, be included therein by reference until
such changes or new ordinances are printed as supplements to said Code,
at which time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-7. Supplementation of Code.
A. Supplements to this Code shall be prepared whenever authorized or
directed by the Board of Selectmen. A supplement to the Code shall
include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances
passed by the Town and all changes made thereby in the Code.
B. When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the
person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement)
may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of
ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so
to embody them into the unified Code. For example, the codifier may:
(1) Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subsections;
(2) Provide appropriate headings and titles for sections and other
subdivisions of the Code included in the supplement, and make
changes in such headings and titles;
(3) Assign appropriate numbers to chapters and sections to be inserted
in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material,
change existing or other section numbers;
(4) Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to
"this chapter," "this article," "this section," etc., as the case may be,
or to "§§ _______ to ___________" (inserting section numbers to indicate
the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of
the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and
(5) Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the
original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in
no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect
of ordinance material included in the supplement or already in the
Code.
§ 1-8. Sale of Code.
Copies of the Code, or any chapter or portion of it, may be purchased
from the Clerk or an authorized agent of the Clerk upon the payment of a
§ 1-5 EAST HADDAM CODE § 1-8
1:4
fee to be set by the Board of Selectmen. The Clerk may also arrange for
procedures for the periodic supplementation of the Code.
§ 1-9. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for offenses.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, any part or portion of the Code or to alter or tamper with such
Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the Town of
East Haddam to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section or
any part of this ordinance shall be subject, upon conviction, to a fine of not
more than $250.
§ 1-10. Severability.
A. Severability of Code provisions. Each section of the Code and every part
of each section is an independent section or part of a section, and the
holding of any section or a part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or
ineffective for any cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or
constitutionality of any other sections or parts thereof.
B. Severability of ordinance provisions. Each section of this ordinance is an
independent section, and the holding of any section or part thereof to be
unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not be deemed
to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other sections or parts
thereof.
§ 1-11. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances of the Town of East Haddam of a
general and permanent nature in force on the date of the adoption of this
ordinance which are inconsistent with any provisions of the Code are hereby
repealed from and after the effective date of this ordinance.
§ 1-12. Certain ordinances not affected by Code.
A. Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be
construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the
following:
(1) Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for
the Town, or any evidence of the Town's indebtedness;
(2) Any appropriation ordinance providing for the levy of taxes or for
any annual budget;
(3) Any order annexing territory to the Town or excluding territory as
a part of the Town;
(4) Any ordinance granting any franchise, permit or other right;
(5) Any Zoning Ordinance or amendment thereto;
(6) Any Subdivision Ordinance or amendment thereto;
(7) Any ordinance creating a special services district;
(8) Any ordinance approving, authorizing or otherwise relating to any
contract, agreement, lease, deed or other instrument;
(9) Any ordinance adopting a preliminary or development plan;
(10) Any temporary or special ordinance.
§ 1-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-12
1:5
B. All ordinances pursuant to this section are hereby recognized as
continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at
length in this section.
§ 1-13. Effect of repeal of ordinance.
A. The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force
before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect, unless expressly
stated.
B. The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty
incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or
proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed
under the ordinance repealed.
§ 1-14. Changes in previously adopted ordinances.
A. In compiling and preparing the ordinances for publication as the Code
of the Town of East Haddam, no changes in the meaning or intent of
such ordinances have been made, except as provided for in Subsection
B hereof. Certain grammatical changes and other minor nonsubstantive
changes were made in one or more of said pieces of legislation. It is the
intention of the Town that all such changes be adopted as part of the
Code as if the ordinances had been previously formally amended to read
as such.
B. In addition, the amendments and/or additions as set forth in Schedule A,
attached hereto and made a part hereof, are made herewith, to become
effective upon the effective date of this ordinance. (Chapter and section
number references are to the ordinances as they have been renumbered
and appear in the Code.)1
§ 1-15. Catchlines, histories and references.
A. The catchlines of the several sections of this Code are intended as
mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not
be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections nor as any part of
the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed
when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or
reenacted.
B. The histories appearing in brackets after sections and subsections and
the references and notes located throughout the Code are for the benefit
of the user of the Code and shall have no legal effect.
1. Editor’s Note: In accordance with § 1-14B, the chapters, parts and/or sections which were
added, amended, adopted or repealed by this ordinance are indicated throughout the Code
by the following history: “Amended (added, repealed) 3-28-2018." Schedule A, which
contains a complete description of all changes, is on file in the Town offices.
§ 1-12 EAST HADDAM CODE § 1-15
1:6
Chapter 12
BOARDS, COMMISSIONS, COMMITTEES AND AGENCIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Code of Ethics — See Ch. 30.
§ 1-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-15
1:7

ARTICLE I
Board of Finance
[Adopted 4-6-1937]
§ 12-1. Establishment; authority.
A Board of Finance is hereby established in accordance with Chapter 28 of
the General Statutes and Chapter 28 of the Cumulative Supplement to the
General Statutes, 1931, 1933, 1935.
§ 12-2. Terms of office. [Added 3-28-2018]
Members of the Board of Finance shall serve staggered terms and shall be
elected biennially to serve four-year terms of office.
§ 12-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-2
1:9

ARTICLE II
Board of Admissions
[Adopted 2-2-1970]
§ 12-3. Members.
The Board of Admissions for the Town of East Haddam shall be the Town
Clerk and the Registrars of Voters as set forth in § 9-15a of the General
Statutes of the State of Connecticut.
§ 12-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-3
1:11

ARTICLE III
Conservation Commission
[Adopted 6-15-1972]
§ 12-4. Creation.
The Town of East Haddam adopts an ordinance creating a Conservation
Commission, which shall be empowered to undertake all activities pursuant
to § 7-131a of the General Statutes of the State of Connecticut, Revision of
1958, as amended.
§ 12-5. Membership; terms. [Amended 11-19-1996; 3-26-2003]
The Commission shall consist of six regular members and three alternate
members who shall be electors of said Town. They shall be appointed by
the Chief Executive Officer of said Town to serve for a two-year term
commencing at the completion of the current terms.
§ 12-6. Removal; vacancies.
The Chief Executive Officer may remove any member for cause and may fill
any vacancy.
§ 12-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-6
1:13

ARTICLE IV
Recreation Commission
[Adopted 6-15-1972]
§ 12-7. Creation; membership.
The Town of East Haddam adopts an ordinance creating a Recreation
Commission, consisting of nine members appointed by the Board of
Selectmen to serve as follows: three members to serve for a three-year
term; three members to serve for a two-year term; and three members to
serve for a one-year term.
§ 12-8. Terms.
The terms of the members shall run from July 1, and after the initial
appointments, all appointments shall be for terms of three years, except
when filling vacancies caused by resignation, removal or death, in which
case the appointment shall be for the unexpired portion of the term of the
member being replaced.
§ 12-9. Removal; vacancies; representation.
The Board of Selectmen may remove any member for cause and may fill
any vacancy. The Board of Selectmen shall attempt to appoint members
representing as nearly as possible a cross section of the population of East
Haddam, including both youth and senior citizens.
§ 12-10. Duties.
It shall be the function of the Commission:
A. To make a continuing study of recreational activities in the Town of East
Haddam.
B. To keep a continuing inventory of recreational needs and available
resources in the Town.
C. To formulate short- and long-term recreational goals and objectives for
the Town.
D. To advise the Board of Selectmen, as well as other boards, commissions
and agencies, regarding the recreational needs of the Town.
E. To make an annual report to the Town in the manner employed by other
Town commissions and agencies.
§ 12-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-10
1:15

ARTICLE V
Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Commission
[Adopted 6-20-1974]
§ 12-11. Findings and purpose.
The inland wetlands and watercourses are an indispensable and
irreplaceable but fragile natural resource with which the citizens of the
Town of East Haddam have been endowed. The wetlands and watercourses
are an interrelated web of nature essential to an adequate supply of surface
and underground water; to hydrological stability and control of flooding
and erosion; to the recharging and purification of groundwater; and to the
existence of many forms of animal, aquatic and plant life. Many inland
wetlands and watercourses have been destroyed or are in danger of
destruction because of unregulated use by reason of deposition, filling or
removal of material, the diversion or obstruction of water flow, the erection
of structures and other uses, all of which have despoiled, polluted and
eliminated wetlands and watercourses. Such unregulated activity has had
and will continue to have a significant, adverse impact on the environment
and ecology of the Town of East Haddam and has and will continue to
imperil the quality of the environment, thus adversely affecting the
ecological, scenic, historic and recreational values and benefits of the Town
for its citizens now and forevermore. The preservation and protection of
the wetlands and watercourses from random, unnecessary, undesirable and
unregulated uses, disturbance or destruction is in the public interest and is
essential to the health, welfare and safety of the citizens of the Town of East
Haddam. It is, therefore, the purpose of this article to protect the citizens
of the Town of East Haddam by making provisions for the protection,
preservation, maintenance and use of the inland wetlands and watercourses
by minimizing their disturbance and pollution, maintaining and improving
water quality in accordance with the highest standards set by federal, state
or local authority; preventing damage from erosion, turbidity or siltation,
preventing loss of fish and other beneficial aquatic organisms, wildlife and
vegetation and the destruction of the natural habitats thereof; deterring
and inhibiting the danger of flood and pollution; protecting the quality
of wetlands and watercourses for their conservation, economic, aesthetic,
recreational, and other public and private uses and dangers of drought,
overdraft, pollution, misuse and mismanagement by providing an orderly
process to balance the need for the economic growth of the Town of East
Haddam and the use of its land with the need to protect its environment
and ecology in order to forever guarantee to the people of the Town of
East Haddam the safety of such natural resources for their benefit and
enjoyment and for the benefit and enjoyment of generations yet unborn.
§ 12-12. Membership.
A. An Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Commission is hereby established
which shall consist of five members and two alternates who are electors
of East Haddam and shall be appointed by the Board of Selectmen by
a majority vote for a term of office of two years. In the event that
§ 12-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-12
1:17
a Commission member is absent from four consecutive meetings, the
Board of Selectmen may remove the member by a majority vote and fill
the vacancy created. [Amended 3-1-2011]
B. Electors of the Town who are also municipal employees may serve
as members to the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Commission as
provided by Connecticut General Statutes § 7-421(e)(2)(D). [Added
12-26-2006]
C. At the first regular meeting of the Commission in January of every evennumbered
year, the members shall elect officers: a Chairman, a Vice-
Chairman and a Secretary. [Added 3-1-2011]
§ 12-13. Responsibilities. [Amended 3-1-2011; 3-28-2018]
The Commission shall have all the powers and responsibilities authorized
under Connecticut General Statutes §§ 22a-36 through 22a-45, inclusive, as
amended.
§ 12-12 EAST HADDAM CODE § 12-13
1:18
ARTICLE VI
Economic Development Commission
[Adopted 5-26-1987]
§ 12-14. Creation.
The Town of East Haddam hereby establishes, by this article, an Economic
Development Commission:
A. In accordance with the provisions of the General Statutes of the State
of Connecticut, as set forth under Chapters 97 and § 7-136, as amended;
[Amended 3-28-2018]
B. Hereby intending to confer on the Economic Development Commission
the powers and duties as currently enumerated in Chapters 97 and
132 of said General Statutes and all other powers and duties which
may thereafter be conferred by the General Statutes of the State of
Connecticut; and
C. Hereby intending to promote and develop the economic resources of the
Town of East Haddam and make appropriations then in acceptance of
the provisions of said General Statutes.
§ 12-15. Designation as development agency.
The Economic Development Commission of the Town of East Haddam is
hereby designated as the development agency (municipal development
projects) of the Town of East Haddam to exercise powers granted under
Chapter 132 of the Connecticut General Statutes.
§ 12-16. Members. [Amended 4-26-1989; 3-28-2018]
The Economic Development Commission shall consist of seven electors of
voting age of the Town of East Haddam who shall be appointed by the Board
of Selectmen. Upon expiration of the term of any member or replacement,
they will be appointed for a term of five years. Vacancies, however created,
shall be filled by the Board of Selectmen for the unexpired portion of the
term of the member creating the vacancy.
§ 12-17. Quorum; appointments.
A majority of the voting members of the Economic Development
Commission shall constitute a quorum. All appointments shall be made
consistent with the provisions of § 9-167a of the Connecticut General
Statutes, with terms of office to run from the date of their appointment or
until their successors are appointed and qualified.
§ 12-18. Chair and officers.
The Economic Development Commission shall annually elect from its voting
membership a Chairperson and such other officers as it shall from time to
time determine may be necessary.
§ 12-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-19
1:19
§ 12-19. Removal.
Any member may be removed by the Board of Selectmen for cause and, on
request of such member, after public hearing.
§ 12-20. Appointing employees.
The Economic Development Commission may appoint and engage
employees, agents, and consultants as may be necessary for the discharge
of its duties upon obtaining the approval of the Board of Selectmen within
the limits of the appropriations made therefor.
§ 12-21. Duties and responsibilities.
A. The Economic Development Commission, upon approval of the Board of
Selectmen, shall conduct research of the economic conditions and trends
in the Town of East Haddam, make recommendations to appropriate
officials and agencies of said Town of East Haddam regarding action it
believes will improve its economic development, and may advertise and
may prepare, print and distribute books, charts and pamphlets which in
its judgment will further its official purpose.
B. The Economic Development Commission shall annually prepare and
submit to the Board of Selectmen a report of its activities and of its
recommendations for improving such economic conditions and
development.
§ 12-22. State and federal grants.
The Economic Development Commission, following approval of the Board
of Selectmen, shall have the authority to apply for, and the First Selectman
shall be empowered to receive on behalf of the Town of East Haddam,
grants from state and federal agencies and other sources.
§ 12-23. Budget.
The Economic Development Commission shall submit each year a budget to
the Board of Selectmen to be included in the Selectmen's budget proposal.
§ 12-24. Meetings and reports.
Meetings of the Economic Development Commission shall be held at least
six times annually and at such other times as the Chairman shall deem
necessary. The Economic Development Commission shall make a written
report of its activities to the Board of Selectmen on or before the first day
of April, and such other special reports as the Board may require from time
to time.
§ 12-25. Alternate members. [Added 5-12-2010]
There shall be two alternate members who shall be appointed by the Board
of Selectmen, each for a term of five years commencing the date of
appointment. Any alternate member may be removed in accordance with
§ 12-19 EAST HADDAM CODE § 12-25
1:20
§ 12-18 of this article. An alternate member in attendance at a meeting shall
be counted in the determination of a quorum. Whenever a member is absent
or recuses himself/herself from participation or voting on a matter before
the Commission, the Chairman or the person serving as Acting Chairman
of the meeting shall appoint an alternate member to take the place of
the absent or recused member, which alternate member shall be invested
with all powers and attributes of full membership on the Commission for
the duration of the meeting or on the matter from which the regular
member has recused himself/herself, including the right to participate in
any discussion and the right to vote.
§ 12-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-25
1:21

ARTICLE VII
Board of Fire Commissioners
[Adopted 6-27-1996]
§ 12-26. Composition.
There shall be a Board of Fire Commissioners consisting of three members,
each appointed by the Board of Selectmen.
§ 12-27. Terms. [Amended 10-14-1997]
Effective January 1, 1997, one Commissioner shall be appointed to a oneyear
term; one Commissioner shall be appointed to a two-year term; and
one Commissioner shall be appointed to a three-year term. Thereafter,
the terms of office for each Commissioner shall be three years. As of the
amendment effective November 6, 1997, no Commissioner shall serve more
than two consecutive three-year terms.
§ 12-28. Vacancies.
In the event a Commissioner leaves office before completing his or her term
of service, the Board of Selectmen shall appoint a replacement within 60
days who shall serve the remainder of that Commissioner's term.
§ 12-29. Duties.
The Board of Fire Commissioners shall have the following duties:
A. To enter into an agreement with the East Haddam Volunteer Fire
Department for protection of the Town from fire.
B. To enter into mutual aid agreements with other entities pursuant to
Connecticut General Statutes § 7-310.
C. To appoint a local Fire Marshal and such Deputy Fire Marshals as
may be necessary, giving preference in making such appointments to
members of the East Haddam Volunteer Fire Department, pursuant to
Connecticut General Statutes § 29-297.
D. To supervise the care of all fire equipment and buildings and to make
appropriate arrangements for the reasonable care thereof.
E. To recommend the purchase of new apparatus and equipment as
needed.
F. To prepare and submit to the Selectmen an annual budget for the
maintenance and proper care of all fire equipment and buildings and, as
appropriate, for purchases and for long-term capital planning.
G. To purchase additional apparatus and equipment as voted by the Town.
H. To attend, as circumstances permit, fire-emergency calls in order to
observe the condition of apparatus, and the efficiency of the East
Haddam Volunteer Fire Department, but without authority to direct
operations.
§ 12-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-29
1:23

ARTICLE VIII
Agriculture Commission
[Adopted 6-1-2010]
§ 12-30. Findings and purpose.
A. Family farms and the rural landscape they represent are being lost at
an alarming rate in Connecticut. East Haddam is among the several
towns which have lost valuable farmland to residential development.
According to the 1950 Census of Agriculture, there were 15,615 farms
in Connecticut using about 40% of the land area in the state (1,254,144
acres of the 3,135,360 total). By 2002, the number of farms dropped
to 4,191 and 357,154 acres. During the same period, in Middlesex
County, the number of farms had plummeted to 326 from 1,039. This
was a change in farmland area from 76,595 acres to 17,806 acres. It is
interesting to note that in 2007 the number of farms increased to 393,
but the amount of land devoted to farming decreased to 16,623 acres
and the size of an average farm was reduced to 42 acres from 55 acres.
B. Agriculture is an important element of the rural character of East
Haddam. It is not difficult to see how far we have come from our
early agricultural heritage when one views the many stone walls, now
mostly shrouded in trees and separating subdivisions. These walls are a
connection to the many farms that once covered the majority of our Town
landscape.
C. The importance of agriculture is expressed very well in the publication
"Planning for Agriculture." "Farms and farmland remain cornerstones of
many Connecticut communities, linking the past to the future through
a landscape of fields and pastures, stone walls and weathered barns
shaped by generations of hardworking farm families. This landscape,
cherished by so many, is often taken for granted. Some of its benefits
are obvious: the bounty of fresh fruits and vegetables in the spring
and summer months; pumpkins, chrysanthemums and Christmas trees
in the fall and winter; and milk and dairy products year-round. Other
benefits are less obvious: the local revenue and jobs farms provide, the
recreational and tourism opportunities they create, the wildlife habitat
and other environmental benefits they offer. Some benefits are easily
quantified; many are not. The benefit that may be most valued by
Connecticut residents — the ephemeral 'quality of life' that farms help
to provide — unfortunately sometimes is only recognized after it's too
late and the last farm in Town has disappeared." (Note: A publication
of American Farmland Trust and Connecticut Conference of
Municipalities.)
D. It is therefore incumbent on the Town of East Haddam to endeavor to
preserve, protect and promote the few remaining farms contributing to
its unique rural character, to encourage new agricultural enterprises and
to ensure that our community has a local source of food for the future.
§ 12-31. Membership; terms; meetings.
A. Appointment. The Agriculture Commission shall consist of five-regular
members and three alternates. Regular members and alternates shall be
§ 12-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-31
1:25
appointed by the Board of Selectmen in accordance with the Connecticut
General Statutes. Insofar as practical, members appointed shall be
representative of all groups interested in the management, promotion,
protection and regulation of agriculture as defined by Connecticut
General Statutes § 1-1(q), particularly those involved in agriculture. The
Agriculture Commission may recommend to the Board of Selectmen
removal of members from the Commission and appointment of new
members to fill vacancies on the Commission.
B. Length of term. Staggered three-year terms, with initial appointments
to be three members for two years and two members for one year;
thereafter, all terms for members shall be three years; one alternate
for two years and two alternates for one year; thereafter, all terms of
alternates shall be two years. Terms shall commence on the second
Tuesday of January and expire on the second Monday of January. A
regular or alternate member who misses four consecutive meetings may
be removed by the Board of Selectmen and a replacement appointed to
serve the remainder of that member's term. Members of the Commission
shall serve without pay.
C. Quorum and alternate member voting. A quorum will consist of three
regular members. An alternate named to act in place of a regular
member at a meeting shall be considered a regular member for purposes
of establishing a quorum. Alternate members may participate in
Commission discussions but shall vote only when appointed to fill an
absence among regular members.
D. Meetings. The Commission shall meet no less frequently than quarterly
in each calendar year.
§ 12-32. Duties and responsibilities.
The Agricultural Commission shall be an advisory board with the following
duties and responsibilities:
A. Advocacy: to act as an advocate for local agriculture.
B. Information: to serve as a conduit between nonprofit agencies, civic
organizations, municipal boards and commissions, elected officials and
local farmers.
C. Education: to recommend changes in local law, regulations, rules and
practices of Town departments, boards and commissions regarding
compatibility with all forms of agriculture, farms and farming as defined
in Connecticut General Statutes; to educate Town government about
agricultural laws, such as right to farm, and legal issues regarding
farm machinery, buildings and operations; to provide information and
guidance on agriculture-related issues, such as zoning, inland wetlands,
public works and others, to Town departments and other boards and
commissions as necessary; to act as a sounding board/provide review
to Town departments, boards and commissions concerning the impact
of proposed Town policies on farms; to support vocational/agricultural
education of young farmers and new farmers; to support local and
regional agriculture education programs.
§ 12-31 EAST HADDAM CODE § 12-32
1:26
D. Conflict resolution: to serve as a resource for information and
nonbinding advice for residents, established Town committees and
departments concerning resolution of agriculture-related conflicts.
E. Economic opportunities: to identify innovative opportunities for farming
in East Haddam; to promote opportunities for residents and local
businesses to support and value farming; to serve as a conduit between
nonprofit agencies, funders, and local farmers; to work to create a
climate that supports the economic viability of farming as a career in
East Haddam; to create a sustainable agriculture community; to work
with local land use boards and commissions and East Haddam's Open
Space Committee to secure the land base necessary for future
agricultural uses.
§ 12-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-32
1:27

ARTICLE IX
Commission on Aging
[Adopted 11-30-2010]
§ 12-33. Membership; terms; meetings.
A. Appointment. The Commission on Aging shall consist of seven regular
members and two alternates. Regular members and two alternates shall
be appointed by the Board of Selectmen in accordance with the
Connecticut General Statutes. The Commission on Aging may
recommend to the Board of Selectmen removal of members from the
Commission for cause and appointment of new members to fill vacancies
on the Commission. For purposes of this article, "for cause" shall mean
a member or alternate who is absent from more than three meetings in
any calendar year.
B. Length of term. Members shall serve staggered three-year terms, with
initial appointments to be one member for one year; three members for
two years; and three members for three years. Thereafter, all terms for
members shall be three years; two alternates for one year and thereafter
all terms for alternates shall be one year. All terms of regular members
(except initial appointments) and alternates shall commence on July 1
and end on June 30. Members and alternates of the Commission shall
serve without pay.
C. Quorum and alternate member voting. A quorum will consist of four
regular members. An alternate named to act in place of a regular
member at a meeting shall be considered a regular member for purposes
of establishing a quorum. Alternate members may participate in
Commission discussions but shall vote only when appointed to fill an
absence among regular members.
D. Meetings. The Commission shall meet no less frequently than six times
in each calendar year.
§ 12-34. Duties and responsibilities.
The Commission on Aging shall be an advisory board with the following
duties and responsibilities:
A. Advocacy: to promote the health, safety and well-being of the Town's
senior citizens, defined as residents who are 50 years of age or older.2
B. Information:
(1) To analyze services and programs available through public and
private agencies for the Town's senior citizens;
(2) To make recommendations to the Board of Selectmen regarding
the development and application of services and programs for the
benefit of the Town's senior citizens;
(3) To exchange information with the state's Commission on Aging and
Department of Social Services;
2. Editor's Note: This subsection was revised by the Board of Selectmen 12-19-2012 to
change "65 years of age" to "50 years of age."
§ 12-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-34
1:29
(4) To serve as a conduit between nonprofit agencies, civic
organizations, municipal boards and commissions, elected officials
and the Town's senior citizens;
(5) To apply to the State of Connecticut Commission on Aging, or to
other public agencies, for assistance in planning and coordinating
services and programs for the benefit of the Town's senior citizens;
(6) To receive gifts and apply for grants in the name of the Town for
the benefit of the Town's senior citizens, and to administer such gifts
or grants in accordance with terms of this article and in accordance
with any specific purposes or limitations stated in such gifts or
grants; and
(7) To conduct programs for the benefit of the Town's senior citizens,
provided monies for such programs are available by gift, grant or
Town appropriation. The programs to be conducted may include
travel, food services and other services.
§ 12-34 EAST HADDAM CODE § 12-34
1:30
Chapter 26
ELECTIONS
§ 12-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-34
1:31

ARTICLE I
Registration of Voters
[Adopted 5-11-1962]
§ 26-1. Additional sessions.
The Board of Admissions of Electors of the Town of East Haddam is
authorized to hold additional sessions on the last Saturday in January and
the last Saturday in May from 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon.
§ 26-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 26-1
1:33

ARTICLE II
Election Date
[Adopted 12-17-1968]
§ 26-2. November date established.
A municipal election date in accordance with § 9-164 of the General
Statutes, as amended, is established, this date to be, in the Town of East
Haddam, the first Tuesday after the first Monday in November in oddnumbered
years.
§ 26-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 26-2
1:35

ARTICLE III
Election Officials
[Adopted 9-1-1970; amended in its entirety 3-28-2018]
§ 26-3. Shifts of officials.
Two shifts of election officials shall be established at each polling place,
with the exception of the Moderator, pursuant to the provisions of C.G.S.
§ 9-258a.
§ 26-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 26-3
1:37

ARTICLE IV
Location
[Adopted 9-30-2009]
§ 26-4. Location established.
The Town Meeting hereby establishes the Nathan Hale-Ray High School
Gymnasium at 15 School Drive, Moodus, as the polling place for all regular
elections held subsequent to this date, and hereby repeals any prior
ordinance or resolution establishing a different location.
§ 26-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 26-4
1:39
Chapter 30
ETHICS, CODE OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Boards, commissions, committees and
agencies — See Ch. 12.
Justices of the Peace — See Ch. 57.
§ 30-1. Purpose.
Public office is a public trust. The trust of the public is essential for
government to function effectively. Public policy developed by government
officials and employees affects every citizen of the municipality, and it
must be based on honest and fair deliberations and decisions. This process
must be free from threats, favoritism, undue influence, and all forms of
impropriety so that the confidence of the public is not eroded. By enacting
this code, this municipality seeks to avoid any loss of trust and to maintain
and increase the confidence of our citizens in the integrity and fairness of
their government.
§ 30-2. Applicability.
A. This code shall apply to all current Town officials and employees,
whether elected and/or appointed, full-time or part-time, paid or unpaid.
All of the above shall be referred to hereinafter as "persons governed by
this code." [Amended 3-28-2018]
B. This code shall not be applicable if it conflicts in whole or in part with
any labor agreement, employment contract or state statute.
§ 30-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BUSINESS — Any entity through which activity for profit or not for profit
is conducted, including but not limited to a corporation, partnership,
proprietorship, firm, enterprise, franchise, association, organization, or selfemployed
individual.
BUSINESS WITH WHICH HE/SHE IS ASSOCIATED — A business of which
the person or a member of his/her immediate family is a director, officer,
owner, partner, member, employee, compensated agent, or holder of stock
which constitutes 5% or more of the total outstanding stock of any class.
CODE — This Code of Ethical Conduct.
COMMISSION — The Municipal Ethics Commission.
COMPLAINANT — Any person who signed a complaint under penalties of
false statement alleging a violation of this code.
§ 26-4 EAST HADDAM CODE § 30-3
1:40
COMPLAINT — Any complaint received by the Commission alleging a
violation of this Code of Ethics.
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION — Information, whether transmitted orally
or in writing, which is obtained by reason of the public position or office
held, that is not, at the time of transmission, a matter of public record or
public knowledge.
CONFIDENTIAL INVESTIGATION — The examination, prior to the finding
of probable cause, of both written and oral evidence, that is not to be
disclosed to any third party by anyone connected with the investigation,
except upon the written request of the respondent.
CONFLICT OF INTEREST — An interest that is in substantial conflict with
the proper discharge of the official's duties or employment in the public
interest and of the official's responsibilities as prescribed by the laws of
this state, if the official has reason to believe or expect that the official,
the official's spouse or dependent child, or a business with which he is
associated, as defined herein, will derive a direct monetary gain or suffer a
direct monetary loss, as the case may be, by reason of the official's official
activity.
FINANCIAL INTEREST — Pecuniary or material benefit accruing to a Town
official/employee as a result of a contract, transaction, zoning decision or
other matter which is, or may be, the subject of an official act or action by
or with the Town of East Haddam except for such contracts of transactions
which by their terms and by the substance of their provisions confer the
opportunity and right to realize the accrual of similar benefits to all persons
and/or property similarly situated.
GIFT — Anything of value, including entertainment, food, beverages, travel,
and lodging, given or paid to a public official or public employee to the
extent that consideration of equal or greater value is not received. A gift
does not include:
A political contribution otherwise reported as required by law or a
donation or payment as described in Subdivision (9) or (11) of
Subsection (b) of C.G.S. § 9-601a; [Amended 3-28-2018]
A.
A commercially reasonable loan made on terms not more favorable than
loans made in the ordinary course of business;
B.
A gift received from a member of a person's immediate family or
fiancee;
C.
Goods or services which are provided to the municipality or that
support an event and which facilitate government actions or functions;
[Amended 3-28-2018]
D.
E. A certificate, plaque or other ceremonial award costing less than $200;
A rebate or discount on the price of anything of value made in the
ordinary course of business, without regard to that person's status;
F.
§ 30-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-3
1:41
IMMEDIATE FAMILY — Spouse, child, parent, grandchild, brother, sister,
grandparent, daughter-in-law, son-in-law, mother-in-law, father-in-law,
sister-in-law, brother-in-law, stepchildren and step-grandchildren.
ON THE RECORD — In writing, signed and dated, or a directive to the
secretary taking the minutes of a meeting to note in the minutes of the
meeting a special disclosure or statement.
PERSONAL BENEFICIAL INTEREST — Any interest, other than financial,
which would affect the action of the official or employee, except if that
interest is based solely on the responsibility of his/her Town office or
employment. Membership in or affiliation with a social, fraternal,
charitable, service, educational, religious, governmental or similar
nonprofit organization is not deemed to automatically create a presumption
of personal interest unless the official employee is also an employee of the
organization.
PROBABLE CAUSE — Probable cause is defined by determining whether
the facts would warrant a reasonable person to believe that a Town official
or employee violated this code; the belief should be more than a mere
suspicion, but less than proof beyond a reasonable doubt.[Amended
3-28-2018]
RESPONDENT — Any person accused of violating this code.
TOWN OFFICIAL, OFFICER OR EMPLOYEE — An individual, whether
elected or appointed, whether paid or unpaid, full- or part-time, including
members of boards, commissions and committees in the service of the Town
of East Haddam.
Printed or recorded information germane to government action or
functions;
G.
An honorary degree bestowed upon a public official or public employee
by a public or private university;
H.
A meal provided at an event or business meeting and/or the registration
or entrance fee to attend such an event, in which the public official or
public employee participates in his official capacity;
I.
J. A meal provided in the home by an East Haddam resident;
Gift-giving occasions recognized by the public, including Christmas,
Chanukah, birthdays, the birth or adoption of a child, weddings, first
communions, confirmations or bar/bat mitzvahs, provided the total
value of such gifts for each event shall not exceed $150;
K.
L. Services provided by persons volunteering their time;
M. A promotional item available to the general public; [Added 3-28-2018]
Anything having a value of not more than $10, provided the value of all
things provided by a donor to a recipient in any calendar year shall not
exceed $50. [Added 3-28-2018]
N.
§ 30-3 EAST HADDAM CODE § 30-4
1:42
§ 30-4. Conflicts of interest.
A. Persons governed by this code shall not engage in or participate in
any business or transaction, nor have an interest, direct or indirect,
which is incompatible with the proper discharge of that person's or
persons' official duties in the public interest, or would tend to impair
that person's or persons' independent judgment or action in the
performance of that person's or persons' official responsibilities.
B. Persons governed by this code shall not be financially interested or have
any personal beneficial interest in any contract or purchase order for
any supplies, materials, equipment or contractual services furnished to
or used by the board, agency or commission of which that person or
persons is or are a member, or of which that person or persons is or are
an employee(s). It is further provided, notwithstanding the above, that
no member of the Board of Selectmen of the Town of East Haddam and
no member of the Board of Finance of the Town of East Haddam shall
be financially interested, or have any personal beneficial interest, either
directly or indirectly, in any contract or purchase order for any supplies,
materials, equipment or contractual services furnished to or used by any
board, agency, or commission of the Town of East Haddam.
C. Financial interest in vote or transaction.
(1) Persons governed by this code shall refrain from voting upon or
otherwise participating in any matter on behalf of the municipality if
that employee or official, a business with which he/she is associated,
or a member of his/her immediate family has a financial or personal
interest in the transaction or contract, including but not limited
to the sale of real estate, materials, supplies or services to the
municipality; provided, however, that the restrictions of this
Subsection C(1) shall not apply if such financial or personal interest
accrues to him/her, his/her spouse, a dependent child or a business
with which he/she, his/her spouse, or a dependent child is associated
as a member of a profession, occupation or group to no greater
extent than to any other member of such profession, occupation or
group.
(2) If such participation is within the scope of the public employee's
or public official's official responsibility, he/she shall be required to
provide written disclosure, which sets forth in detail the nature and
extent of such interest, to the Commission.
(3) Notwithstanding the prohibition in Subsection C(1), a public
employee or public official may vote or otherwise participate in
a matter if it involves a determination of general policy and the
interest is shared with a substantial segment of the population of the
municipality.
D. Persons governed by this code shall not request or permit the use of
Town-owned vehicles, equipment, facilities, materials, or property for
personal convenience or profit, except when such are available to the
public generally, or provided by a municipal policy as adopted by the
Board of Selectman for the use of such Town official/employee in the
interest of the Town.
E. Gifts.
§ 30-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-4
1:43
(1) No person governed by this code shall solicit or accept any gift from
any person who to his/her knowledge is interested in any pending
matter within such employee's or official's responsibility.
(2) If a prohibited gift is offered, he/she must refuse it, return it, pay
the donor the full value of the gift or donate it to a nonprofit
organization, provided he/she does not receive the corresponding
tax benefit. Alternatively, it may be considered a gift to the
municipality, provided it remains in the municipality's possession
permanently.
F. No public employee or public official shall appear on behalf of private
interests before any board, agency, or committee of the municipality,
with the following exceptions, which shall be permitted:
(1) A public official who receives no compensation for his/her service to
the municipality other than per-diem payments and reimbursement
of expenses may so appear; and
(2) A public official whose responsibilities in such position include
advocacy for members of the public and/or businesses or other
applicants (e.g., economic development, land use planner) may so
appear, provided said public official is not compensated by the
private interests for such appearance.
G. No public employee or public official shall represent private interests
against the interests of the municipality in any litigation to which the
municipality is a party, with the following exceptions, which shall be
permitted:
(1) A public official who receives no compensation for his/her service to
the municipality other than per-diem payments and reimbursements
of expenses may so testify; and
(2) A public official may testify in any legal matter in which the
municipality is a party, provided said public official is not
compensated by the private interest for such a testimony.
H. Nothing contained in this code shall prohibit or restrict a public
employee or public official from appearing before any board or
commission of the municipality on his/her own behalf, or from being a
party in any action, proceeding or litigation brought by or against the
public employee or public official to which the municipality is a party.
I. No public employee or public official shall disclose confidential
information concerning municipal affairs, or use confidential
information acquired in the course of and by reason of his/her official
duties, nor shall he/she use such information for the financial interests
of himself/herself or others.
J. No public employee or public official shall use his/her position or office
to take any action that would benefit, financially or otherwise, such
employee or official or any other person or organization in a manner
that is not available to all similarly situated persons or organizations,
nor shall any public employee or public official take any action in his/her
official capacity in exchange for or as a quid pro quo for any benefit of
any kind that he/she has received from any persons or organization.
§ 30-4 EAST HADDAM CODE § 30-4
1:44
K. No public official or public employee shall grant or accept any special
consideration, treatment or advantage to or from any person beyond
that which is available to every other person.
L. No public employee or public official shall accept a fee or honorarium
for an article, appearance or speech, or for participation at an event, in
his/her official capacity.
§ 30-5. Conflict of interest statement.
All appointed members of Town boards and commissions, elected officials
and department heads must recuse themselves from any decision that
would incur a conflict of interest or potential conflict of interest. Failure to
do so will constitute a violation of this code.
§ 30-6. Distribution of code.
The Board of Selectmen shall cause a copy of this Code of Ethics to be
distributed to every public employee and public official within 60 days
after enactment of this code. Each public employee and public official shall
be furnished a copy before entering upon the duties of his/her office or
employment. A signed receipt for all copies shall be returned to the First
Selectman and retained on file.
§ 30-7. Municipal Ethics Commission.
A. There shall be a Municipal Ethics Commission consisting of five
members. The members shall be appointed by vote of the Board of
Selectmen for a term of three years, except that, of the initially
appointed members, one shall serve for one year, two for two years, and
two for three years. No individual shall be appointed to more than two
consecutive three-year terms, provided that any member may continue
in office until a successor has been appointed. No more than three
members shall be members of the same political party.
B. All members shall be electors of the municipality. No member shall:
(1) Have held public office or have been a candidate for public office for
a two-year period prior to appointment.
(2) Hold office in any political party or political committee.
(3) Be a public official in any other capacity other than a notary public
or Justice of the Peace.
C. The Commission shall elect a Chairperson, who shall preside at meetings
of the Commission, and a Vice-Chairperson to preside in the absence of
the Chairperson. Three members shall constitute a quorum. A majority
vote of the Commission shall be required for action of the Commission.
The Chairperson or any three members may call a meeting.
§ 30-8. Duties of Commission.
A. The Commission shall:
(1) Compile and maintain a record of all reports, advisory opinions,
statements, and memoranda filed by and with the Commission to
facilitate public access to such reports and statements;
§ 30-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-8
1:45
(2) Issue advisory opinions with regard to the requirements of this code
upon the written request of any person. Advisory opinions rendered
by the Commission, until amended or revoked, shall be binding on
the Commission and shall be deemed to be final decisions of the
Commission. Any person who requested an advisory opinion and who
acts in good-faith reliance on such advisory opinion shall be entitled
to use such reliance as an absolute defense to any complaint brought
under the provisions of the code in conjunction with the specific
activities that were subject of the advisory opinion;
(3) Report annually on or before February 1 to the Board of Selectmen
summarizing the activities of the Commission.
B. The Commission may adopt, after a public hearing, rules and regulations
not inconsistent with this code for the administration and
implementation of the code.
C. The Commission may employ necessary staff or outside counsel within
available appropriations.
§ 30-9. Procedure for receiving complaint.
A. The Commission shall receive complaints from any person alleging
violation of the code. Any complaint received by the Commission must
be in writing on a form prescribed by the Commission and signed under
penalty of false statement by the individual making said complaint
before:
(1) A judge of a court of record;
(2) A clerk or deputy clerk of a court having a seal;
(3) A Commissioner of Deeds or Town Clerk;
(4) A notary public;
(5) A Justice of the Peace;
(6) An attorney admitted to the Bar of the State of Connecticut.
B. If the complainant intentionally makes a false statement, he/she may
be subject to fines of up to $1,000 and penalties of up to one year's
imprisonment under the provisions of § 53a-157b of the Connecticut
General Statutes, a Class A misdemeanor.
§ 30-10. Investigation procedures, time limits, notice, hearings.
A. Upon the complaint of any person on a form prescribed by the
Commission, signed under penalty of false statement, or upon its own
complaint, the Commission shall investigate any alleged violation of
this code. Until such time as the Commission makes a determination
of probable cause, any allegations and any information supplied to or
received from the Commission shall not be disclosed to any third party
by a complainant, witness, or Commission or staff member, except upon
the written request of the respondent.
(1) Not later than 10 days after the receipt or issuance of such
complaint, the Commission shall provide notice of such receipt or
issuance and a copy of the complaint by registered or certified mail
to any respondent against whom such complaint is filed and shall
provide notice of the receipt of such complaint to the complainant.
Complaints shall be noted as received at a scheduled meeting.
§ 30-8 EAST HADDAM CODE § 30-10
1:46
(2) If the complaint has been filed by a member of the public, the
Commission shall review the complaint to determine:
(a) Whether the allegations contained therein, if proved, would
constitute a violation of any provisions of the code. If the
Commission determines that the complaint does not allege
sufficient facts to constitute a violation, the Commission shall
dismiss the complaint and duly notify the complainant and
respondent by registered or certified mail.
(b) If the Commission determines that the complaint alleges
sufficient facts to constitute a violation, then within 30 days
after so determining, the Commission shall fix a date for the
commencement of the hearing on the allegation contained
therein. Such hearing shall be conducted in two phases. In the
first phase, the Commission will make a confidential
determination as to whether there is probable cause to believe
the facts alleged in the complaint actually occurred. If the
Commission does not make a finding of probable cause, the
complaint and all records of the hearing shall remain confidential
except upon the written request of the respondent. If the
Commission makes a finding of probable cause, the Commission
shall proceed to the second phase, which shall be a public
hearing to determine whether a violation has occurred. The
hearing date regarding any complaint shall be not more than 60
days after the filing of the complaint.
B. In the conduct of an investigation of an alleged violation of this code:
(1) The Commission shall have the power to hold hearings, administer
oaths, examine witnesses, receive oral and documentary evidence,
subpoena witnesses, and require the production for examination by
the Commission of any books and papers that the Commission deems
relevant in any matter under investigation or in question. In the
exercise of such powers, the Commission may use the services of the
municipal police, who shall provide the same upon the Commission's
request.
(2) The respondent shall have the right to appear and to be represented
by legal counsel and to examine and cross-examine witnesses. All
witnesses will be sworn.
C. The Commission shall make no finding that there is a violation of any
provision of the code except upon the concurring vote of at least four of
its members.
D. Any hearing conducted by the Commission shall be governed by the
Uniform Administrative Procedures Act, C.G.S. § 4-166 et seq., as
amended. [Amended 3-28-2018]
E. No complaint may be made under this code except within three years
after the violation alleged in the complaint has been committed.
F. No person shall take or threaten to take official action against an
individual for such individual's disclosure of information to the
Commission under the provisions of this code.
§ 30-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-11
1:47
§ 30-11. Confidentiality of complaints; evaluations of possible
violations and investigations; publication of findings.
A. Unless the Commission makes a finding of probable cause, a complaint
alleging a violation shall be confidential except upon the written request
of the respondent unless such information is required to be disclosed
pursuant to the Freedom of Information Act as set forth in Connecticut
General Statutes § 1-200 et seq.
B. Prior to any other action on a complaint, the Commission may conduct a
preliminary investigation to determine whether the filing of a complaint
is warranted. This preliminary investigation shall be confidential except
upon the written request of the respondent.
C. If the Commission makes a finding of no probable cause, the complaint
and the record of its investigation shall remain confidential, except upon
the request of the respondent. No complainant, witness, designated
party, or commission or staff member shall disclose to any third party
any information learned from the investigation, including knowledge
of the existence of a complaint, which the disclosing party would not
otherwise have known. The Commission shall inform the complainant
and the respondent of its finding by registered or certified mail not
later than three business days after termination of the hearing or
investigation.
D. The Commission shall make public a finding of a violation not later than
five business days after the termination of the hearing. At such time, the
entire record of the investigation shall become public.
E. The Commission shall inform the complainant and the respondent of its
finding and provide them a summary of its reasons for making such a
finding by registered or certified mail not later than three business days
after termination of the hearing.
§ 30-12. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by any final decision of the Commission may appeal
such decision in accordance with the provisions of § 4-175 or 4-183 of the
Connecticut General Statutes. If successful, any and all reasonable legal
fees will be paid by the Town of East Haddam.
Chapter 35
FUNDS
§ 30-11 EAST HADDAM CODE § 30-12
1:48
ARTICLE I
Albert E. Purple Memorial Fund
[Adopted 2-10-1930]
§ 35-1. Establishment.
The Town of East Haddam hereby accepts with grateful appreciation the
generous bequest of $400,000 in trust, as a permanent fund to be known as
the "Albert E. Purple Memorial Fund" for high school purposes, as provided
in the will of our late fellow townsman, Arthur J. Silliman, deceased. The
Town agrees to assume said trust for the benefit of its inhabitants and to
carry out the provisions of said bequest, and the Town Treasurer is hereby
authorized to accept the receipt for said fund, on behalf of the Town.
§ 35-2. Investment of funds.
The Town School Committee, increased as hereinafter provided, in
cooperation with the Town Treasurer, is hereby instructed and empowered
in behalf of the Town to enter into such institution having a trust
department, located in the State of Connecticut and selected by said
Treasurer and Committee increased as aforesaid, as may be deemed by
them to be for the best interests of the Town, to act as financial agent of
the Town in the care, custody, management, investment and reinvestment
of said trust fund, said agreement to be executed in behalf of the Town by
the Chairman of the Town School Committee and by the Treasurer.
§ 35-3. Committee.
In the preparation of said agreement and in any subsequent transaction
relating to said trust fund, the Town School Committee is hereby authorized
to associate with itself one person selected by a majority of its members,
who is a resident of East Haddam, but not a member of said committee,
all of said persons to constitute and be known as the "Albert E. Purple
Memorial Fund Committee."
§ 35-4. Delivery of assets to financial institution.
The Town Treasurer, upon said bequest from the Silliman Estate, and upon
the completion of said agreement, shall deliver to such trust company or
banking institution, as financial agent of the Town, the assets of said trust
fund, to be invested and administered by the financial agent according to
the terms of said bequest and of such agreement.
§ 35-5. Transfer of securities.
Any transfer of securities or other property in said fund, when duly executed
by said financial agent and countersigned by the Town Treasurer then in
office, or in his absence or by reason of his inability to act, by the Chairman
of the Town School Committee, shall be effectual to confer a good title.
§ 35-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 35-6
1:49
§ 35-6. Financial agent.
The appointment of any financial agent under said agreement shall continue
(except in case of resignation) until rescinded by a two-thirds vote of a Town
Meeting legally warned for that purpose; and said financial agent shall not
resign or relinquish its duties and obligations under said agreement (unless
in case of the removal for cause), except upon three months' written notice
to the Town Treasurer then in office.
§ 35-6 EAST HADDAM CODE § 35-6
1:50
ARTICLE II
Reserve Fund
[Adopted 9-19-1950]
§ 35-7. Establishment; authority. [Amended 3-28-2018]
The Town hereby creates a reserve fund for capital and nonrecurring
expenditures, termed the "Reserve Fund for Capital and Nonrecurring
Expenditures," in accord with C.G.S. § 7-360.
§ 35-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 35-7
1:51

ARTICLE III
Open Space Trust Fund
[Adopted 6-25-1998; amended in its entirety 12-30-2002]
§ 35-8. Findings and purpose.
Open space areas within the Town of East Haddam have been and continue
to be a diminishing resource, and such open space areas are considered
a valuable asset to the community. It is recognized that there is a need
to obtain additional open space areas in order to meet future recreational
needs, to preserve agricultural lands, to protect natural resource areas and
to maintain the Town's quality of life. In the 1980s, the State of Connecticut,
through its plan of conservation and development, made commitments to
acquire open space but has fallen for short of its commitment. The Town of
East Haddam cannot depend solely on the state. The establishment of an
open space trust fund will permit the acquisition of land and/or purchase
of development rights for areas identified in the Plan of Development Open
Space Plan and other recreational and conservation planning documents.
§ 35-9. Goals.
Not in any set order of importance:
A. Protect contiguous areas of open space; assemble corridors or
greenbelts, wildlife corridors and trails, and add to present open space
throughout the Town and adjoining communities.
B. Protect surface water, wetlands, watercourses, and aquifers.
C. Protect critical or threatened species and natural communities with
emphasis on areas identified in Connecticut's Natural Diversity Data
Base and Endangered Species List; preserve areas to support the
existing diversity of species, species in decline and improve habitats.
D. Preserve farmland and productive forest land.
E. Protect lands of cultural importance, including archeological and
historical sites.
F. Encourage development only in areas capable of supporting
development without adversely impacting the environment.
§ 35-10. Benefits.
Not in any set order of importance:
A. Protect East Haddam's rural character and maintain and improve the
quality of life for the residents.
B. Preserve the diverse and native plants, animals and natural communities
indigenous to East Haddam by protecting the open spaces they need to
survive and coexist with the residents of East Haddam.
C. Tourism is recognized as of major economic importance to East Haddam.
Retaining open space will provide a long-term economic base for tourism
by continuing to maintain an attractive landscape for the tourism
industry.
D. Protect and enhance the value of all properties with progressive
planning.
§ 35-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 35-10
1:53
E. Reduce the final burden on the taxpayers. It is recognized that
development increases the tax base but never covers the cost incurred
for Town services. Studies concluded that towns with the most
commercial and industrial activity still have higher yearly tax rates. The
Town can preserve open space without sacrificing the tax base.
F. Provide property owners with another option or device to protect their
property rather than selling the property for development.
§ 35-11. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation of this article:
AGRICULTURAL LAND — Any land in the Town suitable by reference to
soil types, existing and past use of such land for agricultural purposes and
other relevant factors for the cultivation of plants for production of human
food and fiber or production of other useful and capable plant products
and for production of animals, livestock and poultry useful to man and the
environment and land capable of providing economically profitable farm
units, which may include adjacent pastures, woodland, natural drainage
areas and other adjacent open areas.
APPROPRIATION — A legal authorization granted by the Town Board of
Finance and Town Meeting to make expenditures and to incur obligations
for specific purposes.
CONSERVATION EASEMENT — The grant of a property right stipulating
that the described land will remain primarily in its natural state and limited
future or additional development.
DEVELOPMENT RIGHTS — The right or combination of rights of fee simple
owners of open, unimproved, forest and agricultural land to develop,
construct on, sell, lease or otherwise develop or improve such land for uses
that render such land no longer open, unimproved, forest or agricultural.
The acquisition of development rights is not intended to prevent any
development of the land to which the development rights relate.
Development may be allowed which is consistent with the public purpose
for which such development rights are purchased and provided that such
development is permitted, pursuant to a written document approved by the
Town.
GREENWAY — Any corridor of open space that protects natural resources
and/or provides recreation. By way of example, greenways can be located
along a waterway or other defining feature, such as a ridgeline, or along
a man-made corridor such as an abandoned right-of-way, abandoned Town
road or a woods road. It can be a green space along a highway or around a
village. Greenways can provide the vital "missing links" to connect existing
protected areas and to give people convenient access to the outdoors. A
greenway can be as wide as a river valley or as narrow as an abandoned
roadbed.
OPEN SPACE COMMITTEE — The Board of Selectmen shall appoint a
Land Preservation Committee. The membership of the Committee shall be
composed of an individual or representatives from each of the following
§ 35-10 EAST HADDAM CODE § 35-11
1:54
commissions, boards and organizations: the Board of Selectmen, the Board
of Finance, the Board of Education, the Planning and Zoning Commission,
the Conservation Commission, the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses
Commission, the Historic District Commission, the Economic Development
Commission, the Recreation Commission, the Agriculture Commission and
the East Haddam Land Trust, Inc. The membership shall coincide with the
terms of election or appointment from each committee or board and follow
the political balance in accordance with Connecticut General Statutes. This
Committee will be responsible for the preservation of agricultural and
open space in Town, for the review and selection of agricultural and open
space and for making recommendations to the Town for the land and for
expenditures of any funds from the Open Space Trust Fund or any other
source.[Amended 11-30-2010]
OPEN SPACE LAND — Any area of land, including forest land, land
designated as wetland under C.G.S. § 22a-38 and farmland, the preservation
or restriction of the use of which would:
OPEN SPACE PLAN — A plan or plans prepared by the Conservation
Commission pursuant to § 7-131a of the General Statutes and/or prepared/
assisted by the Planning and Zoning Commission, Recreation Commission
or special advisory committee.
PAYMENT OF FEE IN LIEU OF OPEN SPACE — Funding option, pursuant
to C.G.S. § 8-25, as amended. The Planning and Zoning Commission may
authorize a subdivider to pay a fee into an Open Space Trust Fund
administered by the Town of East Haddam in lieu of the disposition of
land, as set forth in the East Haddam Subdivision Regulations.[Amended
3-28-2018]
PLAN OF DEVELOPMENT — A plan or plans prepared by the Planning and
Zoning Commission pursuant to C.G.S. § 8-23.
§ 35-12. Types of land.
A. The types of land to be considered for acquisition by the Open Space
Committee must meet at least one of the following criteria (not in any
set priority):
A. Maintain and enhance the conservation of natural or scenic resources;
B. Protect natural streams or water supplies;
C. Promote conservation of soils, wetland, beaches or tidal marshes;
Enhance the value to the public or abutting or neighboring parks,
forests, wildlife preserves, nature reservations or sanctuaries or other
open spaces;
D.
E. Enhance public recreation opportunities;
F. Preserve historic or archaeological sites; or
Promote orderly development compatible with the aforementioned
goals.
G.
§ 35-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 35-12
1:55
(1) Land that assembles greenbelt corridors and is adjacent to or in
close proximity to present open space.
(2) Land that is or could be agricultural land, as recommended in the
Plan of Development or open space plans.
(3) Land that is productive forest land.
(4) Land that protects critical or threatened natural communities and
species as identified by the Department of Energy and
Environmental Protection.
(5) Land that has recreation value, as recommend in the recreation and/
or open space plan component of the Plan of Development, or as such
plans are adopted by the Town.
(6) Land that has significant scenic, conservation, or natural resource
value based on the characteristics of the land.
(7) Land that has significant historical or archeological value, based on
the character of the land and/or improvements thereon.
B. The types of development rights to be considered for purchase by the
Open Space Committee must be consistent with the general purpose of
this article and may include one or more of the following:
(1) Development rights which will tend to maintain and enhance the
conservation of natural or scenic resources;
(2) Development rights which will tend to protect natural topography,
streams or water supply;
(3) Development rights which will tend to enhance public recreation
opportunities;
(4) Development rights which will tend to protect historical or
archeological sites;
(5) Development rights which will tend to promote conservation of
agricultural soils, particularly prime farmland soil;
(6) Development rights which will tend to contribute towards
preservation of agriculture in Town.
(7) Development rights which will tend to promote certain publicly
desirable uses of land, expected at the present time to include
agricultural, forest and natural uses.
C. In considering the acquisition of a particular parcel of land or certain
development rights thereto, the Open Space Committee may obtain
written recommendations from:
(1) The Planning and Zoning Commission as to the recommendation
for the Plan of Development and other open space/farmland
preservation reports.
(2) The Conservation Commission and East Haddam Historical
Commission as to the value of the land as a scenic, archeological or
historic site.
(3) The Recreation Commission as to the recreational value.
(4) The University of Connecticut Cooperative Extension system as to
the agricultural value.
(5) The East Haddam Land Trust, Inc., as to the value of the land for
natural resources.
(6) A statement from any other advisory committee or organization
whose opinion is deemed appropriate by the Open Space Committee.
§ 35-12 EAST HADDAM CODE § 35-13
1:56
§ 35-13. Public hearings.
A. The Open Space Committee shall hold one or more informational public
hearings regarding a proposed acquisition of a particular parcel of
land(s), or acquisition of the development rights thereto.
B. When a public informational hearing is to be held, the Open Space
Committee shall cause notice to be published at least twice at intervals
of not less than two days, the first not more than 15 days nor less than
10 days and the last not less than two days before such hearing in a
newspaper having substantial circulation in the Town.
§ 35-14. Approval of acquisition; administration.
A. Prior to final action, a referral to the Planning and Zoning Commission
shall be made, pursuant to C.G.S. § 8-24, Municipal improvements.
B. Upon determination that a particular parcel of land(s) or development
rights thereto are to be acquired with monies in the fund or any other
source, the Open Space Committee shall, by resolution, request the
Board of Selectmen and the Board of Finance to consider the
appropriation of funds and set a Town Meeting for the Town's people to
vote on said issue.
C. As provided in C.G.S. § 7-131b, Acquisition of open space and easement,
the Town may vote to accept the recommendation of the Open Space
Committee; provided, however, that such acquisition is approved by the
Board of Finance and the Board of Selectmen.
D. The fund shall be administered by the Board of Finance.
§ 35-15. Funding.
A. In preparing the annual Town budget, the Board of Finance shall
consider additions to the fund as part of its Open Space Trust Fund
or "sinking fund." The Town shall also investigate, on a continuing
basis, the availability of any state and federal monies available for land
acquisition and development rights.
B. The fund shall include payments received in lieu of open space, pursuant
to C.G.S. § 8-25, as amended. [Amended 3-28-2018]
C. Contributions to the reserve can be accepted from individuals,
corporations, associations, partnerships and any other legal entities.
Said contributions shall be used exclusively for the herein stated
purposes of the fund if by resolution the Board of Selectmen, Board of
Finance, and Town Meeting accepts the funds for the purposes intended.
D. Funds can be used for appraisal, survey, legal research, fees and
preparation of documents for any acquisition of property or development
rights.
§ 35-16. Stewardship of acquired properties and development
rights.
As provided in § 7-131a of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended,
the East Haddam Conservation Commission shall administer the properties
and rights acquired as intended.
§ 35-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 35-16
1:57
Chapter 57
JUSTICES OF THE PEACE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police protection — See Ch. 95.
§ 57-1. Number.
Pursuant to the provisions of Connecticut General Statutes § 9-183a, as
amended, the number of Justices of the Peace which shall be elected in 1996
and quadrennially thereafter shall be 18.
Chapter 62
LIBRARY
§ 62-1. Establishment.
The East Haddam Public Library System is hereby established. The East
Haddam Free Public Library shall be designated as the principal public
library, and the Rathbun Free Memorial Library shall be made a part
thereof. The East Haddam Free Public Library and Rathbun Free Memorial
Library shall constitute one library at two locations and all library services
provided the public from said two locations shall be part of one unified
library system known as the "East Haddam Public Library System." The
library building at 36 Main Street, East Haddam, Connecticut shall continue
to bear the name "Rathbun Free Memorial Library" in perpetuity.
§ 62-2. Board of Trustees; bylaws.
The Board of Trustees shall be the only library board operating and existing
under the ordinances of East Haddam, and any other board or boards,
committees or councils established prior to the date of the first
organizational meeting of the Board of Trustees under the ordinances of
East Haddam or holding office as elected trustees of the East Haddam
Free Public Library for the purpose of overseeing, managing or operating
either the East Haddam Free Public Library or Rathbun Free Memorial
Library is abolished. The Board of Trustees may create a set of bylaws for
its governance and from time to time, in the discretion of the Board, amend
its bylaws.
§ 62-3. Board of Trustees membership.
There shall be a Board of Trustees consisting of nine elected trustees whose
terms of office shall be six years. Said trustees shall be elected in the
manner provided in Connecticut General Statutes § 9-207.
§ 35-16 EAST HADDAM CODE § 62-4
1:58
§ 62-4. Election of Trustees; terms; vacancies.
In 2013, nine Trustees shall be elected, three to a term of two years and
hence in 2015 to a term of six years, three to a term of four years and hence
in 2017 to a term of six years, and three to a term of six years and hence
in 2019 to a term of six years. Upon the election of said nine Trustees to
the Board of Trustees in 2013 and upon the taking of the oath of office, the
Board of Trustees shall be duly constituted under the laws of the State of
Connecticut and able to carry out its responsibilities as enumerated below
in § 62-6. Any vacancy in the office of Library Trustee created by death,
resignation, ceasing to be an elector of East Haddam or removal from the
Board of Trustees for any other reason shall be filled by appointment of
the Board of Selectmen in accordance with Connecticut General Statutes
§§ 9-220 and 9-167a.
§ 62-5. Officers; quorum.
The Board of Trustees shall hold an organizational meeting within 30 days
of the 2013 election, at which a Chairperson and Secretary shall be elected.
Five Trustees present shall constitute a quorum.
§ 62-6. Responsibilities of Board of Trustees.
The Board of Trustees is authorized under the provisions of this chapter
and the laws of the State of Connecticut to carry out the responsibilities
of trustees of the system. The Trustees shall be principally responsible, in
consultation with the Library Director, for developing appropriate policies
for overseeing the management of the system's finances, purchasing,
budgeting and accounting systems; maintenance of the buildings, interior
and exterior, contents and the grounds, driveways and parking areas; hours
and use of the premises by the public; developing a job description for the
Library Director and evaluating the performance of the Library Director
and staff; promoting gifting and other forms of private donation and fundraising;
and advocating for the system to the public.
§ 62-7. Appropriations.
All appropriations for the system shall be requested in accordance with the
Town’s established municipal budgeting procedures as determined by the
Board of Selectmen and the Board of Finance and adopted at the annual
budget town meeting.
§ 62-8. Library Director.
The Board of Selectmen shall hire a Library Director, who shall have
responsibility for the day-to-day operations and management of the system,
including assisting the Board of Trustees in developing appropriate policies
for management of the system's finances, purchasing and accounting
systems; maintenance of the buildings, interior and exterior, contents and
the grounds, driveways and parking areas; hours and use of the premises by
the public; evaluating the performance of the staff; promoting gifting and
§ 62-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 62-8
1:59
other forms of private donation and fund-raising; and advocating for the
system to the public.
§ 62-9. Condition precedent to establishing system.
The conveyance, transfer and delivery of appropriate documents of title
to the physical assets consisting of the real property located at 36 Main
Street, East Haddam, Connecticut and the contents and tangible personal
property located in the library building situated on said real property by
Bank of America, Trustee of the Norris W. Rathbun Trust fbo Rathbun
Free Memorial Library, as directed in the decree of the Probate Court,
Region #14 Probate District dated January 3, 2013, is deemed a condition
precedent to establishing the system and the Board of Trustees under this
chapter, and failure or refusal of Bank of America, Trustee, to make said
transfer and deliver said physical assets as authorized under the terms of
the decree will render this chapter null and void.
Chapter 71
NOTICES AND REPORTS
§ 62-8 EAST HADDAM CODE § 62-9
1:60
ARTICLE I
Legal Notices; Publication of Ordinances
[Adopted 4-6-1971]
§ 71-1. Advertising. [Amended 2-3-2009]
All future legal Town notices shall be advertised as provided by law.
§ 71-2. Summary publication of ordinances. [Added 5-2-1995]
Pursuant to the authority of Connecticut General Statutes § 7-157, for the
purpose of legal notice, the Town of East Haddam shall publish a summary
of a proposed ordinance in lieu of it being published in its entirety, provided
the Town Clerk shall make available for public inspection and shall, upon
request, mail a copy of said proposed ordinance to any person requesting
the same. Any summary so published shall bear the disclaimer, "This notice
is prepared for the benefit of the public, solely for the purpose of
information, summarization and explanation. This notice does not represent
the intent of the legislative body of the Town of East Haddam for any
purpose." This section shall not apply to any proposal which makes or
requires an appropriation.
§ 71-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 71-2
1:61

ARTICLE II
Annual Report
[Adopted 11-19-1974]
§ 71-3. Availability.
The annual report shall be made available to the residents of the Town of
East Haddam during the calendar year in which the fiscal year ends.
§ 71-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 71-3
1:63

ARTICLE III
Notice to Abutting Property Owners
[Adopted 9-18-1990]
§ 71-4. Scope of notice required.
In addition to the provisions for notice contained in any other statute,
ordinance or regulation, no individual, company, corporation, municipal
legislative or administrative body shall enact or act on any ordinance,
regulation or rule or other matter specifically affecting the use of a parcel(s)
of land, with or without improvements, situated within the Town of East
Haddam, until the owner of said parcel(s) and all owners of parcels as
recorded on the last completed Grand List of said Town of East Haddam
within a distance of 100 feet, from any boundary, of said parcel(s) affected,
has been notified, in writing, certified mail, return receipt requested, not
less than 14 days prior to any hearing or meeting pertaining to any such act
or enactment.
§ 71-5. Compliance required prior to action.
Any request to or by a public body for such an act or enactment shall not be
heard or acted upon until the party making such request submits evidence
of compliance with the notice provisions of this article.
§ 71-6. Proof of notice.
The deposit of notice, addressed to the proper parties, in writing, in the
United State Post Office, certified mail, return receipt requested, shall
be deemed sufficient notice and evidence thereof may be given by filing
an affidavit, with return receipts attached, attesting that such notice was
complied with by the requesting party, who shall be responsible for such
notice, which shall become a part of the file of said public body.
§ 71-7. Exceptions.
The requirements and provisions of this notice and article shall not apply to
the enactment of any ordinance or regulation of general application and/or
enforcement, nor shall it apply to the ordinary maintenance and repair of
municipal property, including highways.
§ 71-8. Definitions.
The term "act or enactment," as used in this article, shall be defined to
mean the actual adoption of any ordinance, regulation or rule or other
matter specifically affecting the use of a parcel of land, with or without
improvements, situated within the Town of East Haddam, which must be
obeyed by the owner(s) as hereinbefore defined, subject to sanctions or
legal consequences.
§ 71-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 71-8
1:65
Chapter 84
PENSION AND RETIREMENT PLANS
§ 71-8 EAST HADDAM CODE § 71-8
1:66
ARTICLE I
Employee Pension Plan
[A new plan, enacted with an effective date of July 1, 1986, is on file
in the Town Clerk's office.]
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 71-8
1:67

ARTICLE II
Volunteer Fire Pension Plan
[Adopted 12-13-1990]
§ 84-1. Purpose.
In recognition of the particular problems and unusual risks attendant upon
fire-fighting duties undertaken by members of the several companies and
their chief officers of the East Haddam Volunteer Fire Department; and in
recognition that the enactment of an ordinance authorizing the Board of
Fire Commissioners and the Board of Selectmen to enter into a contract
for such services and directing that such payments be devoted exclusively
to the establishment of a plan which confers benefits upon active volunteer
firefighters following retirement would act as an inducement in attracting
and retaining superior personnel and in recognition that the public interest,
safety and welfare will be promoted by the authorization of such a contract
and incentive plan, the Board of Selectmen, in order to give practical effect
to this policy, hereby adopts the following article.
§ 84-2. Contract and plan authorized.
Pursuant to §§ 7-148(c)(2), 7-194(43) and 7-301 of the Connecticut General
Statutes, the East Haddam Board of Selectmen hereby authorizes the Board
of Fire Commissioners and the Board of Selectmen to enter into a contract
for an indefinite term with the several companies and the chief officers of
the East Haddam Volunteer Fire Department for the purposes of providing
the Town of East Haddam with fire protection services in consideration for
an annual payment, the amount of which shall be determined annually by
the plan administrator, said contract to provide, inter alia:
A. That such annual sum be paid into the Volunteer Firefighters' Incentive
Plan, as established herein, to be used exclusively for the purpose of
funding an incentive plan for the benefit of the members of the several
companies and the chief officers of the East Haddam Volunteer Fire
Department;
B. That the amount of such annual sum be determined each year by the
funding estimated to be required to offset the future benefits liability
incurred for each firefighter computed at the rate stated in the plan
document;
C. That said incentive plan, upon adoption by the Board of Selectmen, shall
be incorporated in and become an integral part of said contract;
D. That said plan and the benefits provided thereunder shall be made
available to volunteer members of the several companies and the chief
officers of the East Haddam Fire Department in accordance with such
criteria as the plan prescribes;
E. That said plan and the benefits provided thereunder shall be
retroactively effective as to members of the several companies and the
chief officers of the East Haddam Volunteer Fire Department who would
have qualified thereunder as of July 1, 1990;
F. That said incentive plan be administered by the plan administrator as
defined in the plan;
§ 84-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 84-2
1:69
G. That said plan and Town payments into the incentive plan shall
automatically terminate at such time as one or more of the several
companies of the East Haddam Volunteer Fire Department cease to
be organizations composed of volunteer firefighters who are unpaid
for their fire-fighting services except for chief officer stipends, special
payments for fire watches, forest firefighting and training exercises,
and reimbursements for losses of personal property. Said termination
shall occur when any form of compensation, such as but not limited to
reimbursement for personal automobile usage (mileage allowance) for
time on fire-fighting duty, and for per-call compensation, is instituted.
It may otherwise be terminated by either of the parties upon 180 days'
written notice of such intention to terminate;
H. That in the event of the termination of said incentive plan, the balance
on hand in said plan at the time of such termination, except for the
reasonable costs of administration and any funds which may be required
for the payment of benefits which may have accrued or vested at the
time of such termination, shall revert back to the Town of East Haddam,
and neither the several companies and the chief officers of the East
Haddam Fire Department nor any member thereof shall have any claim
upon such balance; and
I. That said incentive plan, together with any amendments thereto, shall
be consistent with the terms of this article.
§ 84-3. Delegation to plan administrator.
The adoption of this article shall constitute a specific delegation to the
plan administrator, pursuant to the Board of Selectmen, to accept the
responsibilities of and to perform the duties involved in the administration
of said incentive plan.
§ 84-4. Waiver of competitive bidding.
Inasmuch as the services which are the subject of the contract herein
described are of a hazardous and unique character and directly affect the
public health, safety and welfare, competitive bidding requirements are
hereby determined to be unnecessary and not for the best interests of the
Town, and said competitive bidding requirements are therefore waived.
§ 84-5. Limitation on eligibility for Volunteer Firefighters' Incentive
Plan. [Added 12-28-2011]
The only individuals who are eligible to receive a benefit from or participate
in the Volunteer Firefighters' Incentive Plan established by §§ 84-1 through
84-4 of this article (the "incentive plan") are those individuals who were
eligible to receive a benefit from or participate in the incentive plan on
December 31, 2011, or who had a vested benefit under said incentive
plan on December 31, 2011. Individuals who become members of the East
Haddam Volunteer Fire Department after December 31, 2011, shall not
be eligible to receive a benefit from or participate in the incentive plan
with regard to volunteer services performed by such individuals for the
§ 84-2 EAST HADDAM CODE § 84-5
1:70
East Haddam Volunteer Fire Department after December 31, 2011. All plan
documents for the incentive plan are hereby amended to incorporate the
provisions of this § 84-5.
§ 84-6. Establishment of Length of Service Award Plan. [Added
12-28-2011]
A. Statement of purpose. In recognition that the public interest, safety,
and welfare will be promoted and advanced through the retention and
recruitment of volunteer members for the East Haddam Volunteer Fire
Department ("the Department") and through the encouragement of
active involvement by those volunteer members in the fire-fighting and
prevention services which the Department provides to the Town of East
Haddam ("the Town"), it is in the best interests of the Town to establish
a system which will provide length of service awards to the following
active volunteer members of the Department (the "eligible volunteers"):
(1) Active volunteer members of the Department who become members
of the Department after December 31, 2011, and who meet the
eligibility requirements for participation set forth in the plan
documents for the length of service award system; and
(2) Active volunteer members of the Department who became members
of the Department on or before December 31, 2011, and who have
five years or less of credited service under the Volunteer
Firefighters' Incentive Plan established by §§ 84-1 through 84-4 of
this article (the "existing incentive plan") and who do not have
a nonforfeitable interest or vested interest in any accrued benefit
under the existing incentive plan and who, no later than February
1, 2012, waive all benefits and rights which they may be entitled to
under the Town's existing incentive plan and who meet the eligibility
requirements for participation set forth in the plan documents for
the length of service award system.
B. Establishment. Pursuant to §§ 7-148(c)(5)(A) and 7-148(2) of the
Connecticut General Statutes, the Town establishes a system for
providing length of service awards to the eligible volunteers, and such
system (the LOSAP) is intended to be a length of service award plan as
defined in §§ 457(e)(11)(A)(ii), 457(e)(11)(B), and 457(e)(11)(C) of Title
26 of the United States Code, as amended, and any successor sections.
C. The First Selectman is empowered, authorized and directed to enter into
and execute on behalf of the Town a plan document for the LOSAP and
such other documents and agreements as may be required to establish
and maintain the LOSAP, such plan document and such other documents
and agreements to become effective after approval by the Board of
Selectmen and the Board of Finance.
D. The LOSAP shall be administered by the plan administrator as defined
in the plan document for the LOSAP. The adoption of this § 84-6 shall
constitute a specific delegation to the plan administrator, pursuant to the
Board of Selectmen, to accept the responsibilities of and to perform the
duties of the plan administrator in the administration of the LOSAP and
to exercise the powers and rights of the plan administrator to administer
the LOSAP.
§ 84-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 84-6
1:71
E. The Town shall enter into a trust agreement establishing a trust (the
LOSAP Trust) to receive contributions from the Town to fund the length
of service awards under the LOSAP. The trustee shall be a trustee
approved by the plan administrator of the LOSAP. The trustee shall
disburse funds from the LOSAP Trust in accordance with the provisions
of the trust agreement, Connecticut law and this § 84-6.
F. The Town may periodically contribute to the LOSAP Trust such amounts
of cash as may be determined and approved by the Board of Selectmen
and the Board of Finance to fund the length of service awards which
have been credited under the LOSAP to the accounts of the eligible
volunteers under the plan document for the LOSAP.
§ 84-6 EAST HADDAM CODE § 84-6
1:72
Chapter 90
PLANNING AND ZONING
§ 84-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 84-6
1:73

ARTICLE I
Planning and Zoning Commission; Zoning Board of Appeals
[Adopted 9-15-1960]
§ 90-1. Establishment.
The Town of East Haddam adopts the provisions of Chapters 124 and 126
of the General Statutes of Connecticut, Revision of 1958, as amended, and
elects to exercise through a single Planning and Zoning Commission the
powers granted therein.
§ 90-2. Membership; terms. [Amended 3-28-2018]
The Planning and Zoning Commission of the Town of East Haddam shall
consist of seven members who shall be electors of said Town. They shall
be appointed by the Board of Selectmen of said Town on the effective date
of this article, to serve as follows: two to serve until the biennial Town
election of 1961, at which two members shall be elected to replace the two
whose terms then expire; two to serve until the biennial Town election of
1963, at which election their successors shall be chosen; and three to serve
until the biennial Town election of 1965, at which time their successors
shall be chosen. All of said elected members of the Commission shall serve
for six years from the dates of their respective elections, after which their
successors shall be chosen at regular Town elections, also for terms of six
years. At each such election at which two members of the Commission are
to be elected, one shall be from each of the two major political parties. At
an election at which three members are to be elected, not more than two
shall be of the same party. In the event of a vacancy on said Commission,
the Board of Selectmen shall fill the vacancy for the unexpired period, by
appointing a member of the same political party as that of the member
who is being replaced. At no time shall the membership of the Commission
consist of more than five members of the same political party. No member
of the Commission may be at the same time a member of the Zoning Board
of Appeals. (Section 9-167a of the General Statutes of Connecticut, minority
representation: total membership of seven; maximum from one party: five.)
§ 90-3. Zoning Board of Appeals. [Amended 3-28-2018]
The Zoning Board of Appeals of East Haddam shall consist of five members
and three alternate members who shall be electors of said Town, as
provided by Chapter 124 of the General Statutes of Connecticut, Revision
of 1958, as amended. They shall be appointed by the Board of Selectmen
in the first instance, to serve as follows. one of the regular members for
one year, one for two years, one for three years, one for four years and
one for five years. The alternate members shall be appointed to serve for
three years, four years and five years, respectively. Thereafter, each new
regular member and each new alternate member shall be appointed for
five years, except that an appointment to succeed a member whose term
has not expired shall be only for the unexpired balance of said term. At
no time shall the regular members of said Board include more than four
§ 90-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-3
1:75
members of one political party, nor shall the alternate members include
more than two members of the same political party. In all matters relating
to the Zoning Board of Appeals not specifically covered by this article, the
provisions of Title 8 of the General Statutes of Connecticut, Revision of
1958, as amended, shall apply.
§ 90-4. Municipal employees may serve. [Added 12-26-2006]
Electors of the Town who are also municipal employees may serve as
members of the Planning and Zoning Commission and the Zoning Board of
Appeals as provided by Connecticut General Statutes §§ 7-421(e)(2)(A) and
7-421(e)(2)(C).
§ 90-3 EAST HADDAM CODE § 90-4
1:76
ARTICLE II
Planning and Zoning Commission Alternates
[Adopted 7-21-1978]
§ 90-5. Number; term; appointment.
The Board of Selectmen of East Haddam, Connecticut, shall appoint three
alternate members to the Town Planning and Zoning Commission on the
effective date of this article. Alternate members shall be appointed to serve
as follows: one until the biennial Town election of 1979, at which time a
successor shall be elected; one until the biennial Town election of 1981, at
which time a successor shall be elected; and one until 1983, at which time
a successor shall be elected. Thereafter, each alternate member shall be
elected for six years, except that vacancies, which may occur from time to
time, shall be filled by appointment by the Board of Selectmen and the term
of alternate members so appointed shall be only for the unexpired balance
of said term. At no time shall the alternate member to such Commission
include more than two members of the same political party. Such alternate
members shall, when seated as herein provided, have all the powers and
duties set forth in the General Statutes or any special act relating to
such municipality for such Commission and its members. Such alternate
members shall be electors and shall not be members of the Zoning Board of
Appeals. If a regular member of the Town Planning and Zoning Commission
is absent or disqualified, the Chairman of said Commission shall designate
an alternate to so act, choosing alternates in rotation so that they shall act
as nearly an equal number of times possible. If any alternate is not available
in accordance with such rotation, such fact shall be recorded in the minutes
of the meeting.
§ 90-6. Municipal employees may serve. [Added 12-26-2006]
Electors of the Town who are also municipal employees may serve as
alternates to the Planning and Zoning Commission as provided by
Connecticut General Statutes §§ 7-421(e)(2)(A) and 7-421(e)(2)(C).
§ 90-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-6
1:77
Chapter 95
POLICE PROTECTION
§ 95-1. Resident State Troopers.
The Board of Selectmen shall be authorized to enter into such agreements
and contracts with the Commissioner of the State of Connecticut,
Department of Emergency Services and Public Protection so that Resident
State Trooper(s) be appointed to serve the Town of East Haddam. The First
Selectman shall be authorized to sign such agreements and contracts on
behalf of the Town.
Chapter 106
PURCHASING
§ 106-1. Competitive bidding required for certain purchases.
[Amended 3-12-2014]
All contracts for and single purchases of supplies, materials, equipment
and contractual services (except utilities, gravel and materials necessary on
an as-needed basis) shall be based, when possible, on competitive bids if
such purchase price exceeds $15,000. If the purchase can reasonably be
anticipated to fall between $7,500 and $15,000, the purchase order shall be
accompanied by documentation for two price quotes. This documentation
shall be maintained in Town records for one year. If such purchase price
exceeds $15,000, the Selectmen, when possible, shall invoke an advertised/
sealed bid process.
§ 106-2. Solicitation of sealed bids.
The First Selectman, acting on behalf of the appropriate agency, shall
solicit sealed bids by the sending of notice to prospective suppliers and
by advertising in a newspaper having a general circulation in said Town
of East Haddam. The First Selectman may place advertisements in other
periodicals, trade magazines, etc., but may not exempt above said
newspaper. Each sealed bid shall be publicly opened at the time stated in
the notice soliciting such bid. Bids selected by this process shall be publicly
awarded at a Board of Selectmen meeting.
§ 106-3. Number of bids required; negotiated purchases or
contracts. [Amended 3-12-2014]
All purchases or contracts above $15,000 shall be based on at least two
competitive bids. When at least two such bids shall not have been received,
the Board of Selectmen may, at the request of the Town agency represented,
void the bid and direct said agency to identify and negotiate with at least
two suppliers (one of whom shall be the sole bidder of the voided bid if there
was only one such bidder) for the best price and product for the Town of
§ 90-6 EAST HADDAM CODE § 106-3
1:78
East Haddam. Such negotiated purchase or contract must be approved by
the Board of Selectmen before being placed into effect.
§ 106-4. Preference for local businesses.
If the low bidder is not a local business (as defined hereinafter), then the
next low bidder, provided it is within 10% of the next low bidder, may, at its
option, if it is a local business, match the bid of the low bidder. The Board
of Selectmen retains the sole judgment, within its discretion, to determine
what constitutes low bidder and next low bidder, after due consideration
to base bid, allowances and alternates to a bid, as they may apply. For the
purpose of this provision only, "local business" is defined as a business or
individual who or which is assessed real, personal, or motor vehicle taxes in
East Haddam on the previous October 1 to the date of the bid opening.
§ 106-5. Additional purchasing procedures.
In lieu of the standard competitive bid process, any agency of the Town of
East Haddam may:
A. With prior approval of the Board of Selectmen, use one or more of the
following options:
(1) A request for proposal (RFP). Vendors of goods or services will be
asked to submit a proposed solution or solutions (including costs)
to a problem or issue described in writing by the Town. Prices are
finalized by negotiation.
(2) A request for qualifications (RFQ). Vendors of professional services
will be asked to present their qualifications for resolving the problem
or issue at hand. Price will be negotiated with the vendor deemed
best qualified.
(3) Simple negotiations with appropriate legitimate suppliers.
(4) An agent of record. The Town retains an agent to seek out and
evaluate proposals and to bring forward a recommended course of
action.
B. All such purchases or contracts shall be approved by the Board of
Selectmen before being awarded or placed into effect.
C. The Town agency, at its discretion, may award such purchase or contract
to the legal state low bidder, a supplier which has been selected by the
State of Connecticut's purchasing procedure following a competitive bid.
§ 106-6. Change orders.
If, after the awarding of any bid or its appropriate alternative as described
herein, changes in the scope of work or specifications become necessary,
they shall be done only through a work change order system as developed
by the First Selectman. All payments for such changes shall be made with
the appropriate distinctions as such.
§ 106-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 106-7
1:79
§ 106-7. Selectmen's authority.
The Board of Selectmen reserve the right to accept or reject any and all, or
any and all parts of any bids and may waive any informalities in the bidding.
Chapter 123
SOCIAL SECURITY
§ 123-1. Participation in state program. [Amended 6-25-1975;
7-10-1975]
The Town of East Haddam shall apply for membership and to participate
in the Old Age and Survivor's Insurance System under Title II of the Social
Security Act as amended in accordance with Public Act Number 277 of
the 1951 Public Acts as of the first day of July 1951, for all its employees,
including its elected officials who serve on a full-time basis and/or whose
annual compensation from the Town, including salary and fees, is $2,000 or
more, and the employees excluded by § 3 of said Public Act Number 277.
§ 123-2. Duties of First Selectman.
The First Selectman shall execute on behalf and in the name of the Town of
East Haddam any and all agreements with the State Employees' Retirement
Commission for the purpose outlined in § 123-1, in accordance with, and
subject to the provisions of said Public Act Number 277, and subject to the
regulations promulgated by the State Employees' Retirement Commission
pursuant to said public act.
§ 123-3. Duties of Treasurer.
The Town Treasurer of the Town of East Haddam is authorized and directed
to make deductions from the wages of the employees participating in said
Old Age and Survivors' Insurance System, as required by § 4 of said Public
Act Number 277, and to forward the amount thereof, together with the
contribution of the Town of East Haddam, to the State Employees'
Retirement Commission in manner and form prescribed by said regulations.
Chapter 133
TOWN CLERK
§ 106-7 EAST HADDAM CODE § 123-3
1:80
ARTICLE I
Salary
[Adopted 5-21-1986]
§ 133-1. Establishment.
Under the provisions of § 7-34b of the Connecticut General Statutes, the
Town of East Haddam hereby provides that the compensation of the Town
Clerk shall be by the salary established and fixed by Town Meeting of East
Haddam, which salary shall be in lieu of all fees and other compensation
provided for in the General Statutes.
§ 133-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 133-1
1:81
Chapter 138
WATER POLLUTION CONTROL AUTHORITY
§ 138-1. Creation; authority; regulations. [Amended 3-28-2018]
The Town of East Haddam hereby creates a Water Pollution Control
Authority. Such authority shall have all the powers, purposes, objectives,
duties and obligations set forth in Chapters 102 and 103 of the General
Statutes of the State of Connecticut, Revision of 1958, and existing and
future amendments thereto, and all powers inuring or granted to Water
Pollution Control Authorities by § 7-246 and by other relevant sections of
the General Statutes of Connecticut, Revision of 1958, and existing and
future amendments thereto. Such authority shall have the power to develop
and enforce activities to protect the groundwater and aquifers of the Town
of East Haddam. Said regulations promulgated by the authority would need
approval by the legislative body of the Town.
§ 138-2. Membership; terms. [Amended 4-27-1994]
Said Authority shall consist of six regular members and two alternates, all
electors of the Town of East Haddam, who shall be designated and approved
by the Board of Selectmen and serve without compensation. Members and
alternates appointed shall serve for a term of five years; terms shall expire
June 30. However, the first term of each new seat hereby created will expire
on June 30, 1998.
§ 138-3. Officers; records; meetings.
The Authority shall elect a Chairman from among its own members at the
first meeting and annually thereafter at the first meeting held after the
first day of July in each year. The Authority shall appoint a Secretary. The
Secretary shall keep a complete record of the proceedings of the Authority
and, when ordered by the Authority, shall file the same with the Town Clerk.
All such records shall be open for public inspection at reasonable hours.
Meetings of the Authority may be called by the Chairman or any three
members upon 24 hours' notice thereof.
§ 138-4. Budget.
The Authority shall prepare annually a budget of estimated revenue and
expenditures for the ensuring fiscal year.
§ 138-5. Removal of members.
A commissioner may be removed for inefficiency or neglect of duty or
misconduct in office by the Board of Selectmen after a hearing conforming
to recognized standards of due process of law; a commissioner shall be
removed only after opportunity to be heard in person or by counsel before
the Board of Selectmen at least 10 days prior to which he shall have been
§ 133-1 EAST HADDAM CODE § 138-5
1:82
given a copy of the charges against him. In the event of the removal of
any commissioner, a record of the proceeding, together with the charges
and findings thereon, shall be filed in the office of the Town Clerk of East
Haddam.
Chapter 150
ADULT-ORIENTED ESTABLISHMENTS
§ 150-1. Findings and purpose.
The Board of Selectmen of the Town of East Haddam, Connecticut finds:
A. There may in the future be adult-oriented establishments located in the
Town of East Haddam which require special supervision from the Town's
public safety agencies in order to protect and preserve the health, safety
and welfare of the patrons of such establishments, as well as the health,
safety, and welfare of the Town's citizens.
B. Statistics and studies performed by a substantial number of cities and
towns in the United States indicate that:
(1) Large numbers of persons, primarily male, frequent such adultoriented
establishments, especially those which provide closed
booths, cubicles, studies and rooms for the private viewing of socalled
"adult" motion pictures and/or videotapes and/or live
entertainment;
(2) Persons under the age of 18 may be attracted to adult-oriented
establishments and seek to enter or loiter about them without the
knowledge or permission of their parents or guardian;
(3) Such closed booths, cubicles, studios and rooms have been used by
patrons, clients or customers of such adult-oriented establishments
for the purpose of engaging in certain sexual acts;
(4) Male and female prostitutes have been known to frequent such
establishments in order to provide sex for hire to the patrons, clients
or customers of such establishments within such booths, cubicles
and rooms;
(5) Doors, curtains, blinds and/or other closures installed in or on the
entrances and/or exits of such booths, cubicles and rooms, and
rooms which are closed while such booths, cubicles, studios and
rooms are in use, encourage patrons using such booths, cubicles,
studios and rooms to engage in sexual acts therein with prostitutes
or others, thereby promoting and encouraging prostitution and the
commission of sexual acts which cause blood, semen and urine to be
deposited on the floors and/or walls of such booths, cubicles, studios
and rooms, which deposits could prove detrimental to the health
and safety of other persons who may come into contact with such
deposits;
(6) The reasonable regulation and supervision of such adult-oriented
establishments tends to discourage such sexual acts and prostitution
and thereby promotes the health, safety and welfare of the patrons,
clients and customers of such establishments; and
§ 138-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-1
1:83
(7) The nature of adult-oriented establishments and the traffic which
they generate, and the potential and the propensity for such
establishments to attract persons interested in explicit sexual
activities or erotic art forms and the potential for outdoor assembly
of such persons around the premises of such establishments, are
such as to make them incompatible with nearby uses of land where
concentrations of children or youth tend to congregate.
C. The continued unregulated operation of adult-oriented establishments,
including, without limitations, those specifically cited at Subsection A
hereof, is and would be detrimental to the general welfare, health and
safety of the citizens of East Haddam.
D. The Constitution and Laws of the State of Connecticut grant to the
Town powers, especially police power, to enact reasonable legislation
and measures to regulate and supervise adult-oriented establishments
as hereinafter defined in order to protect the public health, safety and
welfare.
E. It is not the intent of the Board of Selectmen, in enacting this chapter, to
deny to any person rights to speech protected by the United States and/
or State Constitution, nor is it the intent of the Board of Selectmen to
impose any additional limitations or restrictions on the contents of any
communicative materials, including sexually oriented films, videotapes,
books and/or other materials. Further, by enacting this chapter, the
Board of Selectmen does not intend to deny or restrict the rights of any
adult to obtain and/or view any sexually oriented materials protected
by the United States and/or State Constitution, nor does it intend to
restrict or deny any constitutionally protected rights that distributors or
exhibitors of such sexually oriented materials may have to sell, distribute
or exhibit such materials.
§ 150-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the words and phrases used herein shall
have the following meanings, unless otherwise clearly indicated by the
context:
ADULT AMUSEMENT MACHINE — Includes any amusement machine that
is regularly used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by
an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual
activities and specified anatomical areas, as defined below, for observation
by patrons therein.
ADULT BOOKSTORE — An establishment having any portion of its stock
and trade in books, films, videocassettes or other visual representations, or
magazines and other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized
by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, as defined below, provided
that this definition shall not apply to any establishment in which such
materials constitute less than 10% of the value of the inventory of said
establishment and in which the display of such materials does not permit
the viewing of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas
within the establishment.[Amended 3-28-2018]
§ 150-1 EAST HADDAM CODE § 150-2
1:84
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT — Any exhibition of any adult-oriented motion
pictures, live performance, display or dance of any type, removal of articles
of clothing or appearing unclothed, pantomime, modeling, or any other
personal services offered customers, which has as a significant or
substantial portion of such performance any actual or simulated
performance of specified sexual activities or exhibition and viewing of
specified anatomical areas.
ADULT MINI-MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — An enclosed building with
a capacity of less than 50 persons regularly used for presenting material
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas, as defined below, for observation by patrons therein.
ADULT MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — An enclosed building with a
capacity of 50 or more persons regularly used for presenting material
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas, as defined below, for observation by patrons therein.
ADULT-ORIENTED ESTABLISHMENT —
AMUSEMENT MACHINE — Any machine which, upon the payment of a
charge or upon insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate, or disk, may be
operated by the public for use as a game, entertainment or amusement,
whether or not registering a score and whether or not electronically
operated.
BOARD OF SELECTMEN — The Board of Selectmen of the Town of East
Haddam, Connecticut.
EMPLOYEE — Any and all persons, including independent contractors, who
work in or at or render any services directly related to the operation of an
adult-oriented establishment.
ENTERTAINER — Any person who provides entertainment within an adultoriented
establishment as defined in this section, whether or not a fee is
Shall include, without limitation, adult bookstores, adult motion-picture
theaters, adult mini-motion-picture theaters and commercial
establishments containing one or more adult amusement machines.
A.
"Adult-oriented establishment" further means any premises to which
the public, patrons or members are invited or admitted, and which are
so physically arranged as to provide booths, cubicles, rooms, studios,
compartments or stalls separate from the common areas of the
premises for the purpose of viewing adult entertainment, when such
adult entertainment is held, conducted, operated or maintained for
a profit, direct or indirect. An adult-oriented establishment further
includes, without limitation, any adult entertainment studio or any
premises that are physically arranged and used as such, whether
advertised or represented as an adult entertainment studio, rap studio,
exotic dance studio, encounter studio, sensitivity studio, modeling
studio, or any other term of like import. [Amended 3-28-2018]
B.
§ 150-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-2
1:85
charged or accepted for entertainment and whether or not entertainment is
provided as an employee or an independent contractor.
INSPECTOR — One or more employees of the Town of East Haddam
designated by the Board of Selectmen who shall hereby be authorized to
inspect premises regulated under this chapter and to take the required
actions authorized by this chapter in case of violations being found on such
premises and to require corrections of unsatisfactory conditions found on
said premises.
MINOR — Deemed to refer to a person under the age of 18 years.
OPERATOR — Any person, or any proprietor, shareholder, general partner
or limited partner who holds any share or partnership interest of any
business which is operating, conducting, owning or maintaining an adultoriented
establishment.
SEXUAL ACTIVITIES — As used in this chapter, is not intended to include
any medical publications or films or bona fide educational publication or
films, nor does it include any art or photography publications which devote
at least 25% of the lineage of each issue to articles and advertisements
dealing with subjects of art or photographs; nor does this definition apply to
any news periodical which reports or describes current events and which,
from time to time, publishes photographs of nude or seminude persons
in connection with the dissemination of the news; nor does this definition
apply to publications or films which describe and report different cultures
and which, from time to time, publish or show photographs or depictions of
nude or seminude persons other than describing cultures in which nudity or
seminudity is indigenous to the population.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS —
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES —
SUPERVISOR — The Building Official or Police Department.
§ 150-3. Operating requirements.
Less than completely and opaquely covered:
(1) Human genitals, pubic region.
(2) Buttocks.
Female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the
aureola; and
(3)
A.
Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state even if completely
covered.
B.
A. Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
B. Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy.
Fondling or erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks
or female breasts.
C.
§ 150-2 EAST HADDAM CODE § 150-3
1:86
A. No operator or employee of an adult-oriented establishment shall allow
or permit any minor or intoxicated person to loiter in any part of such
establishment used by patrons of such adult-oriented establishment.
B. Every adult-oriented establishment shall display a sign outside each
entrance bearing the words, "Adult-oriented establishment — persons
under 18 not admitted" in letters three inches high.
C. No adult-oriented establishment shall be conducted in such a manner
that permits the observation of any material depicting specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas from the outside of the building
that houses the adult-oriented establishment.
D. Every adult-oriented establishment doing business in the Town on or
after July 1, 1999, shall be well lighted at all times and be physically
arranged in such a manner that the entire interior portion of the booths,
cubicles, rooms, or stalls, wherein adult entertainment is provided, shall
be clearly visible from the common areas of the premises. Visibility into
such booths, cubicles, rooms or stalls shall not be blocked or obscured
by doors, curtains, partitions, drapes or any other obstruction
whatsoever. It shall be unlawful to install enclosed booths, cubicles,
rooms or stalls within adult-oriented establishments for whatever
purpose but especially for the purpose of providing for the secluded
viewing of adult-oriented motion pictures or other types of adultoriented
entertainment.
E. On or after July 1, 1999, the operator of each adult-oriented
establishment shall be responsible for and shall provide that any room
or other area used for the purpose of viewing adult-oriented motion
pictures or other types of live adult entertainment shall be well lighted
and readily accessible at all times and shall be continuously open to view
in its entirety. The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting
fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons
are permitted access at an illumination of not less than 150 footcandles
as measured at the floor level. It shall be the duty of the operator and its
agents to ensure that the illumination described above is maintained at
all times that any patron is present on the premises.
F. Every act or omission by an employee which constitutes a violation of
the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed the act or omission of
the operator if such act or omission occurs either with the authorization,
knowledge or approval of the operator or as a result of the operator's
negligent failure to supervise the employee's conduct, and the operator
shall be punishable for such act or omission in the same manner as if the
operator committed the act or caused the omission.
G. An operator shall be responsible for the conduct of all employees while
on the licensed premises, and any act or omission of any employee
constituting a violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed
the act or omission of operator for purposes of determining whether the
operator shall be subject to the penalties imposed by this chapter.
H. All adult-oriented establishments shall be open to inspection at all
reasonable times by the inspector, or such other persons as the Board of
Selectmen may designate. Information regarding employees, including
§ 150-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-3
1:87
name, date of birth and social security number, must be maintained as
part of the record and must be available for inspection by Town officials.
I. No adult-oriented establishment shall be open earlier than 9:00 a.m. or
later than 8:00 p.m. [Amended 3-28-2018]
§ 150-4. Minimum distances from youth facilities.
Adult-oriented establishments shall be located no less than 3,000 feet from
any property containing a public or private school serving grade 12 or
lower; any day-care center, nursery school or similar use; 1,000 feet from
any property containing a church or place of worship, and 100 feet from any
public park and recreational facility owned by the Town of East Haddam,
State of Connecticut, or nonprofit, non-stock corporation or association in
the public interest. Adult-oriented establishments shall not be abutting to
existing residential structures. The separating distance required by this
section shall be determined as of the date that any adult-oriented
establishment commences to operate in accordance with this chapter and
any applicable provision(s) of the East Haddam Zoning Regulations,
Building Code, Health Code or other applicable state and local laws and
such adult-oriented establishment shall not be deemed to violate this
section if, thereafter, one of the enumerated uses is established within the
distances set forth herein.
§ 150-5. Minimum distances from other adult-oriented
establishments.
No adult-oriented establishments shall be permitted in any portion of a
building that is less than 300 feet from that portion of the building occupied
by an existing adult-oriented establishment. The 300 feet shall be the
straight horizontal distance from a public entrance or exit into or out of any
portion of the building housing such adult-oriented establishment or, if only
a portion of the building is so used, any public entrance or exit into or out of
any portion of the building housing such adult-oriented establishment to any
such public entrance or exit for any existing adult-oriented establishment.
§ 150-6. Exemptions for preexisting uses.
The provisions of the preceding §§ 150-4 and 150-5 shall not be deemed to
prohibit any use preexisting the enactment of this chapter. Any preexisting
use which shall be discontinued for a period of 30 days shall thereafter
conform to §§ 150-4 and 150-5.
§ 150-7. Penalties for offenses.
A. Any person, partnership or corporation who or which is found to have
violated this chapter shall be fined a definite sum not exceeding $250 for
each such violation. [Amended 3-28-2018]
B. Each violation of this chapter shall be considered a separate offense, and
any violation continuing more than one hour of time shall be considered
a separate offense for each hour of violation.
§ 150-3 EAST HADDAM CODE § 150-7
1:88
Chapter 154
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
§ 150-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-7
1:89

ARTICLE I
Possession by Minors
[Adopted 3-26-2003]
§ 154-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR — Shall be defined in § 30-1 of the Connecticut
General Statutes.
HOST — To organize a gathering of two or more persons or to allow
premises under one's control to be used with one's knowledge for a
gathering of two or more persons for personal, social or business purposes.
§ 154-2. Possession.
No person under the age of 21 shall be in possession of containers of
alcoholic liquors, whether open or closed, within the Town of East Haddam
except when accompanied by or in the presence of his or her parent,
guardian, or spouse who has attained the age of 21 years.
§ 154-3. Hosting events.
No person shall host an event which allows the consumption or dispensing
of alcoholic liquor to or by a minor or minors except when accompanied by
or in the presence of his or her parent, guardian, or spouse who has attained
the age of 21 years. This prohibition shall apply to events on both public and
private property.
§ 154-4. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating the provisions of this article will be fined not more than
$99 for each offense. A parent or guardian of any minor or minors will be
notified of any violation of the provisions of this article.
§ 154-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 154-4
1:91
Chapter 162
BEACHES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 154. Boating — See Ch. 171.
§ 162-1. Hours.
The area shall be open from sunrise to sunset, with exceptions by
permission of the Recreation Director.
§ 162-2. Parking regulations.
A. Vehicles are not allowed across the pond causeway to the swimming and
picnic area without staff permission.
B. Parking cars and boat trailers shall be limited to designated areas only.
§ 162-3. Beach regulations.
A. Swimming is allowed in the designated area only.
B. When no lifeguards are on duty, swim at your own risk.
C. No glassware or bottles are allowed.
D. Refuse shall be placed in designated containers.
E. No animals or pets are allowed.
F. Only United States Coast Guard approved flotation devices are allowed.
G. Athletic equipment is allowed in designated areas only.
H. No smoking.
I. No open flames (including bonfires and grills) unless prior written
approval is obtained from the Recreation Director.
§ 162-4. Boat regulations.
A. All boats must be launched and stored in the designated area.
B. No boats or water skiers are allowed within 100 feet of the swimming
area.
C. Boats, cars or trailers may not be left in the area after closing time.
§ 162-5. Alcoholic beverages.
The consumption of alcoholic beverages shall not be permitted on Town
beach property, including the parking lot and fields, and no alcoholic
beverages, whether in open or sealed containers, are permitted on Town
beach property, including the parking lot and fields, without prior
permission from the Board of Selectmen.
§ 162-6. Penalties for offenses.
Anyone violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined not more
than $250 and be subject to loss of park privileges.
§ 154-4 EAST HADDAM CODE § 162-6
1:92
Chapter 166
BINGO, BAZAARS AND RAFFLES
§ 162-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 162-6
1:93

ARTICLE I
Bingo
[Adopted 5-27-1941]
§ 166-1. Authorization.
The Town of East Haddam shall allow bingo playing in accordance with the
provisions of the General Statutes.
§ 166-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 166-1
1:95

ARTICLE II
Bazaars and Raffles
[Adopted 3-10-1956]
§ 166-2. Authorization.
The Town of East Haddam shall allow the operation of bazaars and raffles
in accordance with Public Act 409 of the 1955 session of the Legislature.3
3. Editor's Note: See C.G.S. § 7-171.
§ 166-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 166-2
1:97
Chapter 171
BOATING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Beaches — See Ch. 162.
§ 166-2 EAST HADDAM CODE § 166-2
1:98
ARTICLE I
Lake Hayward
[Adopted 8-20-1964]
§ 171-1. Use of boats powered by internal combustion engine
prohibited.
Under authority of the General Statutes of the State of Connecticut, the use
of any boat powered by an internal combustion engine, whether inboard
or outboard, is prohibited on Lake Hayward (Shaw Lake), East Haddam,
Connecticut.
§ 171-2. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 3-28-2018]
Any person or persons violating this article shall be subject to a fine not
exceeding $250.
§ 171-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 171-2
1:99

ARTICLE II
Bashan Lake and Moodus Reservoir
[Adopted 6-30-1966]
§ 171-3. Speed limits. [Amended 3-28-2018]
From 8:00 a.m. through one-half hour after sunset, there shall be a
maximum speed limit of 35 miles per hour on Bashan Lake and Moodus
Reservoir, but not over eight miles per hour within 75 feet of any canoe,
rowboat, sailboat, or any other vessel, or any float dock or the shore, unless
approaching said float dock or shore to take off or land water skiers.
§ 171-4. Speed limit after dark. [Amended 2-25-1997]
No person shall operate a vessel at a speed greater than six miles per hour
from one-half hour after sunset to 8:00 a.m.
§ 171-5. Restricted operation of motorboats.
There shall be no operation of a motorboat while persons or a person is on
the deck, bow, or gunwales of a motorboat.
§ 171-6. Water skiing. [Amended 2-25-1997]
No person shall tow more than two waterskiers simultaneously. Any person
who tows a waterskier shall proceed and operate in a counterclockwise
traffic pattern.
§ 171-7. Ski jump areas; regattas.
The Board of Selectmen of the Town of East Haddam shall designate ski
jump areas and shall control regattas.
§ 171-8. Operation of boats with toilets prohibited.
No boat shall be allowed on said lake and reservoir with a flush or portable
toilet.
§ 171-9. Overnight camping prohibited.
There shall be no camping overnight in a boat.
§ 171-10. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 3-28-2018]
Any person, firm, corporation or association violating any of the provisions
of this article shall be fined not more than $250 for each offense.
§ 171-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 171-10
1:101
Chapter 177
BUILDING NUMBERING
§ 177-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote the public safety, health and
welfare, and particularly to facilitate the delivery of fire protection, law
enforcement, emergency medical services, social services, and postal
services to all of the townspeople of East Haddam. In this effort, the Town
of East Haddam wishes to adopt the following regulations to govern the
posting of address identifying numbers on all buildings within the Town.
§ 177-2. Applicability.
All residential, business, or other principal buildings erected or to be
erected within the Town of East Haddam shall display address identifying
numbers, as assigned by the Town of East Haddam, in conformance with the
specifications provided herein.
§ 177-3. Number specifications.
A. Numbers shall be Arabic block-style, not italic or Roman numerals.
B. Numbers shall be of a color that contrasts clearly with the background
to which they are affixed, and may be of a reflective material.
C. Numbers shall be a minimum size of four inches in height when affixed
on buildings. Numbers affixed to mailboxes or signposts shall be a
minimum of three inches in height.
D. Numbers on buildings within historical districts must conform to
Historic District Commission requirements.
§ 177-4. Location specifications.
A. Numbers shall be securely affixed to the front of the building or other
fixed appurtenance, so as to be clearly visible from the access street.
B. Numbers affixed to buildings will not be less than five feet nor more than
10 feet above ground level.
C. A building which is set back more than 100 feet from the center of the
access street, or if numbers cannot be made legible from that location
because of obstructions, shall have the aforesaid numbers securely
affixed to a post, sign, mailbox, or other device which shall be located
within 10 feet of the driveway entrance to the premises. Numbers will be
visible from both travel directions. Mailboxes will be numbered on both
sides and the front. Numbers will be no less than three feet nor more
than eight feet above the ground.
D. Buildings containing more than two dwelling units sharing common
entrances shall have the common entrance displaying the range of
numbers accessible through that entrance. For buildings containing
more than two dwelling units with multiple entrances, each entrance
shall display the range of numbers accessible through that entrance.
Each individual premises within such entrance shall display its individual
§ 171-10 EAST HADDAM CODE § 177-4
1:102
number. Numbers for all applicable buildings within the section shall be
located on, or immediately adjacent to, the entrance door.
E. Residential dwellings that consist of multiple units having different
street numbers shall post the range of unit numbers per building at a
prominent location thereon. Each individual unit shall have its number
affixed at each and every entrance.
§ 177-5. Private drives, courts, and roadways.
All such private roads shall be posted in a manner so that the numbers are
clearly visible and identifiable from the intersecting street. All driveways on
private roads will be numbered within 10 feet of the driveway entrance.
§ 177-6. Date of compliance.
A. This chapter shall become effective 60 days after adoption at a Town
meeting.
B. All existing buildings requiring numbering are subject to this chapter on
that date following chapter adoption.
C. All buildings required to be numbered, after this date, shall have the
prescribed numbering installed before a certificate of occupancy is
issued for the building.
D. All buildings under construction shall comply with this chapter
commencing with the issuance of a building permit.
§ 177-7. Enforcement; penalties for offenses.
A. Violations may be reported by any emergency, public service or other
Town of East Haddam agency or department.
B. Violations will be reported to the Building Official.
C. The Fire Marshal shall advise of the violation in writing. If not remedied
within 10 business days, the offense shall be turned over to the
authorities. Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be
subject to a penalty in an amount not to exceed $250. Each day of
violation shall be considered a separate offense. [Added 3-28-2018]
Chapter 183
BURNING, OPEN
§ 183-1. Statutory authority.
Pursuant to C.G.S. § 22a-174, the Town of East Haddam adopts the following
Open Burning Ordinance.
§ 183-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following words or phrases shall have the
meanings indicated:
APPLICANT — The person making the open burning certificate application
and who will be responsible for the open burning.
§ 177-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 183-2
1:103
BRUSH — Shrubs, vegetation or prunings, the diameter of which is not
greater than three inches at the widest point.
BUILDING — Any structure which is enclosed by a roof and walls.
COMMISSIONER — The Commissioner of the State of Connecticut
Department of Energy and Environmental Protection, or his or her
designee.
DEEP — The State of Connecticut Department of Energy and Environmental
Protection.
NUISANCE — The discharge into the open air of any smoke, soot, dust,
fumes, odors or other emissions which cause injury, detriment or annoyance
or which endanger the comfort, repose, health or safety of the public
or which cause, or are likely to cause, injury or damage to business or
property.
OPEN BURNING CERTIFICATE — A certificate issued by the Open Burning
Official in accordance with this chapter, C.G.S. § 22a-174, and the
regulations.
OPEN BURNING CERTIFICATE APPLICATION — An application for an
open burning certificate made on the form furnished by the Open Burning
Official, which form shall, at a minimum, name the person responsible for
the open burning, list his or her address, list his or her telephone number,
explain the purpose of the open burning, explain the type and quantity of
material to be burned and list the address of the property at which the open
burning shall take place.
OPEN BURNING OFFICIAL — The official who has been nominated,
certified and serves in accordance with C.G.S. § 22a-174 and the
regulations.
OPEN BURNING REGISTRATION — Verbal registration which is made to
the Open Burning Official of an open burning enumerated in § 183-5 of this
chapter 24 hours prior to the ignition of such open burning.
OPEN BURNS — The ignition of, causing to be ignited, permitting to be
ignited, or maintenance of a fire outside the confines of a building.
REGULATIONS — Those regulations of Connecticut State Agencies enacted
pursuant to C.G.S. § 22a-174, as amended.
SECTION 22a-174 — Section 22a-174 of the Connecticut General Statutes,
as amended.
§ 183-3. General prohibition.
No open burning shall be allowed except as specifically provided in this
chapter.
§ 183-4. Open burning certificate required.
A. The following types of open burning shall be allowed only after an
applicant obtains an open burning certificate:
§ 183-2 EAST HADDAM CODE § 183-4
1:104
(1) The open burns of brush on residential property. The applicant must
be a resident or an authorized agent of a resident of the property
where the open burning will occur. The Open Burning Official, in his
or her discretion, may require proof of residency or proof that the
applicant is an authorized agent of a resident.
(2) Fire training exercises.
(3) Eradication or control of insect infestations or disease.
(4) Agricultural purposes.
(5) Clearing vegetative debris following a natural disaster.
(6) Vegetative management or enhancement of wildlife habitat or
ecological sustainability on Town property or on any privately owned
property permanently dedicated to open space.
(7) Any other type of fire that is described in Section 22a-174 or the
regulations.
B. The following conditions shall be placed on all open burning certificates:
(1) Open burning must take place between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and
5:00 p.m. No visible embers, flame, or smoke may be present after
5:00 p.m.
(2) Open burning shall only be permitted on sunny or partly sunny
days when the wind speed is five miles per hour to 15 miles per
hour, except that fire training exercises shall not be subject to this
condition.
(3) The open burning of brush may only occur on residential property
that contains one or two residential units.
(4) The applicant must keep a copy of the open burning certificate in his
or her possession at the time of the open burning.
(5) The applicant must call the Open Burning Official or such other
person listed on the open burning certificate 24 hours prior to the
ignition of the open burning and leave the applicant's name,
telephone number, the specific time of, and location of the open burn.
(6) Any other conditions required to be imposed by Section 22a-174 or
the regulations.
C. The Open Burning Official may issue such further conditions to an open
burning certificate, either at the time of issuance of the open burning
certificate or afterwards, as are necessary to avoid a nuisance or to
protect the health, safety and comfort of the public, relating to the
following:
(1) The materials and quantities to be burned.
(2) The hours and days during which the open burning is allowed.
(3) Any other conditions allowed under Section 22a-174 or the
regulations.
D. An open burning certificate is applicable only for the occasion and
purpose outlined in such open burning certificate. The open burning
certificate may be revoked in writing by the Open Burning Official or
the Commissioner for violation of any provision of this chapter or the
Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies enacted pursuant to Section
22a-174, as amended.
§ 183-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 183-5
1:105
§ 183-5. Fires permitted with open burning registration.
The following types of open burning shall be allowed only after a person
makes an open burning registration: any campfires or bonfires that exceed
four feet in any direction.
§ 183-6. Exceptions.
The following types of open burning shall be allowed without the need for
an open burning certificate or open burning registration:
A. Barbecues or other similar outdoor fires, which fires are for the cooking
of food for human consumption.
B. Campfires, bonfires, or other types of fires made out of nonprocessed
wood for recreational or ceremonial purposes, provided that the size of
such fires does not exceed four feet in any direction.
C. Fires in "salamanders" or other similar devices used by construction
or other workers for heating purposes, which fires are used for street
installation or paving activities, the repairing of utilities or other similar
work.
D. Fire breaks for the purpose of controlling forest fires, provided fire
personnel do it.
E. Any fire specifically exempted from such requirements in Section
22a-174 or the regulations.
§ 183-7. Fire permitted with permit from Fire Marshal.
The following types of open burning shall be allowed only after a permit
from the Fire Marshal is obtained in accordance with Section 22a-174 and
the regulations: the open burning of brush in municipal landfills, transfer
stations and municipal recycling centers in the Town.
§ 183-8. Fires requiring permit from Commissioner.
Certain types of open burning require the issuance of a permit by the
Commissioner; such types are enumerated in the Connecticut General
Statutes and the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies.
§ 183-9. Prohibited burning.
Under no circumstances are the following allowed, and the following are a
violation under this chapter:
A. No weeds, grass, leaves, processed wood, garbage, paper, metals,
plastics, rubber, painted materials, man-made waste, or demolition
waste shall be burned.
B. No open burning of brush shall occur when national or state ambient air
quality standards may be exceeded.
C. No open burning of brush shall occur where a hazardous health
condition might be created.
D. No open burning shall occur when the forest fire danger in the area
is identified by the Commissioner as extreme, and where woodland or
grassland is within 100 feet of the proposed open burning.
§ 183-5 EAST HADDAM CODE § 183-9
1:106
E. No open burning of brush shall occur when there is an advisory from the
Commissioner of any air pollution episode.
F. No open burning is allowed within the limits of any public road or public
right-of-way.
G. No open burning of brush shall occur on commercial or industrial
properties, vacant lots or on properties that contain multifamily
residential units.
§ 183-10. Conditions on all open burning.
The following conditions are imposed on all open burning:
A. No open burning shall create a nuisance.
B. A responsible adult shall tend to the open burning at all times.
C. Suitable fire-extinguishing equipment must be in close proximity and
available at the time of the open burning.
D. The open burning must be a minimum of 25 feet from any property line
and 25 feet from any building, except that barbecues or other similar
outdoor fires shall not be subject to this condition.
E. No open burning shall be allowed to burn out of control so as to require
the response of fire personnel and/or apparatus. The Fire Chief or Fire
Marshal shall make a determination that a fire has been allowed to burn
out of control.
§ 183-11. Extinguishing of fires.
The Fire Marshal, Fire Chief or any officer of the Fire Department, the
Director of Health, or his or her designee, or any police officer may require
any person who ignites or maintains an open burning in violation of the
provisions of this chapter to extinguish such open burning. Failure to
extinguish such open burning shall be a violation under this chapter.
§ 183-12. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be subject to the
following penalties and fines:
A. Fines:
(1) First offense or violation: $50. [Amended 3-28-2018]
(2) Second or subsequent offense or violation: $100 for each separate
violation and each day of continued violation.
B. The Open Burning Official may seek enforcement of the provisions of this
chapter by injunction and, in such event, the violator may be liable for
the Town's reasonable attorney's fees.4
C. Any and all remedies which the Town has in enforcing the chapter, at law
or in equity, shall be cumulative and two or more or all of such remedies
may be exercised at the same time.
Chapter 195
4. Editor's Note: Original Subsection C, regarding Ch. 93, Ordinance Enforcement, which
immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 3-28-2018.
§ 183-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 183-12
1:107
DRIVEWAYS AND EXCAVATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 285.
§ 195-1. Permit required for excavations.
No firm, person or corporation shall excavate or cause any excavation
in or under any Town roadway or public ground in the Town of East
Haddam without an approved written permit obtained at least 48 hours
prior to excavation from the Board of Selectmen or its duly authorized
representative.
§ 195-2. Draining water across rights-of-way prohibited.
No firm, person or corporation shall lay, construct, open or maintain any
drain or conductor pipe in such a manner that the water from the same
is discharged upon any sidewalk, Town roadway or public ground in the
Town of East Haddam or adjacent properties in a manner which may cause
damage.
§ 195-3. Permit required for driveway construction.
No firm, person or corporation shall build, maintain, construct, relocate
or otherwise use a driveway or other access to a Town roadway or public
ground from private or public land without an approved written permit
obtained at least 48 hours prior to excavation from the Board of Selectmen
or its duly authorized representative.
§ 195-4. Construction specifications; bond.
The Board of Selectmen shall adopt and may amend, as required,
specifications concerning the construction of driveways or excavations
abutting Town roadways or public grounds.5 In adopting or amending
specifications, the Board of Selectmen shall include, in its consideration, the
location of the driveway or excavation with respect to its effect on roadway
drainage, safety, the width and character of the roadway affected, the
density of traffic thereon and the character of such traffic. No permit shall
be issued unless the work to be done shall conform to the specifications.
Such specifications shall include the requirement for a bond to ensure
completion of all required work. Should any work not be completed as set
forth in the specifications, then the bond shall be called by the Board of
selectmen.
5. Editor's Note: Said specifications are included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 183-12 EAST HADDAM CODE § 195-5
1:108
§ 195-5. Scope.
As used herein, "Town roadway" shall include any portion of the entire width
of the right-of-way, including the travelled portion, the shoulders of any
unimproved or undeveloped portion of the roadway.
§ 195-6. Exception.
This chapter shall not apply to work being done by or on behalf of the Town
of East Haddam.
§ 195-7. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 3-28-2018]
Any firm, person or corporation who or which shall violate this chapter shall
be subject to fine not to exceed $250 for each day that the violation exists.
Chapter 203
FARMING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Agriculture Commission — See Ch. 12, Art.
VIII.
§ 203-1. Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, the terms "agriculture" and "farming" shall
have the same definition and meaning as set forth in Connecticut General
Statutes § 1-1(q), as may be amended from time to time, as set forth below:
(q) Except as otherwise specifically defined, the words "agriculture" and
"farming" shall include cultivation of the soil, dairying, forestry, raising
or harvesting any agricultural or horticultural commodity, including the
raising, shearing, feeding, caring for, training and management of livestock,
including horses, bees, poultry, fur-bearing animals and wildlife, and the
raising or harvesting of oysters, clams, mussels, other molluscan shellfish
or fish; the operation, management, conservation, improvement or
maintenance of a farm and its buildings, tools and equipment, or salvaging
timber or cleared land of brush or other debris left by a storm, as an
incident to such farming operations; the production or harvesting of maple
syrup or maple sugar, or any agricultural commodity, including lumber, as
an incident to ordinary farming operations or the harvesting of mushrooms,
the hatching of poultry, or the construction, operation or maintenance
of ditches, canals, reservoirs or waterways used exclusively for farming
purposes; handling, planting, drying, packing, packaging, processing,
freezing, grading, storing or delivering to storage or to market, or to a
carrier for transportation to market, or for direct sale any agricultural or
horticultural commodity as an incident to ordinary farming operations, or,
§ 195-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-1
1:109
in the case of fruits and vegetables, as an incident to the preparation of such
fruits or vegetables for market or for direct sale. The term "farm" includes
farm buildings, and accessory buildings thereto, nurseries, orchards,
ranges, greenhouses, hoophouses and other temporary structures or other
structures used primarily for the raising and, as an incident to ordinary
farming operations, the sale of agricultural or horticultural commodities.
The term "aquaculture" means the farming of the waters of the state and
tidal wetlands and the production of protein food, including fish, oysters,
clams, mussels and other molluscan shellfish, on leased, franchised and
public underwater farm lands. Nothing herein shall restrict the power of a
local zoning authority under Chapter 124.
§ 203-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is:
A. To protect and promote agriculture, including the growth of existing
agricultural operations and the production and sale of locally grown food
products;
B. To reduce the loss of local agricultural resources;
C. To mitigate the circumstances under which disputes arise between
farmers and their neighbors and/or public agencies; and
D. To reduce the potential for any agricultural use to be considered or
determined a nuisance.
§ 203-3. Agricultural or farming operations not deemed nuisances.
The methods of farming that comport with generally accepted farming
practices are deemed consistent with community standards. As long as
farmers are in compliance with generally accepted farming practices, their
agricultural uses will be deemed to be consistent with community standards
and within the protections granted to agricultural uses under Connecticut
General Statutes § 19a-341 as set forth below:
§ 203-1 EAST HADDAM CODE § 203-3
1:110
(a) Notwithstanding any general statute or municipal ordinance or
regulation pertaining to nuisances to the contrary, no agricultural or
farming operation, place, establishment or facility, or any of its
appurtenances, or the operation thereof, shall be deemed to constitute
a nuisance, either public or private, due to alleged objectionable (1)
odor from livestock, manure, fertilizer or feed, (2) noise from livestock
or farm equipment used in normal, generally acceptable farming
procedures, (3) dust created during plowing or cultivation operations,
(4) use of chemicals, provided such chemicals and the method of their
application conform to practices approved by the Commissioner of
Energy and Environmental Protection or, where applicable, the
Commissioner of Public Health, or (5) water pollution from livestock
or crop production activities, except the pollution of public or private
drinking water supplies, provided such activities conform to acceptable
management practices for pollution control approved by the
Commissioner of Energy and Environmental Protection; provided such
agricultural or farming operation, place, establishment or facility has
been in operation for one year or more and has not been substantially
changed, and such operation follows generally accepted agricultural
practices. Inspection and approval of the agricultural or farming
operation, place, establishment or facility by the Commissioner of
Agriculture or his designee shall be prima facie evidence that such
operation follows generally accepted agricultural practices.
(b) Notwithstanding any general statute or municipal ordinance or
regulation pertaining to nuisances, no operation to collect spring water
or well water, as defined in section 21a-150, shall be deemed to
constitute a nuisance, either public or private, due to alleged
objectionable noise from equipment used in such operation, provided
the operation (1) conforms to generally accepted practices for the
collection of spring water or well water, (2) has received all approvals
or permits required by law, and (3) complies with the local zoning
authority's time, place and manner restrictions on operations to collect
spring water or well water.
(c) The provisions of this section shall not apply whenever a nuisance
results from negligence or willful or reckless misconduct in the
operation of any such agricultural or farming operation, place,
establishment or facility, or any of its appurtenances.
§ 203-4. Right to farm declaration.
The right to farm is hereby recognized to exist in East Haddam and all
agricultural operations conducted in East Haddam, now and in the future,
in a manner consistent with accepted agricultural practices (and not in
violation of statutes, ordinances, codes, regulations and rules as
promulgated by the legislative bodies of the state and Town, their or its
boards and commissions, offices and agencies with respect to land use,
public health and safety) shall not be considered either a public or private
nuisance.
§ 203-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-5
1:111
§ 203-5. Assistance.
A. Residents and property owners may seek answers and assistance from
the Agriculture Commission regarding questions they have with respect
to any agricultural operation, establishment or facility located in East
Haddam.
B. Residents and property owners may seek assistance from other East
Haddam officials, boards or commissions with respect to any agricultural
operation, establishment or facility located in East Haddam.
C. Nothing herein prohibits residents from taking their questions or
complaints to the Connecticut Department of Agriculture and seeking a
remedy from said Department, and any final administrative decision of
the Department of Agriculture shall be considered determinative of the
issues presented to said Department of Agriculture.
§ 203-6. Promoting right to farm.
The Board of Selectmen authorizes the Agriculture Commission to promote
and advance the right to farm as part of a Town policy by:
A. Disseminating information to Town agencies and officials and to the
general public concerning state and local laws concerning agricultural
uses and practices, including but not limited to C.G.S. § 19a-341,
Agricultural or farming operation not deemed a nuisance.
B. Disseminating information to Town agencies and officials and to the
general public concerning generally accepted agricultural practices.
C. Assisting Town agencies and officials with resolution of complaints
lodged against an agricultural or farming operation or use.
D. Assisting landowners with resolution of complaints when one or more of
the landowners is a farmer or engaged in an agricultural operation or
use.
§ 203-7. Interpretation.
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed or interpreted to
conflict with existing statutes, ordinances, codes, regulations and rules as
promulgated by the legislative bodies of the state and Town, their or its
boards and commissions, offices, officers and agencies with respect to land
use, public health and public safety or conflict with any state law, regulation
or judicial or administrative ruling with respect to abatement of nuisances
as described in C.G.S. § 19a-341. Nothing contained in this chapter is
intended to restrict or interfere with the powers, regulatory authority,
responsibilities and duties of the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses
Commission, Planning and Zoning Commission, Zoning Enforcement
Officer, Building Department, Fire Commissioners or the Chatham Health
District. All offices, agencies, boards and commissions are encouraged to
review and on an as-needed basis to adopt such regulations and rules
consistent with this chapter to make preservation of farmland and
promoting agricultural operations within the Town of East Haddam a
criterion in their planning policy decisions.
Chapter 205
§ 203-5 EAST HADDAM CODE § 203-7
1:112
FEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning and zoning — See Ch. 90.
§ 203-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-7
1:113

ARTICLE I
Land Use Applications
[Adopted 7-24-1990; amended in its entirety 6-25-2003]
§ 205-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is:
A. To establish a schedule of fees, pursuant to §§ 8-1c and 22-a-42a(e)
of the Connecticut General Statutes, for various land use applications.
[Amended 3-28-2018]
B. To establish a reasonable and equitable schedule of fees for reviewing,
evaluating and processing applications to the Historic Commission,
Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Commission, Planning and Zoning
Commission, Water Pollution Control Authority and Zoning Board of
Appeals.
C. To encourage land use applicants to become familiar with and review
municipal development regulations, to submit land use applications
which comply with municipal regulations, and to submit plans and
proposals with fewer errors and omissions.
§ 205-2. Fees. [Amended 3-28-2018]
Fees for the following shall be set from time to time by the Historic District
Commission, Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Commission, Planning and
Zoning Commission, Water Pollution Control Authority, Zoning Board of
Appeals and state statute, as appropriate:
A. Historic District Commission actions.
B. Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Commission.
(1) Permits for residential and commercial use, including declaratory
rulings, summary rulings, plenary rulings, and for disturbed
wetlands or areas in which an activity is proposed.
(2) Modification of a previous approval.
(3) Wetlands Map amendments.
(4) Subdivision review, per-lot fee, IWWC. A fee shall be charged each
time plans are resubmitted with substantial new and revised
information. This fee is for the entire proposal and not just a section.
C. Planning and Zoning Commission.
(1) Permits for commercial/industrial buildings, single-family homes and
accessory structures/additions. Fees will be determined by the
square footage of the proposed building.
(2) Site plan review applications. Fees will be determined by the square
footage of the proposed building and the impervious surface area.
(3) Special exception applications. Fees will be determined by the
square footage of the proposed building and the impervious surface
area.
(4) Change of zoning and subdivision regulations text.
(5) Change of Zoning Map.
(6) Application for a floating zone for a multifamily complex.
(7) Home occupations.
§ 205-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-2
1:115
(8) Subdivision applications, planning and zoning. A fee shall be charged
each time plans are resubmitted with substantial new and revised
information. This fee is for the entire proposal and not just a section.
(9) A public improvement fee is required at the filing of the approved
plans. This includes approvals under site plan review, special
exception review, floating zones and subdivisions: a sum to be
computed by the Town Engineer, equal to 5% of the estimated public
improvements required by the approving commission or board,
which is to be paid prior to the endorsement of the Mylars by the
Chairman or Secretary of the Planning and Zoning Commission.
D. Water Pollution Control Authority actions: all costs incurred by the Town
during review, including engineering and legal fees to be paid prior to
the endorsement of the agreement.
E. Zoning Board of Appeals applications (application fee and/or appeal of
action from the Zoning Enforcement Officer).
F. Public Act 92-235, the State of Connecticut fee to fund state review
agencies.
§ 205-3. Public improvements defined.
For the purpose of this article, "public improvements" include, but are not
limited to, the construction of new roads, to be constructed to standards
approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission, whether such roads are
to be privately owned or conveyed to the Town, improvements to existing
roads, storm drainage facilities, water and sewer lines, the planting of
trees or other landscaping and the installation of retaining walls or other
structures, and sediment and erosion controls.
§ 205-4. Exemptions.
Boards, commissions, councils and departments of the Town of East
Haddam are exempt from all fee requirements.
§ 205-5. Refunds.
The application fee is not refundable.
§ 205-2 EAST HADDAM CODE § 205-5
1:116
Chapter 210
FIRE LANES
§ 210-1. Authority to establish.
The Fire Marshal of the Town of East Haddam shall have the authority
to designate fire lanes in accordance with the provisions of the State Fire
Safety Code.
§ 210-2. Marking of lanes.
The owner(s) of property benefited by the establishment of fire lanes shall
be required to mark the lanes in a manner acceptable to the Fire Marshal.
§ 210-3. Parking prohibited.
Parking shall be prohibited within designated fire lanes.
§ 210-4. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 3-28-2018]
If any vehicles are parked in designated fire lanes, the owners of said
vehicles shall forfeit and pay for the use of the Town of East Haddam a fine
not to exceed maximum amount allowed by law. In addition, any vehicles
parked in designated fire lanes in violation of this chapter may be towed
away by the Town of East Haddam at the vehicle owner's expense.
Chapter 215
FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS
§ 215-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CERTIFIED AGENT — One who has been certified by the State of
Connecticut for food establishment inspections.
DIRECTOR OF HEALTH — The Director of Health for the Town of East
Haddam or the Registered Sanitarian, who is his/her authorized agent, who
shall enforce this chapter.
FOOD — Any raw, cooked or processed edible substance, drink or
ingredient, including ice, used or intended for use, in whole or in part, or
otherwise handled for human consumption.
FOOD ESTABLISHMENT — Any place, fixed or mobile, where food intended
for human consumption is manufactured, prepared, stored, offered for sale,
sold, served or given to the public or handled in any other manner for public
use, regardless of whether consumption is on or off the premises or whether
§ 205-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-1
1:117
there is a charge for the food. The term does not include private homes
where food is prepared for individual family consumption.
FOOD VENDING MACHINE — A device automatically operated to supply
food without the direct supervision of a human being.
HAZARD ANALYSIS — An evaluation of food handling operations to identify
points of potential product contamination and assess the adequacy of hot
processing and hot and cold storage methods of foods.
SEASONAL ESTABLISHMENT — A food establishment which is seasonal in
nature, i.e., not to exceed a six-month duration in any given year.
TEMPORARY FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS — Food establishments
that may operate in the Town of East Haddam at fixed locations for periods
not to exceed 14 days in any thirty-day period, in connection with a carnival,
circus, public exhibition, festival, or similar transitory gathering.
§ 215-2. Classification of establishments.
A. The Director of Health or his/her authorized agent shall classify each
food service establishment at the time of licensure, license renewal or
other registration with the Director of Health.
B. The food service establishment classification shall be reviewed during
each inspection, and in no case less than annually, and the establishment
shall be placed into the highest classification that describes any of the
food operations conducted. No food service establishment shall change
operations to a different classification without prior written approval by
the Director of Health or his/her authorized agent.
C. The classes of food service are as follows:
(1) Class I is a food service establishment with commercially
prepackaged foods and/or hot or cold beverages only. No
preparation, cooking or hot-holding of potentially hazardous foods is
included, except that commercially packaged precooked foods may
be heated and served in the original package within four hours.
(2) Class II is a food service establishment using cold or ready-to-eat
commercially processed food requiring no further heat treatment
and/or hot or cold beverages. No cooking, heating or hot-holding
of potentially hazardous foods is included, except that commercially
packaged precooked foods may be heated and served in the original
package within four hours, and commercially precooked hot dogs,
kielbasa and soups may be heated if transferred directly out of the
original package and served within four hours.
(3) Class III is a food service establishment having on the premises
exposed potentially hazardous foods that are prepared by hot
processes and consumed by the public within four hours of
preparation.
(4) Class IV is a food service establishment having on the premises
exposed potentially hazardous foods that are prepared by hot
processes and held for more than four hours prior to consumption by
the public.
§ 215-1 EAST HADDAM CODE § 215-3
1:118
§ 215-3. Licensing.
A. No person shall operate a food establishment who does not have a valid
license issued to him/her by the Director of Health or certified agent
who has been duly authorized. Only a person who complies with the
requirements of this chapter and the Public Health Code of the State of
Connecticut6 shall be entitled to receive or retain such a license. Food
service licenses are not transferable between or to another owner(s) or
principal operator. Change of ownership or principal operator(s) shall
immediately cause a reinspection and classification of the establishment,
together with the application for a new food service license and payment
of the appropriate fee. A valid license shall be posted prominently in
plain view in every food establishment. Licenses for temporary food
service establishments shall be issued for a period of time not to exceed
14 consecutive days.
B. New license. Any person desiring to operate a food establishment shall
make a written application for a license on forms provided by the Town
Department of Health. Such application shall include the name and
address of the owner, principal operator, and the designated qualified
food operator (QFO), the location and type of the proposed food
establishment, and the signature of all applicants. If the application is
for a temporary food establishment, it shall also include the date(s) of
the proposed operation. Prior to approval of an application for license,
the Director of Health or his/her agent shall inspect the proposed food
establishment to determine compliance with the provisions of this
chapter and the Connecticut Public Health Code. Following this
inspection, payment of fee, and a review that the proposed food
establishment complies with the requirements of this chapter and the
Connecticut Public Health Code and any other applicable statutes,
ordinances or rules and regulations, the Director of Health shall issue a
license to the applicant.
C. License renewal. All food service licenses shall expire on December
31 of each year and may be renewed by the same owner or operator
for another year upon application approval and payment of the annual
fee. Licenses not renewed by February 15 following shall be considered
lapsed and expired, and any subsequent application for renewal shall
trigger reinspection of the establishment. Seasonal food establishments
must complete the license renewal procedure no less than 45 days prior
to the scheduled annual opening of operations to the public.
D. License suspension.
(1) The Director of Health or Registered Sanitarian may, without prior
warning, notice, or hearing, suspend any license to operate a food
establishment if the license holder does not comply with
requirements of this chapter or the Connecticut Public Health Code,
or if the operation of the food establishment otherwise constitutes a
substantial hazard to public health, or for serious or repeated code
violations, or for interference with the Director of Health, Registered
Sanitarian or certified agent in the performance of their duties.
6. Editor's Note: See Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies § 19-13-A1 et seq.
§ 215-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-3
1:119
(2) Whenever a license is suspended, the license holder or person in
charge shall be notified in writing that the license is, upon service
of the notice, immediately suspended and that an opportunity for
an appeal is provided if a written request for an appeal is filed
with the Director of Health by the license holder within 48 hours.
If no request for an appeal is filed within 48 hours, the suspension
becomes final. The Director of Health or Registered Sanitarian may
end the suspension at any time if the reasons for the suspension no
longer exist.
E. Revocation of license. The Director of Health may, after providing
opportunity for an appeal, revoke a license for refusal to comply with
an order of suspension or serious or repeated violations of any of the
requirements of this chapter or of the Public Health Code of the State of
Connecticut. Prior to revocation, the Director of Health shall notify the
license holder or person in charge, in writing, of the reasons for which
the license is subject to revocation, and that the license shall be revoked
at the end of 10 days following service of such notice unless a request
for an appeal is filed with the Director of Health by the license holder
within 48 hours. If no request for an appeal is filed within 48 hours, the
revocation of the license becomes final.
F. Reapplication for licensure. Whenever a suspension or revocation of a
license has become final, the holder of the suspended or revoked license
may make written application for reinstatement of the license or for
a new license. Such request for reinstatement of license must contain
a signed statement that the cited violations have been corrected. A
license holder or establishment that has had its license revoked shall not
be eligible for consideration for a new or renewed food establishment
license until 30 days have elapsed after the correction of all defects and
violations noted in prior inspection reports and notices of violations.
§ 215-4. Qualified food operator required.
Each person owning, operating or managing a food service establishment
designated as Class III or Class IV shall be a qualified food operator (QFO)
or shall employ on site at least one qualified food operator who is in a
supervisory position at said establishment. Documentation for said QFO
shall be maintained on file at the food service establishment and provided
to the local Director of Health or his/her agent on request. Whenever
the qualified food operator terminates employment, is terminated or is
transferred, the person owning, operating or managing the food service
establishment shall immediately notify the local health department in
writing. A replacement qualified food operator shall be employed within 30
days from the date of termination or transfer of the qualified food operator.
Exempt from this QFO requirement (but from no other food service
regulations) are temporary food service establishments and special events
sponsored by nonprofit civic organizations such as, but not limited to,
school sporting events, little league food booths, church suppers and fairs.
§ 215-5. Inspections.
§ 215-3 EAST HADDAM CODE § 215-5
1:120
A. All food service establishments shall be inspected by the Director of
Health, registered sanitarian, or an authorized agent of the Director
of Health. Such authorized inspectors from the Town or state health
department shall be permitted to enter, at any reasonable time, any
food service establishment for the purpose of making inspections to
determine compliance with this section and the Connecticut Public
Health Code.7 All food service establishments are in four classes, as
designated by the Connecticut Public Health Code, including so-called
temporary, itinerant, seasonal/part-time, caterer, and vending/vendor.
B. Classified food service establishments.
(1) Class I food service establishments shall be inspected at intervals not
to exceed 360 days.
(2) Class II service establishments shall be inspected at intervals not to
exceed 180 days.
(3) Class III food service establishments shall be inspected at intervals
not to exceed 120 days.
(4) Class IV food service establishments shall be inspected at intervals
not to exceed 90 days, except that an interval not to exceed 120
days may be allowed where one of the annual inspections is hazard
analysis inspection.
C. Temporary food service establishments, itinerants, and mobile caterers
(not to exceed 14 business days of operation in any thirty-day period)
shall be licensed and inspected at the start of each term of business; said
operator, vendors and caterers must present verification of licensure and
inspection from their town of origin as well as meet all East Haddam
codes and regulations.
D. Enforcement and reinspections.
(1) All inspections shall be conducted according to the regulations and
procedures as stipulated in the Connecticut food protection codes.
Every food service establishment shall maintain a rating score of 80
or higher and shall not have one or more four-demerit-point items
in violation, regardless of the total rating score. If the establishment
fails this stipulation, the Director of Health or his/her agent shall
order correction of the items in violation within two weeks. After
the two weeks, the Director of Health or his/her agent shall make a
reinspection and determine the new rating score; all reinspections
are complete, not partial, inspections.
(2) If at the time of reinspection the rating score is below 80 or there
is one or more four-demerit-point items, the Director of Health shall
take immediate steps to have the food service establishment closed.
E. Unsanitary conditions. If there are unsanitary or other conditions in
the operation of a food service establishment which, in the judgment of
the Director of Health, constitute an immediate and substantial hazard
to the public health, he/she may immediately issue a written notice
to the permit holder or operator citing such conditions, specifying the
corrective action to be taken, and the time period within which such
action shall be taken, and, if deemed necessary, ordering immediate
7. Editor's Note: See Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies § 19-13-A1 et seq.
§ 215-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-5
1:121
correction. If correction is not made in the stated time, a written order
shall be issued to close the food service establishment.
F. Hearings and appeals.
(1) Hearings. An owner or operator may request a hearing to appeal
an order for license suspension or revocation. The hearing provided
for in this chapter shall be conducted by the Director of Health at a
time and place designated by the Director of Health. Based upon the
recorded evidence of such hearing, the Director of Health shall make
a final finding, and may vacate, modify or affirm any notice or order
considered in the appeal. A written report of the hearing decision
shall be furnished to the license holder by the Director of Health.
(2) Appeals. The owner or operator of an establishment who is
aggrieved by such action of the Director of Health may, within 48
hours after the making of such decision, appeal to the Connecticut
Commissioner of Public Health, who shall thereupon immediately
notify the authority from whose order the appeal was taken and
examine the merits of such case and may vacate, modify or affirm
such action. The appeal to the Commissioner must be delivered by
hand or by mail to the office of the Commissioner within the 48 hours
or a telephone call must be made to the office of the Commissioner
within 48 hours with notification of the intent to appeal followed by
a letter of appeal.
§ 215-6. Fees.
A. At the time of licensure or other registration with the Director of Health,
or at the time of annual license renewal, all food service establishments
shall pay an annual fee to the Town of East Haddam. Fees or renewal of
annual licensure shall be paid and delivered to the Building Department
at Town Hall on or before February 15 of each year. Unpaid fees shall
cause the food service license to immediately expire.
B. Annual fees are calendar-based and set as follows:
(1) Class I: $75 per year.
(2) Class II: $100 per year.
(3) Class III: $150 per year.
(4) Class IV: $200 per year.
(5) Temporary license: $35 per registration, to a maximum of $350 per
calendar year; license valid for 14 consecutive days.
(6) Vending machines owned by one vendor, per location: $25.
(7) (Reserved)
(8) Religious, civic, and philanthropic organizations: $5 for Class I and
II; $15 for Class III and Class IV.
(9) Seasonal (less than 180 aggregate days of operation per year): 50%
fee, each classification.
(10) Reinspection fee, each occurrence: $45. The imposition of this fee
or its payment shall not be deemed to excuse any violation found
pursuant to this chapter or to prevent the imposition of any penalty
prescribed by the chapter or other provision of law.
§ 215-7. Submission of plans; upgrading existing facilities.
§ 215-5 EAST HADDAM CODE § 215-7
1:122
A. Whenever a food establishment is constructed or remodeled and
whenever an existing structure is converted to use as food
establishment, or when a change is made in the menu requiring a change
in equipment or operation of an existing food establishment, properly
prepared plans and specifications for such construction, remodeling or
alteration or change shall be submitted to the Director of Health or
certified agent for review and approval before construction, remodeling
or alteration is begun. The plans shall indicate the proposed layout,
construction materials, arrangement of work and storage areas,
location, size, model and type of fixed or movable equipment and
facilities which must be NSF-approved or its equal. The menu, service
expectations and any other information necessary to evaluate the
proposed construction or alteration may be required for submission and
evaluation.
B. The Director of Health or certified agent shall approve the plans and
specifications if they meet the requirements of this chapter and the
Connecticut Public Health Code.8 No food establishment shall be
constructed, remodeled or altered except in accordance with plans and
specifications approved by the Director of Health or certified agent.
Upon change of ownership of existing food establishments, upgrading
of present facilities and equipment as deemed appropriate for effective
maintenance and satisfactory operation may be required by the Director
of Health or certified agent.
C. Preoperational inspections. Whenever plans and specifications are
required by this chapter to be submitted to the Director of Health or
certified agent, the Director of Health, Registered Sanitarian or his/her
certified agent shall inspect the food establishment as may be necessary
prior to its beginning operation to determine compliance with the
approved plans and specifications, and with the requirements of this
chapter and the Public Health Code of the State of Connecticut.
§ 215-8. Examination and condemnation of food.
A. Food may be examined by the Director of Health, Registered Sanitarian
or certified agent as often as necessary for enforcement of this chapter
or the Public Health Code of the State of Connecticut.9 The Director of
Health or certified agent may condemn food or other related substances
which have been subjected to fire, smoke, flooding, sewage
contamination, loss of refrigeration, improper temperature requirements
for potentially hazardous foods or other serious mistreatment. An
itemized list of such destroyed items as required by the Director of
Health or certified agent is to be kept on record, a copy of which shall be
made available to the license holder upon request.
B. The Director of Health or certified agent, without prior written notice,
may at his/her discretion place a hold order on any food which he/
she believes is in violation of the Public Health Code of the State of
Connecticut or any section of this chapter. Confirmation of such action
8. Editor's Note: See Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies § 19-13-A1 et seq.
9. Editor's Note: See Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies § 19-13-A1 et seq.
§ 215-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-8
1:123
shall be by written notice to the license holder by means of an inspection
report or notice of violation or his/her certified agent shall tag, label or
otherwise identify any food subject to the hold order. No food subject to
a hold order shall be used, served, or moved from the establishment.
C. The Director of Health shall permit storage of the food under conditions
specified in the hold order, unless storage is not possible without risk to
the public health, in which case immediate destruction shall be ordered
and accomplished. The hold order shall state that a request for hearing
may be filed with the Director of Health within 48 hours, and that if
no hearing is requested, the food shall be destroyed. The Director of
Health shall hold a hearing, if so requested, and on the basis of evidence
produced at the hearing, the hold order may be vacated or the owner
or person in charge of the food may be directed by written order to
denature or destroy such food or to bring it into compliance with the
provisions of this chapter or the Connecticut Public Health Code.
§ 215-9. Establishments outside Town jurisdiction.
Food from a food establishment outside the jurisdiction of the Director
of Health of the Town of East Haddam may be sold within the Town of
East Haddam if such food establishments conform to the provisions of this
chapter or to substantially equivalent provisions. The Director of Health
or certified agent may accept reports from responsible authorities in other
jurisdictions where such food establishments are located.
§ 215-10. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter and/or
the Public Health Code of the State of Connecticut10 shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of
not more than $100. In addition thereto, such persons may be enjoined from
continuing such violation. Each day upon which such a violation occurs shall
constitute a separate violation.
§ 215-11. Service of notices.
A notice provided for in this chapter is properly served when it is delivered
or left with the license holder or person in charge by means of an inspection
report or other written notice or when it is sent by registered or certified
mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of the license
holder. A copy of any notice shall be filed in the records of the Director of
Health.
Chapter 226
HISTORIC DISTRICTS
10.Editor's Note: See Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies § 19-13-A1 et seq.
§ 215-8 EAST HADDAM CODE § 226-1
1:124
§ 226-1. Purpose.
To promote the educational, cultural, economic and general welfare of the
public through the preservation and protection of buildings, places and
districts of historic interest; by the maintenance of landmarks in the history
of architecture of the Town, state or nation, and through the development of
appropriate settings for such buildings, places and districts, there is hereby
established an historic district in the Town of East Haddam.
§ 226-2. Historic District Commission. [Amended 12-19-1979]
A. An Historic District Commission is hereby established which shall
consist of five members and three alternates, all of whom shall be
electors of the Town holding no salaried Town office. The members of
said Commission shall be appointed by the Board of Selectmen, and
the regular members shall be appointed in such manner that the term
of at least one member shall expire each year, and their successors
shall be appointed in like manner for terms of five years, and alternate
members shall be appointed for terms of three years. An appointment
to fill a vacancy shall be for the duration of the unexpired term. At
least one member and one alternate member of the Commission shall be
residents within the Historic District. Within a period of 30 days after
the appointment of the original members of the Commission, the regular
members shall meet and elect a Chairman, Vice Chairman and a Clerk
from their own members. Alternate members shall not participate in
any election of officers of the Commission. In all other matters in case
of inability to act because of absence, sickness or self interest on the
part of a member of the Commission, his place shall be taken by an
alternate member designated by the Chairman. All members shall serve
without compensation. The Commission shall adopt rules of procedure
not inconsistent with the provisions of the statutes of the state and
may, subject to appropriation, employ clerical or technical assistants or
consultants and may accept money gifts and expend the same for such
purpose. [Amended 3-28-2018]
B. The Historic District Commission shall have such powers and perform
such functions and shall be subject to such limitations as shall, from time
to time, be provided by the General Statutes of Connecticut.
§ 226-3. Historic District No. I.
Historic District No. I shall encompass the following:
Southern Boundary: Beginning at a point on the southerly side of Route 82
at the intersection of the center line of Old Ferry Road and the Connecticut
River;
Thence running easterly along said center line of Old Ferry Road to a point
where the center lines of Old Ferry Road and Lumber Yard Road intersect;
Thence crossing Lumber Yard Road and running northeasterly 200 feet
from and parallel to the center line of Route 82 to a point 200 feet south and
east of the intersection of the center lines of Route 82 and Succor Brook;
§ 226-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 226-3
1:125
Eastern Boundary: Thence turning and running northwesterly at a right
angle across Route 82 to a point 200 feet north and west of the intersection
of the center lines of Route 82 and Succor Brook;
Thence turning and running southwesterly 200 feet from and parallel to the
center line of Route 149 to a point 200 feet east of the intersection of the
center line of Route 149 and Landing Hill Road;
Thence crossing Porges Road and running northerly 200 feet east of and
parallel to the center line of Landing Hill Road to a point which is the
northeast corner of the property of the Norwegian Deaconess Home and
Hospital;
Northern Boundary:
Thence turning and running in a westerly direction to the center line of
Landing Hill Road;
Thence turning and running in a northerly direction approximately 170 feet;
Thence turning and running in a westerly direction along the northern
boundary of the H. Shailer Dow property and extending across Route 149 to
the Connecticut River;
Western Boundary: Thence turning and running southerly along the eastern
shoreline of the Connecticut River to the point of beginning.
§ 226-4. Historic District No. II: Little Haddam Historic District.
[Added 6-7-1977]
In accordance with § 226-1, there is hereby established East Haddam
Historic District No. II in the Town of East Haddam, to be known as "Little
Haddam." "Little Haddam" shall encompass the following:
Northern Boundary: Beginning at a point in the center of the Old Colchester
Turnpike formed by the intersection of the center of the turnpike and the
eastern boundary of Pastore's parcel;
Thence running west approximately 2,900 feet along said center line of Old
Colchester Turnpike crossing Town Street (Route 151) continuing westerly
down the center of Orchard Road;
Thence at the point of intersection of the center of Orchard Road and the
eastern boundary of the Holton's parcel turns north approximately 400 feet
to the northern boundary of Holton's parcel;
Thence west approximately 500 feet to the intersection of the Holton's
parcel western boundary.
Western Boundary: Thence south approximately 350 feet along the western
boundary of Holton's parcel intersecting at a point formed by center of
Orchard Road;
§ 226-3 EAST HADDAM CODE § 226-4
1:126
Thence approximately 150 feet east down the center of Orchard Road to a
point formed by the intersection of western boundary of Morgan's parcel;
Thence south approximately 350 feet;
Thence east approximately 1,100 feet crossing through the First
Ecclesiastical Society parcel to a point formed by the west and south
boundaries of the First Church of Christ;
Thence south approximately 650 feet along the western boundary of the
First Church Cemetery Association crossing through the First Ecclesiastical
Society parcel to the northern side of Deanna Drive;
Thence east approximately 75 feet along the northern side of Deanna Drive
(Deer Run);
Thence south approximately 375 feet across Deanna Drive (Deer Run) along
the western boundary of the Milardo, Arena and Schutz parcel;
Thence east approximately 375 feet down the center of Town Street to a
point formed by the intersection of the southern boundary of the Perry's
parcel;
Southern Boundary: Thence east approximately 500 feet along the southern
boundary of the Perry's parcel to a point formed by the intersection of the
eastern boundary of the Perry's parcel;
Eastern Boundary: Thence north approximately 800 feet along the eastern
boundary of the Perry's parcel, through the Everett's parcel, to a point
formed by the eastern and northern boundaries of the Gibb's parcel;
Thence west approximately 150 feet to a point formed by the southern and
eastern boundaries of the Masonic Association's parcel;
Thence north approximately 550 feet along the eastern boundaries of the
Masonic Association's parcel, the Grange's parcel, and the Town Hall parcel
to a point formed by the intersection of the eastern boundary of the Town
Hall's parcel and the southern boundary of Kihn's parcel;
Thence northeast approximately 700 feet through the Kihn's parcel and
Myer's parcel to a point formed by the intersection of the western and
southern boundaries of Pastore's parcel;
Thence east approximately 400 feet along the southern boundary of the
Pastore's parcel, following the boundaries of the Pastore's parcel, following
the boundaries of the Pastore's parcel by turning north for approximately
250 feet, turning east for approximately 400 feet, and turning north for
approximately 500 feet to the center of the Old Colchester Turnpike, which
is the beginning point.
§ 226-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 226-5
1:127
§ 226-5. Historic District No. III: Millington Green Historic District.
[Added 4-9-1985]
In accordance with § 226-1, there is hereby established East Haddam
Historic District No. III in the Town of East Haddam to be known as
"Millington Green." "Millington Green" shall encompass the following:
Northern Boundary: Beginning at the northeast corner of the Boylan parcel,
thence running westerly approximately 450 feet along the north boundary
of said Boylan parcel, crossing Haywardville Road, continuing westerly
along the north boundary of the Town of East Haddam schoolhouse parcel
to the northwest corner of said schoolhouse parcel; thence southwesterly
approximately 100 feet along the west boundary of said schoolhouse parcel
to the intersection of said west boundary and the east boundary of the
Way parcel; thence northwesterly approximately 390 feet along the east
boundary of said Way parcel to the northeast corner of said Way parcel;
thence westerly approximately 1,090 feet along the north boundary of said
Way parcel to its intersection with the east boundary of the Hartke parcel,
crossing through said Hartke parcel to the west boundary of said Hartke
parcel.
Western Boundary: Thence southeasterly approximately 350 feet along the
west boundary of said Hartke parcel intersecting at a point formed by the
center of the Millington Road; thence easterly 250 feet down the center of
the Millington Road to a point formed by the intersection of the western
boundary of the Nichols parcel; thence southeasterly approximately 435
feet along the west boundary of said Nichols parcel to the southwest corner
of said Nichols parcel.
Southern Boundary: Thence easterly approximately 200 feet along the south
boundary of said Nichols parcel intersecting at a point formed by the center
of the Tater Hill Road; thence northeasterly approximately 150 feet down
the center of the Tater Hill Road to a point formed by the intersection
of the south boundary of the Brindle parcel; thence, first easterly again
approximately 240 feet along the south boundary of said Brindle parcel
intersecting at a point formed by the center of the Old Hopyard Road.
Eastern Boundary: Thence northwesterly approximately 300 feet down the
center of the Old Hopyard Road to a point formed by the intersection of the
south boundary of the Boylan parcel; thence northeasterly approximately
315 feet along the south boundary of said Boylan parcel to the southeast
corner of said Boylan parcel; thence northerly approximately 150 feet along
the east boundary of said Boylan parcel to the northeast corner of said
Boylan parcel, which is the beginning point.
§ 226-6. East Haddam Historic District No. IV: Wickham Sawmill
Historic District. [Added 10-26-1988]
In accordance with § 226-1, there is hereby established East Haddam
Historic District No. IV in the Town of East Haddam to be known as
"Wickham Sawmill." "Wickham Sawmill" shall encompass the following:
§ 226-5 EAST HADDAM CODE § 226-6
1:128
Northern Boundary: Beginning at a point formed by the intersection of
a line running down the center of the Geoffrey Road and a line running
down the center of the Old Wall Street; thence running northerly down the
center of the Old Wall Street to the intersection of the northern boundary
of the East Haddam Fish and Game Club parcel No. 1; thence continuing
northwesterly along the northern boundary of said East Haddam Fish and
Game Club parcel along the northern boundary of said East Haddam Fish
and Game Club parcel No. 1 to the north corner of said East Haddam Fish
and Game Club parcel No. 1; thence continuing southwesterly along the
western boundary of said East Haddam Fish and Game Club parcel No
1 to the northern boundary of the Town right-of-way along the Geoffrey
Road to the intersection of the Wickham Road; thence continuing westerly
across the Wickham Road to the western boundary of the Town road rightof-
way along the Wickham Road. Thence continuing southerly along the
western boundary of the Town right-of-way along the Wickham Road to
the intersection of the northern boundary of the Norton parcel; thence
continuing westerly along the northern boundary of said Norton parcel
approximately 1,680 feet to a pin marking the northwest corner of said
Norton parcel.
Eastern Boundary: Thence running southeasterly along the western
boundary of said Norton parcel 747.46 feet to a pin marking the southwest
corner of said Norton parcel; thence continuing southerly along the western
boundary of the Furstenberg parcel 710.08 feet to a pin marking the
southwest corner of said Furstenberg parcel; thence continuing
southeasterly along the southern boundary of said Furstenberg parcel
approximately 1,298 feet to the northwest corner of the Fanelli parcel;
thence continuing southerly along the western boundary of said Fanelli
parcel 1,004.85 feet to a pin marking the southwest corner of said Fanelli
parcel.
Southern Boundary: Thence running easterly along the southern boundary
of said Fanelli parcel 450.71 feet to a concrete monument marking the
southeast corner of said Fanelli parcel; thence continuing easterly to the
center of the Wickham Road; thence running southerly down the center of
the Wickham Road to a point formed by the intersection of the southern
boundary of the East Haddam Fish and Game Club parcel No. 4; thence
continuing easterly along the southern boundary of said East Haddam Fish
and Game Club parcel No. 4 approximately 2,200 feet to the southeast
corner of said East Haddam Fish and Game Club parcel No. 4; thence
continuing easterly approximately 350 feet to the center of the Old Wall
Street.
Eastern Boundary: Thence running northerly down the center of the Old
Wall Street to the intersection of the Geoffrey Road; thence continuing
northerly to the center of the Geoffrey Road to the point of the beginning.
§ 226-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 226-6
1:129
Chapter 251
NOISE ABATEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Boating — See Ch. 171.
§ 251-1. Prohibited conduct.
No activity giving rise to excessive or disturbing noise shall be conducted
anywhere in the Town of East Haddam. Necessary operations, such as
blasting, lumbering and the like, shall be performed only during normal
daytime working hours.
§ 251-2. Amusement or entertainment activities.
No amusement or entertainment enterprise that causes or induces
excessive or unusual noise shall be conducted in the Town at any time.
This includes, but is not limited to, such noises as are made by firearms,
motors on land, water or in the air, and by jet engines in all applications.
In the case of any such activity which may be determined to be in any
respect nonconforming, it is specifically enacted that there shall be no
extension of such activity, either as to manner or hours of operation. Under
no circumstances shall any jet engines be used in any sport or amusement
exhibition, contest or otherwise.
§ 251-3. Races, exhibitions and contests.
No races, exhibitions, contests or other activities, such as, but not limited
to, motor boating, drag racing or airplane racing, shall be conducted
between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. The purpose of this section is
not to validate such activities at other hours but to prohibit them during the
specific hours without regard to the level of sound created.
§ 251-4. Penalties for offenses.
Violations of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine of not less than
$25 nor more than $500, and each separate incident shall be adjudged
a separate violation. The Town or any interested citizen thereof may also
obtain injunctive relief for such violation or threatened violation.
Chapter 258
PARKING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 285.
§ 226-6 EAST HADDAM CODE § 251-4
1:130
§ 258-1. Prohibitions. [Amended 3-28-2018]
Pursuant to § 14-307 of the Connecticut General Statutes, the following
motor vehicle parking regulations shall be applicable to all motor vehicles,
operable or inoperable, on Town roads or the limits of rights-of-way thereof,
of the Town of East Haddam, Connecticut:
A. No persons, other than those on Town business, are privileged to park
a motor vehicle on Town properties posted with signs bearing the
language: "NO PARKING EXCEPT FOR THE PURPOSE OF
TRANSACTING OR ATTENDING TO TOWN BUSINESS, PER ORDER OF
THE BOARD OF SELECTMEN."
B. No person shall park, or leave standing, a motor vehicle in an area
marked or posted: "FIRE LANE — NO PARKING."
C. No person shall park, or leave standing, a motor vehicle upon the
Town highway known as Old Colchester-East Haddam Turnpike in the
section of that highway known as "the Causeway," dividing the Moodus
Reservoir.
D. No person shall park, or leave standing, a motor vehicle along a Town
highway where it is posted with signs bearing the language: "NO
PARKING (applicable time periods optional) PER ORDER OF THE
BOARD OF SELECTMEN."
E. No person shall park, or leave standing, a motor vehicle so as to
constitute a traffic hazard or obstruct or restrict the free movement of
traffic upon any Town highway.
F. No person shall park, or leave standing, a motor vehicle upon Town
properties in any position other than those so designated by painted
lines, or, in the absence of such designated parking slots, so as to
obstruct garages, gas pumps, pedestrian walkways or other areas
posted so as to come to the attention of the operator of said motor
vehicle.
G. No person shall park, or leave standing, an inoperable or unregistered
motor vehicle along a Town highway, except that it be removed within
48 hours of being brought to the attention of the owner of said motor
vehicle.
H. No person shall park, or leave standing, a motor vehicle in front of or so
as to obstruct or interfere with the ingress to or egress from any private
driveway.
I. No person shall park, or leave standing, a motor vehicle along a Town
highway so as to hinder, obstruct, or interfere with the safe operation of
snow-removal procedures.
J. No person shall park, or leave standing, a motor vehicle without a valid
Town of East Haddam facilities sticker in an area designated for such
use by the Board of Selectmen.
§ 258-2. Proof of vehicle ownership.
In accordance with Connecticut General Statutes § 14-107, proof of the
registration number of any motor vehicle in violation of any such parking
§ 251-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 258-2
1:131
regulation shall be prima facie evidence that the registered owner was in
violation of such regulation and ordinance.
§ 258-3. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 3-28-2018]
Violators of this chapter shall be subject to a fine of $25, payable to the
Town of East Haddam within 14 days of the date of said violation.
§ 258-4. Enforcement.
The duly appointed East Haddam Constables, East Haddam Special
Constables and the Resident State Troopers of the Town of East Haddam
are authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter via the issuance of
a municipal styled violations tag. A claim of not receiving said violation tag
will not relieve the vehicle owner from the prescribed fine.
§ 258-5. Appeals.
Appeals from the issuance of a citation (violation tag) under this chapter
may be made in writing to the First Selectmen within 10 days of such
issuance and subsequently directed to the appointed hearing officer
according to the format outlined in Connecticut General Statutes § 7-152b.
Chapter 263
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 285.
§ 263-1. License required.
Except as hereinafter specified, no person shall, within the Town of East
Haddam, peddle or sell upon the streets, sidewalks, public places, or from
house to house, or at public or private sale, any goods, wares or
merchandise, without first having been duly licensed so to do by a license
issued to him by the Clerk of said Town upon the payment to said Town of a
license fee hereinafter prescribed.
§ 263-2. Application for license.
Before engaging in such business, every person shall make application
therefor in writing to the Clerk of said Town on blank forms to be supplied
by such Clerk.
§ 263-3. License fee.
§ 258-2 EAST HADDAM CODE § 263-3
1:132
A. Every person who resides in said Town of East Haddam who engages
in such business for himself shall pay a license fee of $0.50 per year or
portion thereof.
B. Every person who is not a resident of the Town of East Haddam who
engages in such business shall pay a license fee of $50 per year or
portion thereof.
§ 263-4. License expiration.
Each license herein provided for shall expire on the 31st day of March
succeeding the date of issue thereof.
§ 263-5. Residents acting as agents for nonresidents.
Every resident of East Haddam who engages in such peddling business
who is doing so as the agent, representative, servant or employee of a
nonresident of said Town shall pay the license fee required of nonresidents
of said Town.
§ 263-6. Exceptions.
This chapter shall not apply to such persons who are excepted by the state
laws of the State of Connecticut or to wholesalers selling and delivering
their goods to the merchants of East Haddam, or to goods, wares,
merchandise or foodstuffs sold and delivered by merchants of East Haddam,
or to goods, wares or merchandise of residents of the Town of East Haddam
sold by the maker, manufacturer or producer thereof.
§ 263-7. Display of license.
Each person so licensed shall, on exercising his vocation, wear
conspicuously on his left breast a suitable badge designed and furnished
by the Town Clerk of said Town with the words "licensed vendor" and the
number of his license and the year such license is in force, in numerals
plainly inscribed thereon; and each person so licensed, when using a vehicle
for the purpose for which he is licensed, shall have plainly displayed on
both sides of such vehicle a sign designed and furnished by said Town Clerk
bearing the number of his license and the year such license is in force.
§ 263-8. Record of licenses issued.
It shall be the duty of the Town Clerk to keep a record of all licenses granted
under the provisions of this chapter in a book provided for that purpose,
giving the number and date of each license, name, age and residence of
the person licensed and the amount of the license fee paid. Said Town
Clerk shall keep account of his receipts for such licenses and make a return
thereof to the Town Treasurer.
§ 263-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 263-9
1:133
§ 263-9. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who shall engage in the business without being duly licensed
as herein provided or who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter
shall be fined not more than $25 for each offense.
§ 263-10. Vending and hawking. [Added 3-12-1940]
The Town hereby enacts this section concerning the vending or hawking
upon its public streets of any goods, wares or other merchandise at public
or private sale or auction, or vending or peddling of such articles from
house to house within its limits, including the imposition of a fee not to
exceed $25 a year for each team or vehicle used in connection with such
vending, hawking or peddling for the privilege of so vending, hawking or
peddling such merchandise as provided by Chapter 174 of the Cumulative
Supplements to the General Statutes, 1935.
Chapter 274
SCENIC ROADS
§ 274-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to help preserve the natural beauty, character
and condition of the Town of East Haddam's rural roads from the
destruction of their scenic values caused by unnecessary alterations. In
general, highways or portions of highways designated as "scenic roads"
should remain as they are.
§ 274-2. Authority to designate.
Pursuant to the provisions of § 7-149a of the Connecticut General Statutes
(Public Act 81-401), the Planning and Zoning Commission of the Town of
East Haddam may designate Town highways or portions thereof as scenic
roads. No state highway or portion thereof may be designated as a scenic
road under this chapter.
§ 274-3. Designation criteria.
A. To be eligible for designation as a scenic road, a highway or portion
thereof must be free of intensive commercial development and intensive
vehicle traffic and must meet at least two of the following additional
criteria:
(1) It offers scenic views.
(2) It is bordered by mature trees or stone walls.
(3) It blends naturally into the surrounding terrain.
(4) It parallels or crosses over brooks, streams, lakes or ponds.
(5) It is unpaved.
(6) The traveled portion is no more than 20 feet in width.
B. No highway or portion thereof may be designated as a scenic road by the
Planning and Zoning Commission pursuant to this chapter, regardless of
§ 263-9 EAST HADDAM CODE § 274-3
1:134
where the application originates, unless the owners of the majority of
lot frontage, as listed in the Town of East Haddam Assessor's records,
abutting said highway or portion thereof agree to such designation by
filing a written statement or statements of approval with the Town Clerk
of the Town of East Haddam, who shall promptly transmit a copy thereof
to the Planning and Zoning Commission.
C. The Planning and Zoning Commission may on its own initiative submit an
application for designating a highway or portion thereof as a scenic road
hereunder. Alternatively, any property owner who owns land within the
Town may apply to the Planning and Zoning Commission for designation
of a highway or portion thereof as a scenic road. Such application shall
include a specific description of said highway or portion thereof to be
considered for designation along with a statement of the reasons why
designation should be granted and shall be submitted to the Town Clerk
and accompanied by a list of the names and addresses of the owners of
all lot frontage abutting the highway or portion thereof to be designated.
The Town Clerk will first review the application, including the names and
addresses of owners, for accuracy and completeness and then promptly
submit the entire application to the Planning and Zoning Commission
for action. Following verification of the application by the Town Clerk,
the applicant shall notify by certified mail all owners of lot frontage
along such highway or portion thereof of such application. The Planning
and Zoning Commission will hold a public hearing on the application.
Hearing notices and deadlines therefor shall be in accordance with the
terms of §§ 8-26d and 8-26e of the Connecticut General Statutes.
(1) The Planning and Zoning Commission shall notify the Board of
Selectmen, Board of Fire Commissioners, East Haddam Police
Department, Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Commission, the
Historic District Commission and the Superintendent of Public
Highways for the purpose of review and comment. Each agency shall
submit its recommendation to the Planning and Zoning Commission
within 60 days of receipt of its copy of the application. If such a
report is not received from any agency, it shall be presumed that
such agency approves the scenic road designation as described in
the application.
(2) Following the receipt of the agency reports and public hearings,
the Planning and Zoning Commission shall vote on the proposed
designation pursuant to the procedures set forth in the Connecticut
General Statutes and pursuant to the designation procedure set forth
in § 7-149a of the Connecticut General Statutes. The Planning and
Zoning Commission shall vote on each scenic road application in
accordance with the terms of § 8-26d of the Connecticut General
Statutes. If such vote is in the affirmative, the Planning and Zoning
Commission shall set an effective date and notify the owners
abutting said highway or portion thereof that has been designated as
a scenic road.
§ 274-4. Appeal and rescission.
§ 274-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 274-4
1:135
A. Any person aggrieved by a designation of a highway or portion of a
highway as a scenic road by the Planning and Zoning Commission may
appeal such designation in the manner and using the same standards
of review provided for appeals from the decisions of the Planning and
Zoning Commission under § 8-8 of the Connecticut General Statutes.
B. The scenic road designation may be rescinded by the Planning and
Zoning Commission by two-thirds vote of the entire Commission,
provided that the consent of the owners of the majority of lot frontage
abutting said highway or portion thereof shall be necessary before such
rescission can be effective.
§ 274-5. Effect of designation.
A. In general, it is the intent of this chapter that no road which has been
designated as a scenic road be altered or improved except for good
cause as determined by the Planning and Zoning Commission. However,
scenic roads will not be subject to:
(1) Widening of the right-of-way or of the traveled portion of the
highway.
(2) Paving (if not already paved).
(3) Changes of grade.
(4) Straightening.
(5) Removal of mature trees and/or stone walls.
B. If any of the above-listed alterations are proposed, they shall be
permitted only if the owners of the majority of lot frontage abutting
the scenic road indicate their approval by signing a written statement
agreeing to the alterations and filing it with the Town Clerk.
C. A scenic road under this chapter shall be maintained by the Town of
East Haddam in good and sufficient repair and in passable condition. It
is understood, however, that road repairs and safety improvements will
not, insofar as practicable, alter the scenic quality of the road. Minor
repairs and routine road maintenance can be done at the discretion of
the Superintendent of Highways.
D. Major repairs which might require widening of the right-of-way (but in
no case beyond 20 feet or the legal boundaries) or improved drainage
will require a public hearing by the Planning and Zoning Commission
and a vote of approval by 2/3 of the full Commission before the major
repairs can begin.
E. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent emergency repairs
as needed in the event of a natural disaster in which a scenic road
becomes impassable or unsafe for public travel. These repairs will be
done in a manner that maintains the scenic characteristics of the road
as much as practicable. Similarly, to the extent that reconstruction is
required, the road shall be restored as nearly as practicable to its scenic
character at the time of designation.
F. This chapter does not prohibit a person owning or occupying land
abutting a scenic road from maintaining and repairing land and/or
driveways which abut the scenic road; provided, however, the
maintenance and/or repair occurs on land not within the right-of-way,
paved or unpaved, of the scenic road.
§ 274-4 EAST HADDAM CODE § 274-6
1:136
§ 274-6. Enforcement.
This chapter shall be enforced by the Planning and Zoning Commission
acting through its designated enforcement representatives. Violation of this
chapter shall be subject to such sanctions, legal and equitable, as are
allowable under state law.
Chapter 279
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Open burning — See Ch. 183.
§ 274-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 274-6
1:137

ARTICLE I
Refuse Area
[Adopted 3-12-1940; amended 8-15-1968]
§ 279-1. Maintenance.
The Town shall provide for the upkeep of a public dumping ground with
an attendant in charge. The Selectmen shall be empowered to choose a
committee to work with them.
§ 279-2. Regulations.
A. The Board of Selectmen shall be authorized to regulate the hours when
the refuse area shall be open to the public.
B. Dumping shall be done only when a Town custodian is on duty.
C. Only residents of the Town of East Haddam may be allowed use of
the refuse area. A form of identification must be displayed as proof of
residence.
D. There will be no lighting of fires except in accordance with law or
regulations set by the State Department of Public Health.
E. There will be no littering in or around the refuse area. Dumping in areas
other than those authorized by the custodian will be considered littering.
F. No commercial refuse or waste collector will be permitted use of the
Town refuse area unless he first registers his name and address with
the Public Works Director, upon which he will receive an identification
number which will serve as a permit. If such collector should violate
any of the Town ordinances or state regulations regarding refuse, his
registration may be revoked, in which case he will be refused the
privileges of using the refuse area. The revocation shall be governed by
the majority vote of the Board of Selectmen after a hearing with the
refuse collector present. [Amended 3-28-2018]
§ 279-3. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 3-28-2018]
Violation of this article shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $250.
Each provision of this article shall be determined separate from all other
provisions.
§ 279-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 279-3
1:139

ARTICLE II
Solid Waste Facility
[Adopted 7-24-1990]
§ 279-4. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCEPTABLE WASTE — Garbage, trash, rubbish, refuse and other solid
waste normally collected and disposed of by the Town of East Haddam. The
following are included within the term "acceptable waste":
BOARD OF SELECTMEN or BOARD — The duly elected Board of Selectmen
of the Town of East Haddam.
BULKY WASTE — As defined by the State of Connecticut Department of
Energy and Environmental Protection.
COMMERCIAL COLLECTOR — Any person, firm, partnership, association
or corporation who or which collects, transports and/or dumps garbage for
the payment of a fee.
DUMPING — The depositing, discharging, placing and/or disposing of
garbage by any person.
HAZARDOUS WASTE or HAZARDOUS MATERIALS — As defined by the
State of Connecticut Department of Energy and Environmental Protection.
LICENSED COMMERCIAL COLLECTOR — Includes only such commercial
collector which is the holder of a valid current and unexpired license issued
by the Board of Selectmen pursuant to the provisions of § 279-6 of this
article.
OVERSIZED WASTE — Acceptable waste too large to be processed in most
resource recovery facilities and normally disposed of in a landfill. Generally,
includes any individual items which, uncompacted, are greater than four
feet high by four feet wide by four feet long, and includes household
furniture such as sofas, mattresses, and appliances and industrial material
such as paper butts or rolls, plastic or leather stamping or similar material.
PERSON — Includes, but not limited to, individuals, societies, associations,
municipal corporations and/or its agents and employees, firms,
partnerships, associations and corporations.
Lumber not exceeding six feet in length or six feet in width or four
inches in thickness.
A.
Metal pipe, tracks or banding, wire and cable not exceeding three feet
in overall length or 1 1/2 inches inside diameter.
B.
Cans or drums, no larger than five-gallon capacity, with tops removed
and empty.
C.
§ 279-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 279-4
1:141
RECYCLABLE MATERIAL — Any material so designated by the laws or
regulations of the State of Connecticut and/or the East Haddam Board of
Selectmen, pursuant to § 279-10C.
RESIDENT — Includes only the following:
SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL FACILITY or FACILITY — The area that has been
designated by the Town of East Haddam and is presently in operation.
§ 279-5. Restrictions on use of facility.
A. Only licensed commercial collectors and residents of the Town of East
Haddam shall be permitted to dump garbage in or at the solid waste
disposal facility.
B. No garbage collected and/or generated outside of the corporate
boundaries of the Town of East Haddam shall be dumped or caused to be
dumped at the facility by any person, resident, or commercial collector,
licensed or otherwise.
C. Prior to allowing the dumping of any solid waste in the facility, the Board
of Selectmen or its agents and employees or the First Selectman may
require any person, including but not limited to a licensed commercial
collector, seeking to dump garbage to certify in writing, under penalties
of false statement as provided in the General Statutes of Connecticut,
that the garbage to be dumped was not generated or collected outside
the Town of East Haddam. Any licensed commercial collector refusing
to provide certification in writing as specified in this subsection as to
any load of garbage shall not be permitted to dispose of the garbage in
the facility and shall be ordered to remove his vehicle from the facility
immediately.
D. Prior to permitting any person other than a licensed commercial
collector to dump garbage in the facility, the Board of Selectmen or its
agents and employees or the First Selectman may require that person,
or that person's agent or employees, to present satisfactory proof of
residence within the Town of East Haddam.
E. Dumping shall be permitted only at times and on days established by the
Board and in particular locations as designated by the Board through
its agents or employees on duty. No person shall enter or be permitted
within the facility except during the hours when the area is open to the
public and the custodian is on duty.
F. All solid waste shall be secured in transit in such a manner so as to
prevent the waste from being scattered on roads and highways.
G. No hazardous materials and/or hazardous waste shall be dumped at the
facility without approval of the Board of Selectmen.
§ 279-6. Licensing of commercial collectors; fees.
An individual who resides, owns real property, or operates a business
within the corporate boundaries of the Town of East Haddam.
A.
Any person having a place of business within the corporate boundaries
of the Town of East Haddam.
B.
§ 279-4 EAST HADDAM CODE § 279-6
1:142
A. No person engaged in the business of collection or disposal of garbage
shall deposit garbage in the facility without first obtaining a license from
the Board.
B. All licenses shall be for a period of one year from date of issuance. The
license fee shall be paid in advance of granting said license. The fee for
a license shall be $250 per year. [Amended 3-28-2018]
C. The Board is authorized and empowered, prior to issuing a license, to
require evidence of liability insurance in effect covering all vehicles to
be used to transport garbage into the facility.
D. Any licensee owning more than one vehicle and one removable body
will provide a list of all vehicles and removable bodies to the Board.
Changes in vehicles or removable bodies used to transport garbage to
the facility shall be provided by the licensee as changes occur. The list
shall designate each vehicle by Connecticut registration number, cubic
yard capacity, tare weight and gross weight; and each removable body
by identification number, cubic yard capacity, tare weight, and gross
weight.
E. A licensed commercial collector attempting to deposit garbage in the
facility which was collected or generated in a town other than East
Haddam shall be ordered by any member of the Board of Selectmen, or
its employees or agents or by the First Selectman, to remove the vehicle
from the facility area immediately, notwithstanding the fact that part of
said load of garbage was collected or generated in the Town of East
Haddam.
F. Licenses must be in the possession of the operator of a vehicle described
in the license and shall be shown on request at the time of dumping.
No commercial collector shall be allowed to dump a load of garbage in
the facility if the operator of the vehicle fails to have said license in his
possession or fails to show said license on request. In such instances,
such vehicle shall be ordered by any member of the Board of Selectmen
or any of its employees or agents, or by the First Selectman, to be
removed from the facility immediately.
G. It shall be the responsibility solely of the licensed hauler to ensure
proper separation of materials discarded at the Town facility. The hauler
shall notify the Town's agent of any/all violations by its customers.
§ 279-7. Bulky waste.
A. No person shall, without prior written permission of the Board of
Selectmen, deposit any stump at the bulky waste area of the facility the
dimensions of which exceed 24 inches in height or 24 inches in width.
B. Stumps not exceeding 24 inches in diameter may be deposited at the
facility, provided that a permit is first obtained from the Board of
Selectmen. A disposal fee for stumps will be collected as set by the
Board of Selectmen based on the actual disposal costs to the Town of
East Haddam.
C. All commercial operations in the Town of East Haddam partially
involving stump removal are encouraged to dispose of such stumps
utilizing an approved alternative manner and shall chip all brush, limbs
and branches. A disposal fee for chipped wood products will be collected
§ 279-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 279-7
1:143
as set by the Board of Selectmen based on the actual disposal costs to
the Town of East Haddam.
D. Vehicle tires may be deposited at the facility, at a disposal fee as set by
the Board of Selectmen based on the actual disposal costs to the Town
of East Haddam.
E. No person shall deposit at the facility any icebox, refrigerator or other
container which has an airtight door or lid, snap or other locking device
which may not be released from the inside without first removing said
door or lid, snap lock or other locking device from said icebox,
refrigerator, or container. A disposal fee for large appliances will be
collected as set by the Board of Selectmen based on the actual disposal
costs to the Town of East Haddam.
F. Demolition material may be deposited, provided that a permit is first
obtained from the Board of Selectmen. A disposal fee shall be collected
as set by the Board of Selectmen on a per-cubic-yard basis based on the
full registered capacity of the vehicle or container dumping and based
on the actual disposal costs to the Town of East Haddam.
G. No person shall dispose of any motor vehicles at the facility except
as follows: motor vehicle parts will be accepted from commercial
establishments operating within the Town of East Haddam and licensed
by the State of Connecticut, at a disposal fee set as by the Board
of Selectmen based on the actual disposal costs to the Town of East
Haddam.
H. Oversized waste may be deposited, provided that a disposal fee is
collected as set by the Board of Selectmen based on the actual disposal
costs to the Town of East Haddam.
§ 279-8. Penalties for offenses.
A. Each commercial collector who violates any of the sections of this article
shall be subject to a fine in an amount not exceeding $1,000. Any
resident who violates any section of this article shall be subject to a fine
in an amount not exceeding $1,000. [Amended 3-28-2018]
B. Each commercial collector who violates any of the sections of this article
shall be subject to the following penalties in addition to the fines set forth
in Subsection A of this section: in the event of two or more violations
within any calendar year, suspension of the right to dump at the facility
for the remainder of the calendar year or for a period of time not to
exceed six months, whichever is greater.
C. The Board of Selectmen shall post notice in conspicuous locations in and
around the facility informing persons of the penalty for violating this
article.
§ 279-9. Hearing upon suspension of dumping rights.
A. Any commercial collector whose right to dump at the facility has been
suspended under § 279-8 of this article, within five calendar days of the
receipt of written notice of such suspension, may apply in writing to the
First Selectman for reinstatement of the right to dump in the facility.
B. Filing such an application will stay the suspension until the Board of
Selectmen issues a decision as stated below.
§ 279-7 EAST HADDAM CODE § 279-9
1:144
C. Within five calendar days of the filing of the application, the First
Selectman shall set a date for a hearing on the application, which date
shall be within 10 calendar days of the filing of the application, and
shall give written notice of the time and place of the hearing to the
commercial collector.
D. At such hearing, the commercial collector may present evidence in
support of its claim that its right to dump at the facility should not be
suspended. The commercial collector may be represented by counsel
and may present testimony, documentary or other evidence in support of
its position, and may cross-examine any persons testifying against it.
E. If the Board of Selectmen, based on evidence presented at the hearing,
decides that the commercial collector's right to dump at the facility
should be reinstated, it shall so advise the commercial collector in
writing, whereupon such suspension shall end. If the Board of Selectmen
decides that the commercial collector's suspension should stand, it shall
so advise the commercial collector in writing. Notification to the
commercial collector of the decision shall be sent by certified mail and
such decision shall become effective upon receipt by the commercial
collector.
§ 279-10. Rules and regulations; determination of fees.
A. The Board of Selectmen is authorized to adopt reasonable rules and
regulations to put this article into effect. Such regulations shall be in
writing and shall be effective upon publication in a newspaper having
general circulation in the Town of East Haddam.
B. The Board of Selectmen is authorized to determine the amount of fee
per each assessed material based on actual disposal costs to the Town of
East Haddam.
§ 279-11. Separation of recyclable materials; deposit of bulky waste
materials.
A. The goal of this section is to achieve and surpass a recycling level of 25%
of East Haddam's waste stream.
B. No person shall deposit or attempt to deposit refuse in the facility
which has not been separated according to the regulations pertaining
to separation of all applicable recycled materials as defined in § 279-4
and adopted pursuant to § 279-10A. Bulky waste materials, including but
not limited to tires, brush and stumps, furniture, mattresses, appliances,
etc., and demolition materials, are permitted to be deposited, as
specified herein, in the facility at locations designated by the Board of
Selectmen or its agents and employees, but only by licensed commercial
collectors and residents of the Town.
C. Each load of refuse transported to the facility by any commercial
collector or resident will be subject to inspection by any member of the
Board of Selectmen, prior to permission being granted to dispose of
the load of refuse at the facility. Refuse which has not been separated
in accordance with current recycling materials regulations shall not be
permitted to be deposited at the East Haddam facility.
§ 279-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 279-11
1:145
D. The Board of Selectmen, operating within its authority as provided in
§ 279-10A of this article, is authorized and empowered to add items to
be recycled by the Town, including designated recyclable materials as
defined in this article.
§ 279-12. When effective.
A. Sections 279-4 through 279-10, inclusive, of this article shall be effective
15 days following publication in a newspaper having circulation in the
Town of East Haddam.
B. Section 279-11 shall be effective as of October 1, 1990.
§ 279-11 EAST HADDAM CODE § 279-12
1:146
Chapter 285
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parking — See Ch. 258. Scenic roads — See Ch. 274.
§ 279-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 279-12
1:147

ARTICLE I
Acceptance of Town Roads
[Adopted 5-11-1953]
§ 285-1. Required width.
In the future, all roads that the Town takes over shall be at least 50 feet
wide.
§ 285-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-1
1:149

ARTICLE II
Ice and Snow on Sidewalks
[Adopted 4-6-1988]
§ 285-2. Deposit on highways prohibited.
No person shall plow, throw, put or cause to be thrown or put any snow or
ice from any private property or from any area in the rear of said private
property or in the area between a private dwelling house or structure and
the legally laid out sidewalk into any public highway in the Town of East
Haddam.
§ 285-3. Removal from roof required.
No person, either as owner, occupant or as the person entitled to legal
possession, shall permit snow to remain on the roof of any building in such
condition that the same may slide therefrom upon any street or highway in
the Town.
§ 285-4. Removal from sidewalks.
Whenever the sidewalk, or any part thereof, adjoining or fronting any
building or lot of land or any street, square or public place in the Town of
East Haddam shall have upon it an accumulation of snow, sleet or ice, it
shall be the duty of the owner, occupant or any person having the care of
such building or lot to cause such sidewalks to be made safe and convenient
by removing the snow, sleet or ice therefrom, or by covering the same with
sand or some other suitable substance, and in case such owner, occupant
or other person having the care of such building or lot shall neglect to do
so for the space of eight hours during the daytime, the person whose legal
duty it shall be to clear the sidewalk, and so neglecting, shall be fined not
more than $25 for each occurrence, and every hour of neglect to make
the sidewalks safe in accordance with the provisions of this section, after
notice from the First Selectman or his designee, shall constitute a separate
offense.
§ 285-5. Removal of snow and ice by Town.
If any sidewalk shall remain encumbered with snow, ice, or sleet for four
hours after the owner or person having charge or care of the lot or building
bordering on such sidewalk and legally liable to clear the same has been
notified by the First Selectman or his designee to clear the same, and if the
sidewalk shall not be covered with sand or some other suitable substance,
the Board of Selectmen shall cause the same to be cleared and collect the
expense thereof from such owner or other persons. The Town Attorney shall,
at the request of the Board of Selectmen, collect by suit such expense as a
debt due to the Town of East Haddam.
§ 285-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-6
1:151
§ 285-6. Duty to clear Town property.
It shall be the duty of the Board of Selectmen to cause to be cleared
all crosswalks and all sidewalks properly belonging to the Town of East
Haddam and not adjoining the land of private individuals.
§ 285-7. Inspection of sidewalks. [Amended 3-28-2018]
The Board of Selectmen shall provide for the reasonable inspection of
sidewalks, and shall order the owner or occupants of property adjoining any
sidewalk to remove the snow, ice, sleet or any foreign materials impeding
passageways thereon. If such removal is not accomplished within four
hours from the time of notice thereof, the Board of Selectmen may remove
such snow, ice, sleet or other obstacles, which shall be a charge against
the owner/occupant of the property adjoining such sidewalk or the person
responsible for such obstacles; and the cost shall be collected by the Town
of East Haddam from the person responsible for the use of said Town, and
if payment is not made within a sixty-day period, there shall be a lien upon
the property of the person responsible.
§ 285-8. Limitations on Town liability; continuing liability of
property owners; statute of limitations. [Added 3-12-2015]
A. Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 13a-149 of the Connecticut
General Statutes or any other General Statute or Special Act, the Town
of East Haddam shall not be liable to any person injured in person or
property caused by the presence of ice or snow on a public sidewalk
unless the Town of East Haddam is the owner or the person in possession
and control of land abutting such sidewalk, other than land used as a
highway or street, provided that the Town of East Haddam shall be liable
for its affirmative acts with respect to such sidewalk.
B. The owner or person in possession and control of land abutting a public
sidewalk shall have the same duty of care with respect to the presence
of ice or snow on such sidewalk abutting his property as the municipality
had prior to the effective date of this section, adopted pursuant to the
provisions of Public Act No. 81-340 (C.G.S. § 7-163a), and shall be liable
to persons injured in person or property where a breach of said duty is
the proximate cause of said injury.
C. No action to recover damages for injury to the person or to property
caused by the presence of ice or snow on a public sidewalk against a
person who owns or is in possession and control of land abutting a public
sidewalk shall be brought but within two years from the date when the
injury is first sustained.
§ 285-6 EAST HADDAM CODE § 285-8
1:152
Chapter 290
TAXATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Pension and retirement plans — See Ch. 84. Special Acts regarding assessments — See Ch.
A350, Art. V.
§ 285-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-8
1:153

ARTICLE I
Payment of Taxes in Installments
[Adopted 2-9-1971; amended in its entirety 9-29-1993]
§ 290-1. Due dates.
All taxes on the list of 1970 shall be due and payable in two installments,
the first on July 1, 1971, and the second on January 1, 1972, and taxes on
all subsequent lists shall be payable on the first days of July and January of
each year.
§ 290-2. Single payments for certain taxes.
Commencing on the list of 1970, all property taxes due thereon in an
amount not to exceed $100, and all automobiles, regardless of the amount,
shall be due and payable in a single payment on July 1 and for every year
thereafter.
§ 290-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-2
1:155

ARTICLE II
Exemption for Blind Persons
[Adopted 11-7-1985; amended in its entirety 3-28-2018]
§ 290-3. Exemption adopted; amount.
The recommendation of the Board of Selectmen to adopt an additional
exemption of up to $3,000 on property assessment for qualified legally blind
persons, as per Public Act No. 85-165, is accepted.11
11.Editor's Note: See C.G.S. § 12-81j.
§ 290-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-3
1:157

ARTICLE III
Exemption for Veterans
[Adopted 11-7-1985; amended in its entirety 3-28-2018]
§ 290-4. Exemption adopted; amount.
The recommendation of the Board of Selectmen to adopt an additional
exemption of up to $10,000 on property assessment for qualified veterans,
as per State Statute 84-486, is accepted.12
§ 290-5. Exemption for surviving spouse.
In accordance with C.G.S. § 12-81f, Subsection (b), the exemption is
extended to the surviving spouse of a veteran.
12.Editor's Note: See C.G.S. § 12-81f.
§ 290-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-5
1:159

ARTICLE IV
Waiver of Property Taxes
[Adopted 5-21-1986]
§ 290-6. Amount authorized to be waived.
Any property tax due in an amount of less than $3 levied on any grand list
is hereby waived.
§ 290-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-6
1:161

ARTICLE V
Improvements on Property with Delinquent Taxes
[Adopted 9-18-1990]
§ 290-7. Permits not to be issued.
No official, agent, or employee of the Town of East Haddam shall issue
a zoning permit, building permit, certificate of occupancy, new sanitary
system permit, or any other permit for improvements pertaining to real
property on which there are property taxes past due. Said improvements
shall not include simple maintenance of existing structures.
§ 290-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-7
1:163

ARTICLE VI
Tax Incentive Program for Emergency Service Volunteers
[Adopted 9-5-2002]
§ 290-8. Statutory authority.
The provisions of C.G.S. § 12-81w are hereby adopted, and are set forth in
§§ 290-9, 290-10, 290-11, 290-12 and 290-13.
§ 290-9. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACTIVE — Certified by the Chief of the East Haddam Volunteer Fire
Department, LLC (hereinafter "the Fire Department"), or by the Chief of
the East Haddam Volunteer Ambulance Association (hereinafter "the
Ambulance"), on or before the certification date, as eligible for tax
exemption under this article.
CERTIFICATION DATE — March 15 of the assessment year commencing
October 1, 2001, and each assessment year thereafter.
ELIGIBLE RESIDENT — Each resident of the Town of East Haddam who
volunteers his or her services:
INCENTIVE — The reallocation of property tax burden among taxpayers
described in § 290-11 below.
§ 290-10. Incentive.
Each eligible resident shall be entitled to an exemption applicable to the
assessed value of real or personal property owned by said eligible resident
up to an amount equal to the quotient of $1,000,000 divided by the mil rate,
in effect at the time of assessment, expressed as a whole number of dollars
per $1,000 of assessed value.
§ 290-11. Limitations.
The incentive shall be subject to the following limitations: residents who
are eligible residents under one or more of Subsection A, B or C under the
definition of "eligible residents” in § 290-9 shall be entitled to one incentive
only.
§ 290-12. Procedure.
A. As an active fire fighter for the Fire Department;
As an active emergency medical technician, paramedic or ambulance
driver for the Ambulance; or
B.
C. As the volunteer Director of Civil Preparedness.
§ 290-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-12
1:165
A. The Chief of the Fire Department and the Chief of the Ambulance shall,
on or before the certification date:
(1) Submit original certifications to the Tax Collector for the Town of
East Haddam; and
(2) Forward a copy of certifications to:
(a) The Board of Finance;
(b) The Office of the First Selectman;
(c) The Office of the Tax Assessor;
(d) The Board of Fire Commissioners;
(e) The Fire Department; and
(f) The Ambulance.
B. The Assessor for the Town of East Haddam shall determine the amount
of tax exemption to be applied to the assessments of each eligible
resident on the certification list, and shall apply same by certificate of
correction.
§ 290-13. Eligibility.
All members of the Fire Department and the Ambulance shall be eligible for
the benefit under this article so long as they meet the criteria for attendance
at emergency responses, training and drills for yearly credit toward the
respective pension plans of the Fire Department and the Ambulance.
§ 290-14. Impact on pension plans.
The incentive shall not constitute compensation within the meaning of the
provisions of § 84-2G of Chapter 84, Article II, Volunteer Fire Pension Plan
(Adopted, Town Meeting, December 13, 1990; Published, Middletown Press,
December 4, 1990), nor shall it be deemed to impact the Ambulance pension
plan.
§ 290-15. Report.
The Fire Department and the Ambulance Association shall, on an annual
basis, submit a report to the Board of Selectmen describing recruitment
efforts, the number of volunteers in active service, and the number who
presently qualify and will qualify for this tax incentive program in the
future.
§ 290-12 EAST HADDAM CODE § 290-15
1:166
ARTICLE VII
Delinquent Motor Vehicle Tax Fees
[Adopted 1-22-2004]
§ 290-16. Imposition of fee; amount.
When property tax owed to the Town of East Haddam following a lawful
assessment by the Town upon any motor vehicle remains unpaid on the first
day of the month following the month in which the tax first became due, the
Tax Collector shall submit to the Connecticut Department of Motor Vehicles
a notice, in form and content as prescribed by such Department, declaring
said tax unpaid. Thereafter, the sum of $5 shall be added as a fee to the
unpaid tax and collected by the Tax Collector upon payment of said tax.
§ 290-17. Effective date.
This article shall apply to any such delinquent tax reported to the
Department of Motor Vehicles on or after January 1, 2004.
§ 290-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-17
1:167

ARTICLE VIII
Tax and Business Incentive Program
[Adopted 6-30-2010; amended in its entirety 6-30-2015]
§ 290-18. Agreements authorized.
Subject to Connecticut General Statutes (C.G.S.) §§ 12-65b and 12-65h, the
Town of East Haddam (sometimes referred to herein as "the Town") may,
by affirmative vote of its legislative body, enter into a written agreement
with any party owning or proposing to acquire an interest in real property
or an interest in air space in the Town or with any party who is the lessee
of, or proposes to be the lessee of, air space in the Town in such manner
that the air space leased or proposed to be leased shall be assessed to the
lessee pursuant to C.G.S. § 12-64, or an interest in real property upon which
is located or proposed to be located a manufacturing facility as defined in
Subdivision (72) of C.G.S. § 12-81, fixing the assessment of the real property
or air space and all improvements to be constructed thereon and therein or
of the personal property located in the manufacturing facility, which is the
subject of the agreement in accordance with provisions of § 290-25 of this
article.
§ 290-19. Purpose and intent.
A. The purpose of the Tax and Business Incentive Program (the "program")
is to attract new businesses to the Town, promote expansion of existing
businesses (including home-based businesses relocating into commercial
and industrial zones), and to encourage rehabilitation and reuse of
vacant commercial and industrial buildings.
B. It is the intent of the Town:
(1) To assist in the creation of jobs for local area residents;
(2) To create long-term tax base growth through the replacement,
reconstruction, expansion and remodeling of existing business
facilities where appropriate and not injurious to the surrounding
environment;
(3) To encourage construction of new commercial and industrial
facilities; and
(4) To encourage substantial investment in new machinery, equipment
and other personal property subject to taxation within the Town.
§ 290-20. Interested parties.
The East Haddam Economic Development Commission (EDC) shall provide
any property owner or lessee with general information concerning the
program, prepare and supply interested parties with a fact sheet about
the Town, an application to participate in the program and any other
information that may be reasonably requested by an interested party. For
purposes of this article, an "interested party" is one who owns or proposes
to acquire an interest in real property or air space in East Haddam or
otherwise meets the definition of an owner or lessee of real property or air
space as defined in C.G.S. § 12-65b and who is considering replacement,
§ 290-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-20
1:169
reconstruction, expansion or remodeling of existing business facilities
located or to be relocated in East Haddam. The EDC may perform research
about any party applying to participate in the program and may request of
such party any relevant information that in the opinion of the EDC or the
Board of Selectman (BOS) bears upon consideration of the application. The
EDC shall obtain from the Tax Assessor an opinion of the impact of any
proposed abatement of taxes on the applicable grand list and an estimate of
the impact on future grand lists.
§ 290-21. Qualifying businesses.
A. The following types of businesses, consistent with Town ordinances,
regulations, rules and codes and with the East Haddam Plan of
Conservation and Development, shall receive priority consideration
under the provisions of this article and the program:
(1) All business uses enumerated in Subdivision (b) of C.G.S. § 12-65b.
(2) Resorts and other tourist attractions.
(3) Other business uses.
B. All applicants should have no fines or violations assessed against the
applicant or its subsidiaries by state or federal agencies regarding
environmental or health codes, and be able to demonstrate adequate
financial strength to undertake the proposed capital improvements and
expansions to the real property and machinery and equipment purchases
that would be the subject of the agreement.
§ 290-22. General requirements.
Applications filed with the Town will be considered, provided:
A. The proposed use is located in an appropriate zone as defined in East
Haddam's Zoning Regulations.
B. The proposed use receives approvals, licenses and permits from the
East Haddam Planning and Zoning Commission and any other Town,
State of Connecticut, and federal agencies, boards, commissions and
officials having jurisdiction with respect to the project, if such approvals,
licenses or permits are required under applicable laws, regulations,
rules and codes.
C. If the applicant is a tenant operating under a written lease, the term
of the lease must be for no less than the applicable term of the tax
abatement period and preferably longer. The agreement and the tax
incentives must be clearly recited in said lease and be for a period no
less than the applicable term of the tax abatement period. A copy of said
lease should be submitted at the same time as the application to enter
the program is submitted.
D. No real estate property tax or other tax or fee or municipal charge due
East Haddam is unpaid at the time the application is submitted or at any
time thereafter.
E. If the applicant is relocating its business to East Haddam, the applicant
should provide a minimum of a five-year history of tax assessments and
payments to the municipality or municipalities and/or other political
subdivisions in which its business was operated, as is available, and as
determined by the Town.
§ 290-20 EAST HADDAM CODE § 290-22
1:170
F. The project should have a clear economic benefit to East Haddam. The
applicant should submit in writing with the application a list of benefits,
such as new jobs and growth of the Town grand list, to be realized by
East Haddam if the applicant receives tax incentives under the program.
G. Applicants are encouraged to provide East Haddam residents with the
opportunity to apply for open positions and businesses the opportunity
to bid for construction jobs and projects and be accorded priority,
provided such applicants meet all of the criteria of established job
requirements or are competitive and qualified bidders.
H. Definitions. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
BUSINESS EXPANSION PROJECT — An eligible project involving an
addition or renovation of the applicant's existing property and/or
facilities.
NEW BUSINESS DEVELOPMENT — An eligible project involving real
property acquisition, new construction or renovation, for either a newto-
Town business or the relocation of a Town business to the new project
site.
§ 290-23. Application procedures.
All tax incentive requests shall be made in writing on a form referred to
as "Tax and Business Incentive Application" ("the application") published
and provided by the EDC and approved by the BOS, as it may be amended
from time to time. The application and all accompanying documentation
required hereunder or voluntarily provided shall be submitted in duplicate
at the office of the First Selectman. Upon receipt by the BOS, one copy of
the application shall be provided to the EDC for preliminary review. For
purposes of this article, "receipt by the BOS" means an application and
all accompanying documentation required in accordance with all applicable
provisions of this article are submitted. The following time periods for
review of the application and action are not mandatory; nonetheless, the
EDC and the BOS shall try to meet the time limits stated hereafter: From
the date of receipt by the BOS of the application, the EDC shall have 45 days
to review the application, request additional information and meet with
the property owner and/or lessee or the property owner's and/or lessee's
representatives. Provided the property owner and/or lessee has provided
all information required in the application by this article and by the EDC,
the EDC will, within 30 days thereafter, report its findings to the BOS. The
BOS will place the report on the agenda of the next regularly scheduled
BOS meeting for discussion and action. If the BOS approves the report, the
First Selectman and the property owner/lessee shall enter into a written
agreement (subject to the affirmative vote of the Board of Finance and
the Town Meeting), which agreement, accompanied by the report, will be
referred to the Board of Finance for its review and action. If the Board of
Finance approves the financial terms of the agreement, the BOS shall place
the agreement on the agenda of the next Town Meeting for its review and
action.
§ 290-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-24
1:171
§ 290-24. Assessment of property subject to agreement.
The East Haddam Assessor shall, in the Assessor's sole discretion,
determine the assessment of the real property or the air space or the
personal property and any and all improvements constructed or to be
constructed on or in the real property which is the subject of the agreement.
§ 290-25. Requirements of tax incentive agreement.
A. Pursuant to C.G.S. § 12-65b(a), the assessment of real property and all
improvements in or on or to be constructed in or on said real property or air
space may be fixed:
(1) For a period of not more than seven years, provided the cost of such
improvements to be constructed is not less than $3,000,000;
Percentage of
Abatement 80% 70% 60% 50% 40% 30% 20%
Year 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
(2) For a period of not more than two years, provided the cost of such
improvements to be constructed is not less than $500,000; or
Percentage of Abatement 80% 70%
Year 1 2
(3) To the extent of not more than 50% of such increased assessment, for a period
of not more than three years and provided the cost of such improvements to be
constructed is not less than $25,000.
Percentage of Abatement 50% 50% 50%
Year 1 2 3
B. The fixed assessment will be based on the following:
(1) New business development with the value of improvements to be
constructed greater than $3,000,000: the fixed assessment will be
calculated using the assessed value after completion of the improvements.
(2) Business expansion projects with the value of improvements to be
constructed greater than $3,000,000: the abatement will be based on the
increase in the assessment.
(3) New business development with the value of improvements to be
constructed greater than $500,000 but less than $3,000,000: the fixed
assessment will be calculated using the assessed value after improvements.
(4) Business expansion projects with the value of improvements to be
constructed greater than $500,000 but less than $3,000,000: the abatement
will be based on the increase in the assessment.
(5) Projects with the value of improvements to be constructed greater than
$25,000 but less than $500,000: the abatement will be based 50% or the
difference between the "before" and "after" improvements assessments.
C. The fixed assessment period shall commence the first fiscal year for which a
tax list is prepared on the October 1 immediately following the issuance of a
certificate of occupancy by the appropriate building official for construction
of the buildings or manufacturing facilities or other structures and all
§ 290-24 EAST HADDAM CODE § 290-25
1:172
improvements in or on the real property or air space which is the subject of the
agreement.
D. Notwithstanding anything written in this article to the contrary and provided
in all other respects the applicant qualifies under the provisions of C.G.S.
§§ 12-65b and 12-65h and this article, the Town may, in its sole discretion, offer
to enter into an agreement with such applicant for abatement of taxes of a
lesser percentage and/or of fewer years.
E. On a case-by-case basis, the Town may provide other incentives in addition to
the incentives provided by C.G.S. §§ 12-65b and 12-65h or in lieu thereof as
follows:
(1) Waiver of building permit fees;
(2) Waiver of filing fees with land use agencies; or
(3) Provision of in-kind services such as construction of access roads or road
widening, construction of storm drains and culverts or sidewalks or curbing,
extension of water and/or sewer lines or other public improvements.
F. Machinery and equipment defined in Subdivision (72) of C.G.S. § 12-81 and
intended to qualify for tax relief pursuant to C.G.S. § 12-65h shall have for
federal income tax purposes a depreciable useful life of five years or seven
years.
G. Construction shall commence within six months of approval of the agreement
by the Town Meeting and shall be completed no later than 24 months from date
of approval by the Town Meeting. The times for commencement and completion
of the construction are mandatory, except the owner's or lessee's performance
may be excused when the owner or lessee is prevented from performing by
causes beyond the owner's or lessee's control, including natural disasters, fires
or other calamities or a state or national declared state of emergency.
§ 290-26. Default by owner or lessee.
In the event the owner or lessee of the real properly or air space 1) fails
to pay real estate and/or personal property taxes when such taxes are due
and payable; 2) fails to commence or complete on time the construction of
all improvements upon the property which is the subject of the agreement;
3) becomes insolvent or bankrupt or files any debtor proceedings or others
file such debtor proceedings against the owner or lessee, in any court, in
any jurisdiction, state or federal, and does not withdraw such filing within
90 days or such other proceedings have not been dismissed or withdrawn
by such other parties within 90 days or makes an assignment for the benefit
of creditors or if the property or lease is taken under any writ of execution
or becomes the subject of foreclosure proceedings; 4) abandons the real
property or, in the case of the lessee, purports to assign its lease without
the express consent of the Town as set forth in § 290-27 of this article; or
5) fails to perform any obligation of owner or lessee under the terms of the
agreement; such event shall constitute a material default of the agreement
and the Town may terminate the agreement on the giving of written notice,
whereupon a) the right of the owner and/or lessee to receive tax abatements
and any other considerations granted to the property owner and/or lessee
under the terms of the agreement shall cease and come to an end; and
b) the property owner and/or lessee shall be obligated to repay the Town
the amounts of all tax abatements retroactive to the due date of the first
§ 290-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-26
1:173
abated tax payment plus interest at the rate set and payable pursuant to
provisions of C.G.S. § 12-146, all waived fees, if any, and all actual costs
of the Town in providing in-kind considerations to the property owner and/
or the lessee. In the event of failure to pay a tax when due and if such
delinquency continues for six months and one day, the Town shall terminate
the agreement, whereupon i) the right of the owner and/or lessee to receive
the tax abatement and any other considerations granted to the property
owner or lessee under the terms of the agreement shall cease and come
to an end; and ii) the property owner and/or lessee shall be obligated to
repay the Town the amounts of all tax abatements retroactive to the due
date of the first abated tax payment plus interest at the rate set and payable
pursuant to provisions of C.G.S. § 12-146, all waived fees, if any, and all
actual costs of the Town in providing in-kind considerations to the property
owner and/or the lessee.
§ 290-27. Assignment of agreement.
The agreement between the Town and the owner and/or lessee of real
property or of air space shall not be assigned by the owner or lessee to
any person(s) or business organization or entity or estate or trust without
the express consent of both the BOS and the Board of Finance, which
boards shall signify their consent by an affirmative vote taken at a separate
meeting of each board duly warned and noticed for the stated purpose. A
conveyance of the real property or a transfer of ownership of the business
or substantially all of the assets of the business, which is the subject of
the agreement, to a person or business organization or entity that is not
owned or controlled by the owner of the real property and/or the owner
of the business who are parties to the agreement with the Town shall not
constitute a valid assignment of the agreement or vest any rights under
the agreement in the grantee of the real property or transferee of the
business or of the assets of the business or allow for enforcement of any
obligations of the Town against the Town by the grantee of the real property
or transferee of the business or of the assets of the business, including but
not limited to any remaining tax abatements under terms of the agreement.
For purposes of this section, a "controlled entity" means a business which is
80% or more owned by the grantor or transferor, as the case may be.
§ 290-28. Amendments to applicable statutes.
All references to C.G.S. § 12-65b, 12-65h or 12-81 or any other section of
C.G.S. made herein shall include all amendments to such statutes enacted
and signed into law subsequent to the effective date of this article.
§ 290-26 EAST HADDAM CODE § 290-28
1:174
ARTICLE IX
Tax Relief for Elderly and Disabled
[Adopted 10-17-2017]
§ 290-29. Statutory authority; applicability.
This article is adopted pursuant to the authority granted to the Town under
Section 12-129n of the Connecticut General Statutes, as the same may be
amended from time to time, and shall be effective for the Grand Lists of
2015 through 2020.
§ 290-30. Qualifications for tax relief.
To qualify for the tax relief provided in this article, the taxpayer shall meet
the following requirements:
A. Shall be either:
(1) Sixty-five years of age or over at the close of the previous calendar
year, or his or her spouse, who is domiciled with him or her, or has
been confined to a nursing home from his or her residence in East
Haddam, shall be 65 years of age or over or the surviving spouse
of a taxpayer previously qualified under this section at the time of
his or her death and over the age of 62, subject to requalification
hereunder; or
(2) Under age 65 and eligible in accordance with applicable federal
regulations to receive permanent total disability benefits under
social security, or has not been engaged in employment covered by
social security and accordingly has not qualified for permanent total
disability under any federal, state or local government retirement
or disability plan, including the Railroad Retirement Act and any
government-related teachers’ retirement plan, in which
requirements with respect to qualifications for such permanent total
disability benefits are comparable to such requirements under social
security.
B. Shall have occupied the real property for which tax relief is sought as
his or her principal residence and which property must either be owned
by the applicant or be real property for which the applicant or his or her
spouse is liable for taxes under Section 12-48 of the Connecticut General
Statutes, except as provided in Subsection C hereinbelow.
C. Shall have been liable for residential real property taxes to the Town of
East Haddam for a period of one year immediately preceding the receipt
of tax benefits under this article, and not owe any delinquent property
taxes to the Town of East Haddam; provided, however, that if property
is held in trust for a person who would otherwise qualify for this elderly
and disabled tax relief program, the tax relief may still be granted if the
claimant is the primary beneficiary of the trust and the claimant meets
all other requirements under this program. Under these circumstances,
the application for relief shall be accompanied by a copy of the trust
agreement. The trust agreement shall be reviewed by Town Counsel
prior to any relief being granted to the claimant.
§ 290-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-30
1:175
D. Shall have individually, if unmarried, or jointly if married, adjusted gross
income, as defined in the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended,
plus social security benefits, income from other tax-exempt retirement
and annuity sources and income from tax-exempt bonds, hereinafter
called "qualifying income," during the calendar year, preceding the filing
of his or her application in an amount of no more than $50,000.
§ 290-31. Property limits.
The benefits under this article shall be limited to the residence of the
taxpayer, the house lot upon which such residence is located and any nonincome-
producing accessory buildings located upon said lot.
§ 290-32. Implementation of provisions; documentation of
qualifying income; confidentiality.
The Tax Collector and the Assessor of the Town of East Haddam shall
prescribe, with regard to their respective duties under this article, such
forms and procedures as may be necessary to implement this article. The
Assessor, in addition, shall satisfy himself or herself as to the qualifying
income of an applicant for benefits under this article by requesting and
reviewing such evidence, including documents, of qualifying income as he
or she may deem pertinent. All applications, federal income tax returns
filed herewith and any additional evidence of qualifying income which the
Assessor may require shall be kept confidential and not open to public
inspection.
§ 290-33. Tax relief granted; limits.
A. Tax relief shall be provided by the Town to applicants who meet the
requirements of this article, subject to the limitations contained herein.
B. Amount of relief.
(1) The yearly allowable relief shall be established as follows:
Income Relief Amount
$0 to $24,999 $500
$25,000 to $34,999 $400
$35,000 to $50,000 $300
(2) However, in no event shall the total yearly program exceed the sum of $150,000.
In such event, the amount of relief granted shall be reduced in a pro rata
manner by maintaining, as far as possible, the maximum relief amount for the
lowest income taxpayers and then reducing the relief amount for each higher
income tier until said program does not exceed said amount.
C. The property tax relief provided by this section shall be in addition to and
not dependent upon those benefits available to qualified taxpayers under any
Connecticut General Statutes, Sections 12-129b to 12-129d, 12-129h13 and
12-170aa, provided that the Town and state benefits in any one year shall not
exceed 75% of the real property tax which would have been imposed on a
qualified taxpayer in the absence of such statute and this section.
§ 290-30 EAST HADDAM CODE § 290-33
1:176
D. If a qualifying taxpayer owns property jointly with a non-spouse, tax relief under
the elderly tax relief program will be proportionate to the qualifying taxpayer's
interest in the property.
E. Before the tax relief or any portion thereof under this section shall be given,
such person must first apply for tax relief under any state statute for which he/
she is eligible. If such applicant has not applied for tax relief under any state
statute because he/she is not eligible, he or she shall so certify by filing annually
to the Assessor or authorized agent on a form acceptable to the Assessor an
affidavit testifying to his or her eligibility. The application must be filed each
year with the Assessor between February 1 and May 15 for tax relief for the
following fiscal year which begins on July 1.
F. Any otherwise qualified applicant must own and reside on the property subject
to tax relief for at least 183 days per year for the property to qualify as the
taxpayer's principal residence. Only one tax credit shall be allowed for each
property eligible for tax relief. In any case where title to such real property is
recorded in the name of the taxpayer or his or her spouse who is eligible for
tax relief and any other person or persons, the tax amount shall be prorated
to allow a tax credit equivalent to the fractional share in the property of such
eligible taxpayer or spouse; if such property is a multiple-family dwelling, such
tax credit shall be prorated to reflect the fractional portion of such property
occupied by the eligible taxpayer as provided by state statutes. Persons not
otherwise eligible shall not receive any tax relief.
G. If any person entitled to the tax relief dies without leaving a qualified spouse,
prorated tax relief shall be given from October 1 of the assessment year
in which death occurs to the date of death. Such prorated portion shall be
determined by a fraction, the numerator of which shall be the number of full
months from the first day of October in such assessment year to the date
of death and the denominator of which shall be 12. If such person dies, the
tax relief which such person shall be allowed for his or her estate shall be
given for the next fiscal year and for any subsequent fiscal years in which
the surviving spouse of such person meets the requirements set forth. If any
person receiving qualified tax relief hereunder sells the property on which the
tax relief is granted, no additional tax relief shall be allowed for his or her
interest in the property, and the purchaser of such property shall pay the Town
a prorated portion of the tax relief for that fiscal year. Such prorated portion
of such relief shall be determined by a fraction, the numerator of which shall
be the number of months from the date of conveyance, including the month of
conveyance, to the end of the assessment year and the denominator of which
shall be 12. If such conveyance occurs in the month of October, the grantor
shall be disqualified for tax relief in such assessment year. The grantee shall be
required, within a period not to exceed 10 days immediately following the date
of such conveyance, to notify the Assessor thereof, whereupon the Assessor
shall determine the amount of tax reduction to which the grantor is entitled for
such assessment year.
H. Applications for benefits under this section shall be filed biennially with the
Assessor or authorized agent between February 1 and May 15, when State of
Connecticut applications are due.
13.Editor's Note: C.G.S. § 12-129h, which related to tax relief for special taxes, was repealed
by P.A. 99-89, § 9, effective 6-3-1999.
§ 290-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-33
1:177
I. Any applicant who has received benefits from this section and is later found to
be ineligible after filing a false affidavit will be liable for all benefits received.
The amount due will be treated as taxes not paid from the date they would have
been due and will be subject to interest and penalties as prescribed by law.
§ 290-34. When effective; amendments.
This article shall take effect on passage and publication. Once the article
takes effect, it may be amended by vote of the Town Meeting, upon the
recommendation of the Board of Finance, without complying with
requirements of C.G.S. § 12-129n applicable to the article's initial approval.
§ 290-35. Severability.
If any section, subsection or other portion of this article shall be declared
unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction,
such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect the remaining portions
of this article if they can be given effect without the unconstitutional or
invalid provisions.
§ 290-36. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by the action of the Assessor in determining the
amount of relief or in disapproving any such application under this article
may appeal to the Board of Selectmen in writing, within 10 days after the
date of the written notification of the Assessor on such application. The
Board of Selectmen shall promptly consider such appeal and may grant or
deny the relief requested, or make such other modifications necessary to
comply with the article.
§ 290-33 EAST HADDAM CODE § 290-36
1:178
Chapter 296
TOBACCO PRODUCTS
§ 296-1. Purpose.
This chapter is intended to prohibit the sale of self-service cigarettes and
other tobacco products in establishments open to children under the age of
18. This chapter will require customers to ask the assistance of a store clerk
to obtain possession of tobacco products, thereby inhibiting theft of product
by minors.
§ 296-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ESTABLISHMENT — Any place of business open to the public, including
children 17 years and younger.
SELF-SERVICE — Any product available to or within the reach of customers
of an establishment without the assistance of a store employee.
TOBACCO PRODUCTS — Any products containing tobacco and shall
include, but not be limited to, cigarettes, cigars, cigarillos, tiparillos, and
chewing tobacco.
§ 296-3. Prohibited conduct.
No East Haddam establishment shall offer self-service tobacco products for
consumption by the public after the effective date of this chapter.
§ 296-4. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 3-28-2018]
The owner of an establishment which violates this chapter shall be fined not
more than $250.
Chapter 301
TRAILERS
§ 301-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote the health, sanitation and welfare
of the Town of East Haddam, to reduce fire hazards and to mitigate
congestion and the influx of transients which would increase the burden on
educational and other facilities.
§ 301-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
§ 290-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 301-2
1:179
CAMPER COACH or TRAVEL TRAILER — Any conveyance which is or can
be mounted on wheels, whether or not self-propelled, and which shall be
used exclusively for travel, camping, recreation and vacationing and not as
a fixed dwelling place and which shall not exceed eight feet in width and 26
feet in length.
CAMPGROUND — A plot of ground used for recreational purposes which
can accommodate two or more tents, travel trailers or camper coaches.
COMMERCIAL TRAILER — Any vehicle designed to serve exclusively as a
temporary office for any construction project.
HE — When used in apposition to a licensee, owner or applicant, shall
include persons of both sexes or corporations.
HEALTH OFFICER — The legally designated health authority of East
Haddam or its authorized representative.
LICENSE — A written license by the Board of Selectmen or its authorized
representative permitting a trailer coach to be parked or located off the
public highways in the Town of East Haddam.
OCCUPY — Occupied for sleeping and dwelling purposes.
SINGLE TRAILER SPACE — A space on which a single trailer is
accommodated on one parcel of real estate.
SINGLE TRAILER, TRAILER, OR TRAILER COACH — Any movable or
portable dwelling built on a chassis and which is, has been or may be
mounted or moved on wheels and so constructed as to permit its use
not only as a conveyance upon the public streets or byways but also as
a dwelling and sleeping place occupied by one or more persons. This
definition shall embrace all vehicles (however designated) answering such
description except camper coaches and travel trailers and commercial
trailers.
TRAILER PARK — Any plot of ground upon which two or more trailers
occupied for dwelling and sleeping purposes are located, whether
designated as a trailer camp, trailer park or mobile home park or otherwise.
§ 301-3. Parking of single trailers.
A. After the effective date of this chapter, no person, firm or corporation
shall park a trailer off the public highways within the limits of East
Haddam without first having obtained a license therefor.
B. Such trailer license shall be issued in the name of the Town of East
Haddam by the Board of Selectmen.
C. A license or permit issued prior to the effective date of this chapter, the
renewal thereof and the continued parking of a trailer pursuant thereto
shall remain subject to the provisions of law in effect at the time such
license or permit was granted, and the same shall for such purpose
remain in full force and effect.
D. The owner of the trailer, and the owner of the land on which the trailer
is to be parked, if different therefrom, shall apply to the Board of
Selectmen for such license, for occupancy by the landowner, through a
§ 301-2 EAST HADDAM CODE § 301-3
1:180
written application. An application shall be accepted only when made
in conjunction with an application for a building permit for a detached
dwelling, in accordance with the zoning regulations of the Town of
East Haddam, or when made for a renewal of a license or permit
granted prior to the effective date of this chapter, and shall set forth the
following:
(1) Name and address of the applicant(s).
(2) Ownership, make, model, serial number and motor vehicle
registration number of the trailer, if any.
(3) Description of the plot of land upon which applicant intends to park
such trailer, its location, area and the name of the owner and his
relationship to applicant, if any.
(4) The sewage disposal arrangements provided or to be provided.
(5) The water supply arrangements provided or to be provided.
E. No single trailer shall be parked for occupancy in East Haddam unless:
(1) The plot upon which it is parked is at least two acres in area.
(2) An area of not less than 10,000 square feet immediately surrounding
the trailer is kept free from heavy and dense growth of brush or
weeds, including poisonous or obnoxious weeds, and the front area
of the trailer is landscaped and properly graded in a normal
acceptable manner before a certificate of occupancy can be granted
by the Building Official.
(3) The trailer space is provided with a sewage disposal outlet
connected with a public sewer system or a septic tank or, if the
health officer shall certify that in the particular location no health
menace is involved, an approved cesspool.
(4) The trailer space is provided with an adequate supply of potable
water for all the occupants of the trailer, together with a water
connection for the trailer.
(5) Rubbish and refuse is collected at least once a week and between
collections is placed in flytight, watertight, rodentproof containers.
(6) It is 100 feet distant from any public highway or street other than
trailers already on location.
F. Subsections A and E(1) shall not apply to any single trailer already
parked off the public highway in East Haddam on or before July 1, 1957.
G. The Board of Selectmen shall approve or disapprove such application
within 30 days after the date of filing. No approval of an original
application shall be granted until the health officer has inspected the
site, examined the sanitation plans and facilities and approved, in
writing, the granting of such license and such approval has been filed,
together with the application, in the office of the Town Clerk. No
approval of such application shall be granted and no license issued
unless and until the building permit for the detached dwelling has been
issued in accordance with the zoning regulations of East Haddam, as
hereinabove referred to in Subsection D.
H. All trailer licenses issued subsequent to the effective date of this chapter
shall expire six months after date of issue. Renewal of such permits,
whether upon their expiration or subsequently, shall be valid for only
six months from date of expiration of the original license, and only one
§ 301-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 301-3
1:181
such renewal shall be granted and then only provided that reasonable
progress shall have been made toward the completion of the dwelling
for which the building permit was issued in conjunction with the trailer
license. Such reasonable progress shall be evidenced by the completion
within the initial six-month period of the foundation, the water supply
system, sewage disposal system, the framing and closing in of the
dwelling.
I. The fee for any trailer license, including the renewal thereof, and the fee
for any renewal of a trailer license or permit issued prior to the effective
date of this chapter shall be $50.
§ 301-4. Trailer parks and campgrounds.
After the effective date of this chapter, no person, firm or corporation shall
establish, maintain, or operate a trailer park or campground within the
limits of East Haddam without first having obtained a license or permit
in accordance with zoning regulations of the Town of East Haddam nor
establish, maintain, conduct or operate a campground/trailer park without
complying with such regulations and continue to maintain and operate such
campground/trailer park.
§ 301-5. Right of entry.
The health officer or his deputy and the Fire Marshal or his deputy shall
have the power to enter at reasonable times upon any private or public
property for the purpose of inspecting and investigating conditions relating
to the enforcement of this chapter or of regulations promulgated
thereunder.
§ 301-6. Adoption of regulations.
The Board of Selectmen is hereby authorized to make and to adopt such
written regulations as may be necessary for the proper enforcement of the
provisions of this chapter, provided that such regulations shall not be in
conflict with the provisions of this chapter. Such regulations shall have the
same force and effect as the provisions of this chapter and the penalty
for violation thereof shall be the same as the penalty for violation of the
provisions of this chapter as above provided.
§ 301-7. Electricity.
If a trailer uses electricity, the installation shall comply with all state and
local electrical codes and ordinances. All electric outlets shall be
weatherproof.
§ 301-8. Fire protection.
Every single trailer space shall be kept free of flammable material at all
times and shall be equipped with one or more portable fire extinguishers
maintained in good repair for use in fighting fires. Fires shall be made
only in stoves or other equipment designated for that purpose and in
§ 301-3 EAST HADDAM CODE § 301-8
1:182
incinerators when otherwise permissible. The space shall be subject to all
rules and regulations of the Fire Department of East Haddam.
§ 301-9. Fuel.
Liquefied petroleum gas for cooking purposes shall not be used at any
trailer space unless the containers are properly connected by copper or
other suitable metallic tubing. Liquefied petroleum cylinders shall be
securely fastened in place and adequately protected from the weather. No
cylinder containing liquefied petroleum gas shall be located in any trailer
nor within five feet of the door thereof.
§ 301-10. Location in flood hazard areas prohibited.
No mobile home, camper coach, travel trailer, and/or trailer park shall be
located in "special flood hazard area" or "floodway" as defined in the Federal
Insurance Administration's scientific and engineering report entitled "The
Flood Insurance Study for the Town of East Haddam, Connecticut,
Middlesex County," and dated May 1979, with accompanying Flood
Insurance Rate Maps and Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps, as amended
or revised.
§ 301-11. Penalties for offenses.
Any person found guilty of violating this chapter or any provision thereof
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not less than $5
nor more than $100, and each day such violation exists shall be constituted
a separate offense and shall be punished as such hereunder. In addition
to such penalties, the Board of Selectmen shall be authorized to revoke or
suspend any license whenever the licensee has violated any provision of this
chapter or the regulations thereunder. The Board may, on such conditions
as may be just, restore any license when the violation is remedied and
compliance resumed.
§ 301-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 301-11
1:183

u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 1
TABLE OF CONTENTS
SECTIONS PAGES
INTRODUCTION 3
1 PURPOSES 3
2 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 3
3 SEVERABILITY AND VALIDITY 9
4 EFFECTIVE DATE 9
5 DEFINITIONS 10
6 ZONING DISTRICTS AND ZONING MAPS 23
7 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 24
8 CONFORMANCE AND NON-CONFORMANCE 28
9 USES PERMITTED IN DISTRICTS AND ZONES 32
9.1 Flood Plain Zone 32
9.2 Residence Districts 32
9.3 Resort District 34
9.4 Lake District 35
9.5 East Haddam Village District 36
9.6 C-3 District 42
9.7 IG District 43
9.8 Research & Development District 45
9.9 Conservation (Gateway) Zone 45
9.10 Commercial/Business/Light Industrial District (C/B/IG) 49
9.11 Eightmile River Watershed Overlay District 51
10 SCHEDULE OF LOTS AND BUILDINGS 55
10.1.4 Building Height 56
10.2.3 Accessory Dwellings 57
10.3 Schedule for Non-Conforming Lots 59
10.4 Minimum Buildable Land Requirements 59
10.5 Other Bulk Regulations 61
10.6 Interior Lot Regulations 62
11 GENERAL PARKING REQUIREMENTS 65
12 SIGNS 71
13 TRAILERS 78
14A SITE PLAN REVIEW 79
14B SPECIAL EXCEPTION 87
15 CAMP GROUNDS AND RECREATIONAL CAMPS 93
16 HISTORICAL PARKS 95
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 2
17 FLOATING ZONES 97
18 SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AND AREA REGULATIONS 108
19 REGULATION OF EARTH MATERIAL OPERATIONS 124
20 COMMERCIAL CUTTING OF TIMBER 127
21 REGULATION OF OUTDOOR WOOD BURNING FURNANCES 129
22 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES 130
23 CONSERVATION SUBDIVISION 138
24 CONVERSION SEASONAL/YEAR ROUND 143
25 COLLECTION AND STORAGE OF JUNK MATERIALS, 144
ABANDONED VEHICLES, AND DEBRIS
26 MOBOLE FOOD UNITS 146
27 HOME OCCUPATION 148
28 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT 150
APPENDIX I AMENDMENTS 154
APPENDIX II LAND WITH LIMITATIONS FOR DEVELOPMENT 156
APPENDIX III INVASIVE PLANTS LIST 161
APPENDIX IV RECOMMENDED PLANTS FOR CONNECTICUT 166
APPENDIX V STREETS LOCATED IN THE LAKES DISTRICT 169
APPENDIX VI SITE DESIGN AND COMPATIBLITY OBJECTIVES 171
AND GUIDELINES
APPENDIX VII STANDARDS FOR CONSTRUCTION IN 190
THE IG DISTRICT
APPENDIX VIII BUILDING HEIGHT DIAGRAM 224
APPENDIX IX DEVELOPED AREAS IN THE 225
CONSERVATION ZONE
APPENDIX X EIGHTMILE RIVER WATERSHED 226
OVERLAY DISTRICT MAP
APPENDIX XI INSET MAPS OF ZONING DISTRICTS 227
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 3
INTRODUCTION
The original Zoning Regulations were adopted on September 12, 1961. Since then, numerous revisions to the regulations have been made. These revisions have been written in such a manner as to make them more clear and concise. It is the hope that this will make the regulations easier to use for our citizens and taxpayers and any others who may desire to use them.
The Zoning Regulations have been updated to include revisions to Sections 2, 5, 7, 8, 14A, 14B, incorporation of a new Section 17 and repeal of Sections 21 and 26 through October 14, 1987.
All other Sections of the regulations include revisions made to December 1969 through June 1, 1979.
Addition listing of amendments can be found in Appendix I
SECTION 1 PURPOSES
Pursuant to the power and authority invested in it by the Connecticut General Statutes as amended, the Planning and Zoning Commission of the Town of East Haddam hereby adopts the following regulations.
1.0 PURPOSES There is hereby established a comprehensive zoning plan for the Town of East Haddam, Connecticut (hereinafter referred to as the “Town”) which plan is set forth in the text, maps, and schedule, which constitutes these Regulations. Said plan is adopted for the purposes set forth in Chapter 124 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended, for the protection and promotion of the public health, safety, and welfare.
1.1 Such regulations shall encourage the most appropriate use of the land in accordance with the comprehensive zoning plan, with the purpose of: to lessen congestion in the streets; to secure safety from fire, panic, flood and other dangers; to promote health and the general welfare; to provide adequate light and air; to prevent the overcrowding of land, to avoid undue concentration of population and to facilitate the adequate provisions for transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks and other public requirements. Such regulations shall be made with reasonable consideration as to character of the district and its peculiar suitability for particular uses with a view to conserving property values, and encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout East Haddam.
Zoning regulations may be made with reasonable consideration for the protection of historic factors and for the protection of existing and potential public surface and ground drinking water supplies; proper provisions be made for sedimentation and erosion control. The regulations also encourage energy- efficient patterns of development, the use of solar and other renewable forms of energy, and energy conservation.
SECTION 2 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
2.1. Zoning Enforcement Officer(s). These Regulations shall be administered and enforced by such Zoning Enforcement Officer or Officers as the Commission shall, by resolution, designate, including members and alternate members of the Commission.
2.2. Enforcement and Penalties. These Regulations shall be enforced by the Zoning Enforcement Officer(s), or his/her/their designee, who shall be empowered to cause any building, structure, place or premises to be inspected and examined and to order, in writing, the remedying of any conditions found to exist therein or thereat in violation of any provision of these Regulations, or any permit or approval issue hereunder. The owner or agent of a building, structure, or property where such violation shall have been committed or shall exist, or the lessee or tenant of an entire lot where such violation shall have been committed or shall exist, or the agent, architect, builder, contractor or any other person who shall commit, take part or assist in such violation or who shall maintain any building or premises in which such violations exist shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable as provided in Chapter 124 of the Connecticut General Statutes. Furthermore, the Commission may, at its sole discretion, direct the Town counsel to commence criminal or civil action in State or Federal Court for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of these Regulations.
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 4
2.3. Certificate of Zoning Compliance. Upon the request of any property owner, or the Building Official, the Zoning Enforcement Officer is hereby authorized to issue a Certificate of Zoning Compliance in the following cases:
(a) For any site, building, or structure which has been reviewed and approved by the Commission or the Zoning Board of Appeals, as the case may be, pursuant to any provision of these Regulations. Such Certificate shall be evidence that such site, building, or structure has been developed in conformance with these Regulations and to the requirements and conditions attached to any variance, Site Plan Approval or Special Exception issued hereunder.
(b) For any legally existing use, building or structure for which no variance, Site Plan Approval, or Special Exception is required under these Regulations. Such Certificate shall be evidence that such use, building or structure conforms to all applicable provisions of these Regulations, or is a valid nonconforming use, building or structure, as defined in these Regulations.
c) For any addition to, or expansion of, a legally existing single family dwelling, and/or any permitted accessory buildings, uses or structures located on a non-conforming lot, which lot equals or exceeds one-half (1/2) acre in area. Such Certificate shall be evidence that such use, building, or structure conforms to all applicable provisions of these Regulations, other than required lot area or other required lot dimensions.
(d) For any single-family dwelling and permitted accessory buildings, structures and uses, on a conforming lot. Such Certificate shall be evidence that such single-family home and permitted accessory buildings, structures and uses conform to all applicable provisions of these Regulations.
Any use of land, buildings, or structures, or any expansion of such use, or the erection, extension, or alteration of any building or structure, for which a Certificate of Zoning Compliance is not required under this Section or for which a Special Exception is not required by these Regulations, shall require Site Plan Approval pursuant to Section 14A of these Regulations.
Except as provided below, prior to the issuance of any Certificate of Zoning Compliance in coordination with a Certificate of Occupancy, the property owner shall provide a plan accurate to the Standards of A-2 Classification as defined in the Code of Practices for Standards of Accuracy of surveys and maps adopted December 10, 1975 as amended by the Connecticut Association of Land Surveyors, Inc. Said plan shall show all required setbacks and boundary lines and the location of all new construction and other important features, including, but not limited, new buildings, structures, parking areas, sanitary disposal systems, wells, wetlands, flood plains and other information required to determine compliance with these Regulations, the East Haddam Subdivision Regulations, or the East Haddam Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations, or any permit issued thereunder. Corner boundary pins are to be set prior to the issuance of the final Certificate of Zoning Compliance. Such plan shall not be required for any addition to an existing single-family residential building or structure, nor for any permitted residential accessory building or structure.
No Certificate of Zoning Compliance shall be issued if it is determined that a violation of these Regulations, the East Haddam Subdivision Regulations, or the East Haddam Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations, the Town of East Haddam Ordinance Book, or any permit issued thereunder, is proposed or exists. In accordance with Connecticut General Statutes Section 8-3(f), no Building Permit or Certificate of Occupancy for any building, use or structure shall be issued by the Building Official without the prior issuance of a Certificate of Zoning Compliance. (
2.4. Building Permit. No Building Permit shall be issued for any activity or use which is not in conformance with the provisions of these Regulations, and no such Permit shall be issued unless and until the Zoning Enforcement Officer has issued a Certificate of Zoning Compliance indicating the plans submitted to the Building Official conform to these Regulations and any Special Exception, Site Plan Approval, or variance issued hereunder. During the course of construction, the Building Official and Zoning Enforcement Officer shall insure continued compliance with these Regulations, and any such Special Exception, Site Plan, or variance, including, but not limited to, any erosion control plan approved by the Commission or its authorized agent. The Building Official or Zoning Enforcement Officer shall have the authority to require additional or different erosion control measures if those previously approved are found to be inadequate, or if they are not being maintained in accordance with the approved plan. Any construction activity which is found to be in violation of these Regulations or any Special Exception, Site Plan Approval or variance issued hereunder may be ordered to cease and desist, at the sole discretion of the Zoning Enforcement Officer or Building Official. In order to carry out the provisions of this Section, the property owner shall allow any official of the Town of East Haddam free access to the site.
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 5
2.5. Certificate of Occupancy. No building or structure shall be occupied or used, nor any use of land established, nor shall any addition, extension, or alteration of any building, structure, or use be occupied or used until the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy by the Building Official of the Town of East Haddam. Such Certificate of Occupancy shall not be issued unless the subject site, building(s), and structure(s) conform to any Special Exception, site plan approval, or variance, and any conditions attached thereto, issued by the Commission or the Zoning Board of Appeals, as the case may be, in accordance with these Regulations. Similarly, no Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued until an as-built plan of any septic system design reviewed by the Commission, pursuant to Section 14A of these Regulations, has been submitted to the Town Sanitarian. Said as-built plan shall certify that the preparer thereof personally inspected the installation of the septic system on the site, and that the septic system as installed conformed to the approved design. If the subject septic system was designed by a Connecticut Registered Professional Engineer, said as-built plan shall be certified by such and Engineer. All non-engineer designed systems shall have as-built plans prepared and certified by either the system installer or a Connecticut Registered Professional Engineer. The Building Official may issue a temporary Certificate of Occupancy where a portion of a building, site, or structure is completed and ready for occupancy, in accordance with the bonding procedure set forth herein below.
As set forth in Section 2.3 of these Regulations, no Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued without the prior issuance of a Certificate of Zoning Compliance, if such Certificate is required by these Regulations. (from Sec. 7.0.1, 7.0.2, 7.0.3)
2.6. Special Exceptions, Site Plan Approval, and Variances; Deviations, Amendments, Misrepresentations. In accordance with Section 8-3d of the Connecticut General Statutes, no Special Exception shall be effective until a copy thereof, certified by the Commission or the Zoning Board of Appeals, as the case may be, containing a description of the premises to which it relates and specifying the nature of such variance or special exception, including the Regulation which is varied in its application or to which a special exception is granted, and stating the name of the owner of record, is recorded in the land records of the Town of East Haddam. No person who has obtained a Special Exception, Site Plan Approval, or variance shall attempt to erect any building or structure, or establish any use of land, which is not in substantial conformance with any element of the plans, descriptions, applications and supporting materials, information, specifications submitted, or any representations of fact made, before the Commission or the Zoning Board of Appeals, as the case may be, without an amendment as provided in these Regulations, provided, however, that the construction of open unroofed porches and decks attached to a residential dwelling may be added without application for, or amendment of, a Site Plan Approval. Likewise, no person who has obtained a Special Exception, Site Plan Approval, or variance shall violate any condition imposed thereon. Violation of this provision shall be grounds for the Commission or Zoning Board of Appeals, as the case may be, to void said Special Exception, Site Plan Approval, or variance, and to take such other legal action as may be required to secure compliance with said Special Exception or variance and the conditions attached thereto. The Commission may by resolution permit the Zoning Enforcement Officer to authorize minor, non-substantial deviations from approved Special Exceptions and Site Plan Approvals. Likewise, the Zoning Board of Appeals may by resolution permit the Zoning Enforcement Officer to authorize minor, non-substantial deviations from approved variances.
Substantial changes to Special Exceptions, Site Plan Approvals, and variances shall be treated as new applications for approval, and shall be submitted and acted upon in accordance with these Regulations. Substantial changes are considered changes that involve (a) alterations in use from that set forth in an approved statement of use and site plan; or (b) alteration in an existing use, including such alterations that would:
1. Increased the parking demand of the use; or
2. Increase or change the hours of operation of the use; or
3. Increase the noise generation of the use or change the octave band frequency of such noise; or
4. Increase or change the emission of smoke, dust or other contaminants into the air, including both point sources and fugitive emissions; or
5. Increase or change the demand for outdoor storage, truck or equipment traffic (type or volume), water consumption, or effluent disposals; or
6. Involve the use of different equipment, processes, chemicals, or materials; or
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 6
7. Increase the amount of lighting.
In the event that the Commission or the Board, as the case may be, determines or discovers that information submitted to it in support of any application for Special Exception, Site Plan Approval, or variance was incorrect or invalid, the Commission or Board may, after a hearing, void such approval, and shall state the reasons for such action on the record.
(former Section 7.21, 11/1/78, 11/15/89r; also 14A.4, 3/1/79r; also 14B, 3/1/79r)
2.7. Completion of Construction. For any Special Exception, Site Plan Approval, or variance, the construction of any building or structure, or the establishment of any use, shall be completed by the applicant, and a Certificate of Zoning Compliance and Certificate of Occupancy, where required, shall be issued, within thirty-six (36) months of the effective date for such approval. Any such approval not completed within the time limits contained in this section shall be void. (former Section 14A.4, 3/1/79r; also 14B, 3/1/79r)
2.8. Performance Bonds. As a condition of the approval of any Special Exception, Site Plan Approval, or variance, the Commission or the owners of the subject property post a bond, in such form and with such sureties as the Zoning Enforcement Officer may prescribe, in an amount sufficient to cover the cost of construction of any street improvements, drainage, septic facilities, erosion control measures, water supply, and any other improvements required by the Commission/Board in connection with any such Special Exception, Site Plan Approval, or variance. Such requirement for bonding shall be determined on the basis of the importance of the completion of such improvements to compliance with the criteria of these Regulations, the extent and expense of such improvements, and the potential for occupancy of the site or building in the absence of such improvements. All such improvements shall be completed prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Zoning Compliance and/or Certificate of Occupancy, except as provided herein below.
In the event that certain improvements may not be installed at the time of occupancy of a site or building due to weather conditions or other factors beyond the control of the applicant, the Zoning Enforcement Officer may require a performance bond, is such amounts, form, and surety as he/she may deem necessary, to insure the completion of such improvements in not more than six (6) months following such occupancy. In the event that the improvements described herein above shall not be completed within the time limits contained herein, the Commission, Zoning Board of Appeals, or the Zoning Enforcement Officer, as the case may be, shall be authorized to utilize the performance bond to complete such improvements, and to compensate the Town for any administrative expenses incurred in connection with the completion of such improvements.
A Performance Bond may be required to be posted by the Applicant/Owner prior to the commencement of construction of any improvement or work on any lot to insure the completion of required improvements and utilities in the event the Applicant/Owner shall fail to install same within six (6) months form the date of the occupancy. The term of the Performance Bond may be extended by the Commission upon approval of a petition from the developer to the Commission requesting an extension subject to agreement of such extension by the Surety.
In computing the amount of the Bond, the Commission shall include the construction cost of the following items:
a) The construction cost of all required improvements, including storm drainage system, erosion and sedimentation control measures, roads and pavements, sidewalks, and curbs, trees, plantings, grading, setting of monuments, and any other requirements made as a condition for Site Plan or Special Exception approval or depicted on the endorsed Final Plan, Plan and Profile, Erosion and Sedimentation Control Plan or any other plan as approved by the Commission.
b) Estimated costs shall be those that would allow for the Town advertising, bid evaluation, and awarding a contract for construction of the improvements along with the cost for engineering inspections of the construction.
c) Costs shall be projected to a point at the end of the Performance Bond term. Any extension of the term of the Performance Bond may result in an adjustment as to the bond total.
d) The total estimated cost of the Performance Bond shall also include a 10% addition to cover contingencies and Commission’s engineering. Per new statute.
e) Where a Site Plan or a Special Exception is to be developed in phases, the Applicant/Owner shall petition the Commission in writing for permission to post a Performance Bond covering the costs itemized in paragraphs (6.a) through (6.d) above, related to those improvements and utilities located within or required to serve one or more
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 7
phases rather than for the entire development. Similar permission shall be obtained by the owner prior to commencing development of any or all additional phases. Where the owner bonds in phases as authorized in this paragraph, no improvement, as that term is defined in these Regulations, shall be commenced in any phase for which no bond has been posted.
f) As used in these Regulations, the term “Performance Bond” shall refer to one of the following methods of assuring completion of Site Plan or Special Exception Improvements:
1) Cash in the form of a certified check, or a passbook, assigned to the Town by assignment forms prescribed by the Commission’s legal counsel. The issuing bank (“Surety”) shall be one maintaining offices in either Middlesex, Hartford, or New London Counties. The check must be issued to: Town of East Haddam, 7 Main Street, East Haddam, CT 06423. The amount of the performance bond must match the amount of the bond requirement set forth by the Commission.
2) A Letter of Credit in favor of the Town in the form prescribed by the Commission, after review by its legal counsel. Such Letter of Credit shall be issued only by a bank or comparable lending institution maintaining offices in the State of Connecticut and governed by the law of the State of Connecticut. The issuing bank (“Surety”) shall be one maintaining offices in Middlesex, Hartford, or New London Counties. The letter of Credit must be issued to: Town of East Haddam, 7 Main Street, East Haddam, CT 06423. The amount of the performance bond must match the amount of the bond requirement set forth by the Commission.
3) A surety bond that meet the following requirements:
A. The surety company must be rated “A” or above by Standard and Poor’s, Moody’s or equivalent rating agency and shall be one approved by the Commission based upon the current Department of Treasury Listing of Approved Sureties (Department Circular 570), with modifications based upon whether a particular surety company has previously failed to honor bonds presented by the Town of East Haddam in the past.
B. The surety company shall maintain permanent office within Middlesex, Hartford, or New London Counties of the State of Connecticut.
C. The performance bond must be issued to: Town of East Haddam, 7 Main Street, East Haddam, CT 06423
D. The amount of the performance bond must match the amount of the bond requirement set forth by the Commission.
E. The surety bond agreement shall contain the following provisions, at a minimum: (i) that payment shall be made in full within sixty-five (65) days of written demand by the Commission or its agent; and (ii) that failure to make full payment within such time shall automatically and without further demand result in a penalty of one (1%) of the total outstanding bond for each calendar month or part there of that such payment is delayed past the date of demand; and (iii) that if litigation is required to collect the said surety bond, the surety company shall pay to the Commission the costs and expenses of such litigation; and (*iv) the surety company shall agree to indemnify and hold harmless the Commission and the Town of East Haddam against any and all claims of damage or injury sustained upon, or as a result of, the incomplete public improvements during the period following the demand for payment on said surety bond, and for restoration of any damage or deterioration (including, but not limited to, erosion and sedimentation damages) resulting from such delay in payment; and (v) such other provisions as the Commission’s legal counsel shall require.
F. The performance bond shall not expire until the project completion date. For subdivisions, the performance shall not expire before the entire five-year period in which to complete the subdivision pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes Section 8-25 or the subdivision is completed and all public improvements accepted. If the subdivision approval is extended for an additional five year period under Connecticut General Statutes Section 8-25, the performance bond must be extended for that time period.
G. A sixty (60) day advance notice by the surety company of an expiration or non-renewal of the performance bond must be provided to the Town of East Haddam.
4) A restrictive covenant, in a form prescribed by the Commission’s legal counsel, to be filed on the Land Records of the Town of East Haddam, prohibiting the issuance of a certificate of occupancy of any building until such time as
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 8
all improvements are completed in accordance with these Regulations, or until the incomplete portions of such improvements are bonded by one of the methods in the preceding two (2) paragraphs.
The above referenced forms shall be as provided by the town and shall be the only ones acceptable to the Commission. The amount of the bond shall be the sum which the Commission shall require. The completion date of all required improvements shall be as required by the Commission, but in no event, longer than the period set forth in Chapter 126 of the Connecticut General Statutes.
For all performance bond documents: If the Applicant is a corporation, then the corporate seal must be shown in addition to the seal of the lending institution issuing the passbook assignment or Letter of Credit, and a corporate resolution must be provided indicating that the corporate officer executing the bond documents has authority to do so. If the applicant is a partnership, then a partnership resolution must be provided indicating that the partner executing the bond documents has authority to do so. Any corporation shall provide a Certificate of Good Standing from the Connecticut Secretary of the State; any limited partnership shall provide a Certificate of Legal Existence from the Secretary of the State; out-of-state applicants shall present evidence from the Secretary of the State that they are authorized to do business in Connecticut.
If at any time, the bond required by this Section shall not be in effect for incomplete or unaccepted improvements, the Commission may file a caveat on the Land Records warning potential purchasers of such fact; or may void the site plan or special exception following a public hearing with notice to the applicant and property owner(s).
2.9. Amendment. These Regulations, or the boundaries of any zone or district, may be amended by the Commission, after public notice and public hearing, in accordance with Section 8-3 of the General Statutes. Such amendment may be at the initiation of the Commission, or by the petition of any person. If petition shall be by any person, such petition shall be:
(a) In writing;
(b) Signed by the property owner or owners requesting such a change;
(c) Outline specifically, by map or otherwise, the boundary changes and/or text changes which are requested;
(d) Fee as presented in the Town of East Haddam Ordinance Book under Fee Schedule.
In addition to any other requirement contained in these Regulations, the Commission may require that the applicant provide additional information to establish that the proposed zoning regulation or zoning map amendment will protect or enhance the public health code, safety, and welfare. Such additional information may include, but is not limited to, the following:
For text amendment applications: Detailed or conceptual site plans of proposed uses, including points of access, proposed uses, and other information which depicts and details the nature of the use designation sought for the parcel in question, its density or intensity, and how it will be designed and built: where applicable, sample deed restrictions, easements, or other legal documents which would be used to implement any restrictions, proposed by the applicant, required to implement the development as proposed, or otherwise forming an inseparable part of the proposal; studies analyzing the potential impacts of the proposed change on the public health, safety, and welfare, such as traffic, environment, drainage, sewage disposal, water supply and quality, noise, dust, and similar impacts.
In approving any application for change of zone, the Commission may impose conditions or modifications which protect the public health, safety, and welfare, including on-or off-site improvements which will prevent, mitigate, or compensate for adverse impacts created, in whole or in part, by the development sought by the applicant; or may condition the approval upon the granting of other permits or approvals, or taking or other required actions, by other State or local agencies having jurisdiction. In the case of an affordable housing development sought pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes 8-30g, the Commission may condition the approval of any change of zone upon development in accordance with the requirements of that Section and with the applicant’s representations on the record relative to the proposed development.
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 9
SECTION 3 SEVERABILITY AND VALIDITY
3.0 Each and every separate part of the regulations adopted by this Commission is hereby declared to be separate from each and every other part, to the end that if any part should be declared invalid for any reason whatsoever, such decision shall not affect any other part of these regulations, which shall remain in full force and effect. This paragraph is intended to apply to the present regulations and previously adopted, and to all such additional regulations and amendments as this Commission may adopt from time to time in the future.
SECTION 4 EFFECTIVE DATE
4.0 These regulations are effective as of September 5, 1961. Revisions or amendments and their effective dates are indicated in each section, listed under the introduction, or noted in Appendix I.
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 10
SECTION 5 DEFINITIONS
5.0 Intent and General Rules of Construction. In the interests of clarity and brevity, the following terms shall, unless otherwise stated, have the meaning herein indicated for all the purposes of these Regulations. Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense. When the context so requires, words in the masculine, feminine, or neuter gender shall include any gender, and words in the singular or the plural shall include both singular and plural numbers. The underlined captions set forth in these Regulations are for convenience and reference only, and shall not be deemed to define or limit the provisions hereof or to affect in any way their construction or application.
Abutting: Separated by no intervening private property.
Accessory Building or Structure: Accessory Building includes buildings such as garages, sheds, gazebos, and barns. Accessory structures include swimming pools, detached solar panels, wind mills, and similar structures. Accessory buildings or structures shall be subject to the general requirements as to distance from the lot lines. Accessory buildings may be used for dwelling purposes provided that the total number of family units is not greater than permitted by these regulations and provided also that the living space, floor area and lot area per family unit shall not be less than permitted by these regulations. An accessory building includes a small building or cabin which is accessory to a commercial farming enterprise and which is used by one or more full time hired hands for sleeping only. In the East Haddam Village District, Accessory Buildings need not be located on the same lot as the Principle Building when both buildings are submitted as a single development proposal.
Accessory Use: A use, in addition to the principal use, which is clearly subordinate to, and customarily incidental to, and located upon the same lot as, the principal use. In the East Haddam Village District, Accessory Uses need not be located on the same lot as the Principle Use when both Uses are submitted as a single development proposal. Accessory uses, as defined in these Regulations, are permitted in all zones, provided, however, that if the principle use requires Site Plan Review, Special Exception, variance, or other review under these Regulations, then the accessory use will require the same review.
Agriculture: Means “agriculture” as defines in the §1-1(q) of the Connecticut General Statutes as amended: Except as otherwise specifically defined, the words “agriculture” and “farming” shall include cultivation of the soil, dairying, forestry, raising or harvesting any agricultural or horticultural commodity, including the raising, shearing, feeding, caring for, training and management of livestock, including horses, bees, poultry, fur bearing animals and wildlife, and the raising or harvesting of oysters, clams, mussels, other molluscan shellfish or fish; the operation, management, conservation, improvement, or maintenance of a farm and its buildings, tools and equipment, or salvaging timber or clearing land of brush or other debris left by a storm, as an incident to such farming operations; the production or harvesting of maple syrup or maple sugar, or any agricultural commodity, including lumber, as an incident to ordinary farming operation, or the harvesting of mushrooms, the hatching of poultry, or the construction, operation, or maintenance of ditches, canals, reservoirs, or waterways used exclusively for farming purposes; handling, planting, drying, packing, packaging, processing, freezing, grading, storing, or delivering to storage or to market, or to a carrier for transportation to market, or for direct sale any agricultural or horticultural commodity as an incident to ordinary farming operations, or, in the case of fruits and vegetables, as an incident to the preparation of such fruits or vegetables for market or for direct sale. The term “farm” includes farm buildings, and accessory buildings thereto, nurseries, orchards, ranges, greenhouses, hoop houses, and other temporary structures or other structures used primarily for the raising and, as an incident to ordinary farming operations, the sale of agricultural or horticultural commodities. The term “aquaculture” means the farming of the waters of the state and tidal wetlands and the production of protein food, including fish, oysters, clams, mussels, and other molluscan shellfish, on leased, franchised, and public underwater farm lands. Nothing herein shall restrict the power of a local zoning authority under chapter 124 of the Connecticut General Statutes.
Accessory Uses to Agriculture: The following activities are recognized as a normal part of agriculture uses and are therefore allowed as a Permitted Use: 1) retail sale of agricultural products produced on a Farm, including dairy products, vegetable, fiber, poultry, beef, and other customary, agricultural products. No less than twenty-five (25) percent of the products (both by volume and by product type) shall be raised or produced on the Farm. The maximum square footage of a Farm Stand, including both enclosed and outdoor display areas, shall be seventy-five (75) square feet for each acre of land on the same lot with the Farm which is under cultivation.
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 11
Other activities that may have greater public participation such as corn mazes, horse shows, seminars/meetings, a tasting or sampling room, on site tours for the public to see the operation or production of the product, training and lessons for individuals, public events (such as rentals for weddings, showers, etc.), and artist exhibitions shall require a Special Exception Review and approval as an accessory use by the Planning and Zoning Commission. Such activities are to be complementary and subordinate to the principal agricultural use. The Commission will be reviewing the proposed frequency of events, event traffic, parking, lighting, noise levels, and the sanitation facilities needed. The accessory activities may be permitted as a Special Exception provided the activity is in harmony with the surrounding properties with respect to scale and density of development, shall not depreciate surrounding property values, and shall blend with the historical character of surrounding buildings and landscape.
Aisle: The driving portion of the Parking Area. The aisle provides access to each Parking Space.
Acre: An acre shall be defined for these Regulations as an area of 43,560 continuous square feet of land.
Aggregate Maximum Lot Average The total acres to be sold as building lots divided by the number of such lots.
Alteration: As applied to a building or structure, means a change or rearrangement in the structural parts thereof, the movement of all or any part thereof, or the substantial reconstruction thereof, so as to produce a substantial change in appearance, character, or construction; also means an enlargement, whether by increasing in height, coverage, volume or floor area. As applied to a use, means a change or enlargement in the character, area occupied by, intensity, or scope of the use, including, but not limited to, the extension of hours of operation, the addition of other activities, equipment, functions, or processes, or the extension into additional land or building area.
Angled Parking: Any Parking Space that is not parallel to the curb or perpendicular to the Aisle.
Antiques Sales: Establishment engaged in selling goods or merchandise classified as antiques to the general public for personal or household consumption and render services incidental to the sale of such goods. Storage of antiques shall be confined to the interior of the designated building.
Attic: The space between the ceiling beams of the top story and the roof rafters.
Auto Court: A building or group of two or more detached or semidetached buildings containing rooms or apartments with automobile parking or storage space serving such rooms or apartments provided directly or closely in connection therewith, which buildings or group of buildings is designed, intended, or used primarily for the providing of sleeping accommodations for transient automobile travelers including buildings designated as auto cabins, motels, motor lodges and similar designations.
Awning: A roof-like cover that is temporary and collapsible in nature and that projects from the wall of a building for the purpose of shielding a doorway or window from the elements.
Basement: The floor in a building below the principal floor, having its lowest level wholly or partly below the finished grade adjacent to said building.
Barber Shop: Premises Used for cutting and dressing hair which is licensed under Chapter 386 of the General Statutes.
Bed and Breakfast: A building, or existing group of buildings, a portion of which is occupied by the owner thereof as a permanent residence, and which building(s) is/are designed or used for the short-term rental of not more than eight (8) guest rooms for 16 transient persons and limited to the first or second floor of the structure, and capable of, as an accessory use, the serving of breakfast and such related food service only, and exclusively to persons occupying the facility and their guests, and is subject to approval as a Special Exception Review and is permitted in the Residential Districts (R-4, R-2, R-1, R, R-1/2, & LR) and Commercial Districts (C-1, C-3, & C/B/IG) The provisions of the Special Exception Review in respect to Appropriateness of Use, Architectural Character, and Historic Preservation will be major components of any application.
Bedroom: Bedroom means those areas within a residential building that have the potential to be utilized as a sleeping area on a consistent basis. In order to be deemed a bedroom the room must meet all of the following standards:
1. Be habitable or planned habitable space per the Building Code requirements. Planned habitable space would include those areas which contain the appropriate “rough-in” mechanicals, such as, heating
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 12
ducts, hot water lines, plumbing waste lines, etc., but are not currently “finished” to meet Building Code requirements for habitable space.
2. Provide privacy to the occupants.
3. Full bathroom facilities (containing a bathtub or shower) are conveniently located to serve the bedroom served.
4. Entry is from a common area, not through a room already deemed a bedroom.
Beauty Shop: A Premises Used for hair dressing, facials, and manicures are done, including hairdressers and cosmeticians licensed under Chapter 387 of the General Statutes.
BMPs(Best Management Practices): structural, vegetative, or managerial practices designed to treat, prevent, or reduce degradation of water quality due to stormwater runoff and snow-melt.
Board: Wherever the term “Board” shall appear in these Regulations, it shall refer to the East Haddam Zoning Board of Appeals.
Boardinghouse: A building where lodging and/or meals for no more than four (4) persons are provided to long-term residents, only, for compensation, utilizing one central kitchen facility. A boardinghouse shall be occupied by the owner of the building, and all elements of the boardinghouse use shall be confined to the principal building on the lot.
Buffer / Buffer Strips Open spaces, landscaped areas, fences, walls, berms, or any combination thereof used to physically separate or screen one use or property from another so as to visually shield or block noise, lights, or other nuisance or serve as a filter to protect natural resources from potential adverse impact of adjacent land uses..
Building: Any structure having a roof and intended for shelter, housing or enclosure of persons, animals, or materials. Any other structure more than eight (8) feet high shall be considered a building, including a fence or wall, but excluding an electric transmission line, an electric light, power, or telephone pole, a highway or railroad bridge, or flagpole.
Building Area/Building Coverage: The area of the ground beneath a building (i.e., drip line), including the area of all covered porches, eaves, and similar roofed portions of the building.
Building Height: See Section 10.1.4,
Building Line: A line parallel to a street at a distance equal to the required front yard for the subject zone, or at a greater distance when otherwise established.
Building Official: The Building Official, also known as the Building Inspector, of the Town of East Haddam.
Building Permit: A permit for construction issued by the Building Official pursuant to the East Haddam Building Code and these Regulations.
Building, Principal: That single building, or inter-related group of buildings, in which is conducted the principal use of the lot on which the building is situated.
Building Supplies - Materials used for the construction and repair of structures. This does not include cement or asphalt plants or facilities that manufacture or produce raw supplies.
Building Trade: Persons who are involved in the construction, repair or supervises the construction or repair of structures.
Camper Coaches or Travel Trailers: Any self-propelled or portable unit, whether or not currently operable, originally designed and constructed to be mounted on wheels and to be used for recreation, travel, camping, vacationing, temporary office, or other shelter for one or more persons. [former Section 5.8, 10/15/69a]
Campground: A plot of ground used for recreational purposes which can accommodate camping units and accessory buildings in which individuals sites or locations are rented for a period of time to transient individuals or groups that primarily set up their own camping units is permitted. Campgrounds may conduct organized activities, including but not limited to recreational activities, sports, water-based recreational, “arts and crafts”, team building activities, outdoor pursuits, adventure-type activities, group activities, communal eating, and other activities associated with recreational camping.
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 13
Camping Unit: “Camping Unit” means a portable structure, shelter, or vehicle having a gross trailer area not exceeding 400 square feet designed and intended for occupancy by persons engaged in recreational camping. Camping units include but are not limited to recreational vehicles, recreational park trailers, camping cabins, housekeeping cabins, tents, tepees, yurts, and other rental accommodations that have no hard electrical wiring and permanent drainage plumbing.
Cemetery: Land used for the burial of the dead, and dedicated for cemetery purposes, excluding columbariums, crematories, mausoleums, and mortuaries, established and operated by an ecclesiastical society or cemetery association.
Child Day Care Services:
a. Child day care center: A facility which offers or provides a program of supplementary care to more than twelve related or unrelated children outside their homes on a regular basis for part of the twenty-four hours in one or more days in the week.
b. Group day care home - A residential home which offers or provides a program of supplementary care to not less than seven nor more than twelve related or unrelated children on a regular basis for part of the twenty-four hours in one or more days in the week.
c. “Family day care home” - A residential home which consists of a private family home caring for not more than six children, including the provider’s own children not in school full time, where the twelve hours during a twenty-four-hour period and where care is given on a regularly recurring basis. During the regular school year, a maximum of three additional children, shall be permitted, except that if the provider has more than three children who are in school full time, all of the provider’s children shall be permitted.
Club, Lodge, or Community House: Land, buildings and facilities owned or operated by a non-profit entity for a social, educational, or recreational purpose, to which membership is required for participation and not operated primarily for profit nor to render a service which is customarily carried on as a business.
Commercial Self-Storage Building: A commercial Principle Use where a Building is divided into individual spaces which are rented or otherwise made available to Persons for the storage of household, business, or other articles, but excluding the storage of any live animals, any explosive, toxic, radioactive, or hazardous substance; or any material which would require insurance at higher than standard commercial rates. All storage in a Commercial Self-Storage Building shall be fully enclosed within the Building. “See Warehouse”
The term “commercial” is used in order to create a clear separation between the use the committee is describing, and a business or homeowner that has a building for storage of its own materials. The essence of the “self- storage” use is that it is conducted as a commercial enterprise in its own right, and not as an accessory to some other existing use.
Note that the term “Person” is defined in this section to include corporations, partnerships, etc. Thus, the “person” renting a space at a “commercial self-storage building” could be another business, not just a private individual.
So a stable is not a “commercial self-storage building”, and neither is a chicken coop or pigeon coop.
Commercial Trailer: Any vehicle designed to serve exclusively as a temporary office or storage area for any construction project for which a building permit has been issued, for any period up to an including 18 months.
Commission: The Planning and Zoning Commission of the Town of East Haddam, Connecticut.
Conservation Area: Environmentally sensitive areas with characteristics such as wetlands, floodplains, unprotected elements of the natural landscape such as steep slopes, mature or productive forestland, contiguous open space or connective green belts, prime farmland, land that protects critical or threatened natural communities and species as identified by the Department of Environmental Protection, areas that have recreation value as recommended in the Recreation and/or Open Space Plan component of the Plan of Development, wildlife habitats, and cultural features such as historic and archeological sites, and scenic views.
Conservation Development A form of development that permits a reduction in lot area and bulk requirements, provided there is no increase in the number of lots permitted under a Conventional Subdivision, and the remaining land is devoted to open space, active recreation, preservation of environmentally sensitive areas, or agriculture.
Conservation Easement Conservation Easement shall mean the grant of a property right transferred to a non-profit or government entity where the landowner retains the legal title and all rights associated with the land except
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 14
where the land shall remain in its natural state and preclude future development as set forth in the standard “Conservation Easement” approved by the Town of East Haddam, including easements preserving agricultural and forestry rights.
Conservation Zone: is defined in Section 25-102e of the Connecticut General Statues as it now exists or may there after be amended. Such zone is governed by the standards promulgated by the Gateway Standards. See Section 9.9 and 10 of these Regulations.
Conventional Development A form of development that permits the division of land in the standard form provided by the Town for the District in which it is located, other than Planned Residential Development and Conservation Developments.
Country Inn: A building, a portion of which is occupied by the owner thereof as a permanent residence, and which building is designed or used for the short-term rental of not more than fourteen (14) guest rooms for up to 28 transient persons and limited to the first or second floor of the structure. Country Inn shall not include any facilities for cooking in rooms, but may include meals served by the owner to guests. Meals for dinner and Sunday brunch can be offered to the general public as an accessory use. A Country Inn shall be designed so that normal access and egress are from a centralized point, as distinguished from Auto Court. The application is subject to a Special Exception Review and is permitted in the C-1, C-3, R Districts. The provisions of the Special Exception Review in respect to Appropriateness of Use, Architectural Character, and Historic Preservation will be major components of any application.
Cul De Sac: A proposed street, or any extension of an existing street, or any combination or pattern of streets or extensions thereof having only one outlet to a through State or Town road.
Cutting, Commercial: Any cutting or removal of forest tree species which is not covered under the definition of non-commercial cutting contained in these Regulations.
Cutting, Non-Commercial: The cutting or removal of forest tree species on a lot for the purpose of preparing a site for the construction of a building or other structure, and/or cutting for customary maintenance and lot improvement. Sale of cordwood or other incidental forest products resulting from such non-commercial cutting shall not, in and of itself, constitute commercial cutting. The cutting of firewood for the personal consumption of the owner(s) of the lot shall also be deemed to be non-commercial cutting.
Development: Any man-made change to real estate, including but not limited to, the construction of buildings or structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations.
District: See “Zone.”
Drive-In: A use, or an establishment designed or operated for such use, where a patron is served while seated in an automobile parked in an off-street or on-street parking area.
Dwelling: Any building designed and/or used for human habitation.
Dwelling, Single Family (1-F): A single detached building on one lot used for residential purposes designed and/or used for occupancy by one family living independently of any other family on this same lot. See Section 10.2.3. Accessory Dwelling Unit.
Dwelling, two-family (2-F): A single detached building on one lot used for residential purposes designed and/or used for occupancy by two families living independently of each other.
Dwelling, three family (3-F): A single detached building on one lot used for residential purposes designed and/or used for occupancy by three (3) families living independently of each other.
Dwelling, four family (4-F): A single detached building on one lot used for residential purposes designed and/or used for occupancy by four (4) families living independently of each other.
Dwelling, multiple family: A single detached building on one lot, used for residential purposes designed and/or used for occupancy by five (5) or more families living independently of each other, having separate or joint entrances, services and facilities.
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 15
Dwelling Unit: One room, or rooms connected together, constituting a separate, independent housekeeping establishment for owner or renter occupancy, and containing independent cooking, sleeping, and toilet facilities.
Easement: A right, established in deed or other legal means, of one party to use a designated portion of a second party’s land for a specific limited purpose.
Earth Material Operations: Earth Material Operations shall include (1) Any operations involving excavating, grading, filling or removal of earth, sand, stone, gravel, soil, minerals, loam, fill, clay, peat moss, and any other earth products in the Town of East Haddam, and (2) The transportation of such products in such operations across private property located in the Town, regardless of weather the operation itself is within the Town or in adjacent Town. See Section 19 of these Regulations.
Enlargement, or to Enlarge: Any addition to the floor area of an existing building, an increase in the size of any other structure, or an increase in that portion of a tract of land occupied by an existing use. “To enlarge” is to make an enlargement.
Eightmile River Watershed: The Watershed is defined as all water and land surfaces that drain into the Eightmile River, the boundary of which is delineated on a map in Appendix X.
Erosion and Sedimentation Control Plan: A plan which sets forth measures to be undertaken for the control of erosion and sedimentation, in accordance with Section 14A.2.C of these Regulations.
Eaves: The projecting lower edge of a roof overhanging the wall of a building.
Extend, or to Make an Extension: An increase or amplification, as distinguished from establishment or inception. “Extension” shall be deemed to include the use of a non-conforming seasonal use, or the use of a seasonal cottage on a non-conforming lot, for year-round use; and any increase in the normal days or hours of operation, or any increase in the scope of services offered, of any non-conforming, non-residential use or land, buildings, or structures.
Family: (a) An individual, or two or more persons related by blood, marriage, or adoption, living together as a single housekeeping unit; or (b) A group of not more than five (5) persons, not so related by blood, marriage, or adoption, living together as a single housekeeping unit.
Farm: see Agriculture
Farm Stand: see Accessory Uses to Agriculture
Feed and Grain - Food for livestock, mixtures prepared for livestock
Fence: A structure for enclosure or screening, including a wall.
Finance, Insurance, and Real Estate (Fire): Establishments such as banks and savings and loans associations, investment companies, and offices for brokers and dealers of securities and commodities, insurance agents, and travel and real estate agents, and real estate developers.
Fire Marshall: The legally designated head of the East Haddam Fire Department or his authorized representative(s).
Flood (or Flooding): See Definition in Section 18.3.10 of these Regulations.
Floor Area: The sum of the areas of the several floors of a structure, as measured by the exterior faces of the walls, including covered porches and the like as measured at the exterior limits thereof, but excluding garage space which is in the basement of a building or, in the case of garage space which is accessory to a dwelling unit, is at grade.
Grade: The finished ground level adjoining the building at all exterior walls.
Grade Plane: A reference plane representing the average of the finished ground level adjoining the building of the exterior walls as measured at the corners. The lowest finished grade measurement shall be no higher than the existing natural grade. (The Commission will not consider platforms built above the natural grade as a valid low point measuring point)
Grocery: Establishment engaged in selling goods or merchandise classified as grocer items (food staples, meats, produce, dairy products, and the usual household supplies) to the general public for personal or household consumption and render services (such as butcher, baker) accessory the sale of such goods. “Grocery” may include, as an accessory use, the sale of sandwiches, soups, and other prepared foods for consumption off premises, provided:
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 16
(a) there is no seating or table space for patrons; (b) there is no separate entrance for such use; (c) the area dedicated to such use does not exceed 10% of the square footage of the grocery use.
Gross Floor Area: The total Floor Area of a Building, including those spaces excluded from the definition of “Floor Area.”
Habitable Space: Space in a structure for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, or sanitary facilities. Closets, halls, storage or utility spaces and similar areas are not considered habitable spaces.
Hardware: Materials such as tools, utensils, fittings, or cutlery.
Height, Story: The vertical distance from the top to top of two successive tiers of beams or finished floor surfaces; and, for the topmost story, from the top of the floor finish to the top of the ceiling joists or, where there is not a ceiling, to the top of the roof rafters.
Health Officer: The legally designated health authority of the Town of East Haddam or his authorized representative(s).
Home Occupation: Accessory uses of a building or lot which are carried on within a dwelling or an accessory building and which are: (a) permitted by Special Exception or as a matter of right under Section 27 of these Regulations; or (b) existing with the approval of the Planning and Zoning Commission under any provisions of these regulations in effect prior to the effective date of said Section 27; or (c) otherwise legally existing on the effective date of these regulations.
Hotel: A building or buildings designed and used primarily for temporary occupancy by short term rental of not less than six (6) rooms for transient persons. Hotels shall not include any facilities for cooking in rooms, but may include meals served by the owner to guests and the general public. A hotel shall be designed so that normal access and egress are from a centralized point. Rooms for public assembly, conference facilities and recreational facilities may be included. The application is subject to a Special Exception Review and is permitted in the EHVD High, Moderate, & Main Street Districts. The provisions of the Special Exception Review in respect to Appropriateness of Use, Architectural Character, and Historic Preservation will be major components of any application.
Illegal Use Of Land, Building or Structure: Any use, whether of a building or other structure, or of a tract of land; or, the erection of any building or structure, in/on which a violation of any provision of these Regulations has been committed or shall exist, or which use is not specifically listed as permitted in these Regulations. Such violation shall be determined as of the date of establishment of such use, as nearly as the same may be determined.
Impervious surfaces: Impervious surfaces are any paved, hardened or structural surfaces that substantially prevent the natural capture and storage of rainwater.
Inland Wetland: Those areas designated and defined as inland wetlands by the East Haddam Inland Wetlands and Watercourse Commission, pursuant to its Regulations, as the same may be amended from time to time.
Intermittent watercourse: An intermittent watercourse shall be delineated by a defined permanent channel and bank and the occurrence of two or more of the following characteristics: (a) evidence of scour or deposits of recent alluvium or detritus, (b) the presence of standing or flowing water for a duration longer than a particular storm incident, and (c) the presence of hydrophytic vegetation.
Invasive plants: Invasive plants are those listed on the most recent version of the Connecticut Invasive Plant List (as authorized by CT Public Act 03-136). Listed species as of January 2004 are found in Appendix IX.
Land-disturbing activity: A land-disturbing activity is any use or activity that causes significant changes in vegetation or soil structure. These activities may include, but are not limited to, grading, scraping, excavating, filling of land, clearing or cutting of vegetation, and any construction, rebuilding, or significant alteration of structures.
Landscaping and Landscaping Products: A use involving the sale of goods or merchandise classified as landscaping supplies to the general public for business or households use, and rendering services accessory to the sale of such goods. “Landscaping supplies” are those used to enhance the natural setting of a premise including the creation of lawns, walls, fences, patios, gardens, and the like using natural material such as trees, plants, shrubs, rock, soil, and wood chips and decorative features including sculptures, walkways, fountains, and outdoor furniture.
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 17
Light Industrial - light manufacturing; processing; assembly; storage or warehousing; product testing; research and development; laboratory; distribution; and accessory office and other uses customarily accessory to the principal use, provided, however, that this definition shall not be construed to permit any use which is dangerous by reason of fire or explosion hazard, injurious or detrimental to the community or neighborhood by reason of the emission of dust, odor, fumes, smoke, wastes, refuse matter, noise, vibration, radiation, or any other objectionable element. Further, no use within this definition shall be permitted to store, process, or otherwise locate or use any product or material except in an enclosed building.
Logging: See “Cutting”.
Live Theater Support Personnel (LTSP) Housing: Housing designed for congregate living arrangements to support the needs of a Live Theater.
Liquor Store: A place of business that primarily sells alcoholic beverages for off site consumption and licensed in accordance with Chapter 545 of the General Statutes.
Lot: One or more adjacent parcels of land under unified ownership, and separately described in a deed of record, which is occupied or capable of being occupied by one principal building and the accessory buildings or uses customarily incidental to it, including such open spaces as are required by these Regulations, and which, in addition, meets the minimum area, width, and other applicable requirements of these Regulations for the zone in which such parcel is located, or is a legal non-conforming parcel, as defined in these Regulations. In the case of multiple or two family dwellings, a group of buildings under the same ownership shall be considered as occupying the same lot. The term “lot” includes the terms “plot” and “parcel”, but those terms do not include the term “lot”.
Lot Area: The area of a horizontal plane bounded by the front, side, and rear lot lines.
Lot Coverage: The ratio between the Building Area and the Lot Area, expressed as a percent.
Lot Frontage: The lot line adjoining the street line.
Lot Impervious Surface Coverage: The ratio between the Building Area plus the Paved Area, and the Lot Area, expressed as a percent {i.e., (Building Area + Paved Area) / Lot Area = Lot Impervious Surface Coverage.}
Lot interior: A lot that does not have the required minimum lot width for the District as required in the Zoning Regulations but does have street frontage, and is situated generally behind a lot or lots fronting on the street. See Section 10.1.4.
Lot, Interior Access Strip: a fee simple parcel of land connecting an interior lot to the road frontage from which it obtained access. See Section 10.1.4.
Lot width: shall be measured at the required building setback line which line shall be measured parallel to and at the distance from the street right-of-way line which establishes the minimum required front yard.
Lot of Record: A lot for which a deed has been recorded in the office of the Town Clerk of the Town of East Haddam, which lot met the requirements of these Regulations and of the East Haddam Subdivision Regulations, as the same were in force at the time of such recording.
Lot Width: See Sections 10.1.1, 10.1.2, and 10.1.3 of these Regulations.
Lumber yard: A use where stocks of Building Supplies are kept for sale.
Manufacturing Buildings or land may be used and buildings may be erected or altered for the manufacture, processing, assembling, repair, remanufacture, or storage of products as long as such use is not dangerous by reason of fire or explosion hazard, nor injurious, noxious or detrimental to the community or neighborhood by reason of the emission of dust, odor, fumes, smoke, wastes, refuse matter, noise, vibration, or because of any other objectionable feature. Such uses shall be subject to approval of the Planning and Zoning Commission as a Special Exception.
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 18
Mean Roof Height: The average of the highest roof eave height and the height to the highest point on the roof surface, except that for roof angles equal to or less than 10 degrees, the highest surface of the eave shall be deemed to be the “mean roof height”.
Mill Shop: A building provided with machinery for manufacturing of finished building products such as custom windows, doors, and cabinets.
Minimum Lot Width: shall be measured at the required building setback line which shall be measured parallel to and at the distance from the street right-of-way line which establishes the minimum required front yard. For signage, see Section 12.3.12
Mixed Use: A development that provides multiple compatible Uses in close proximity to one another; and/or a land use pattern that seeks to increase concentrations of population and employment in well-defined areas with a mix of diverse and compatible land uses.
Museum: An institution devoted to the procurement, care, study, and display of objects of lasting interest or value.
Non-Conforming Building: A building legally existing on the effective date of these Regulations, which met all requirements of the effective date of these Regulations, which met all requirements of the Zoning Regulations then in force, if any there were, on said effective date, but does not meet the current requirements of these Regulations; or a building legally existing on the effective date of any amendment hereto which caused such building to cease to meet the requirements of these Regulations.
Non-Conforming Lot: A Lot of Record, subject to the requirements of Section 8.1 of these Regulations.
Non-Conforming Use: The actual use of land, buildings, or premises which is not a use permitted by these Regulations for the zone in which such use is occurring, but which was legally existing and conformed to all requirements of the Regulations then in force, if any, on the effective date of these Regulations or on the effective date of any amendment hereto which caused the use to cease to meet the requirements of these Regulations.
Nursery: Land or greenhouses used to raise flowers, shrubs, and plants for sale. See Greenhouse.
Observation Test Pit: A hole dug for the purpose of observing the depth to the seasonal water table, and the depth to ledge, below the existing natural grade of the land. Such Observation Test Pits shall be in accordance with the Connecticut Public Health Code, and the Technical Standards for Subsurface Disposal Systems published pursuant thereto, as the same shall be amended from time to time, and as the same shall be administered by the Town Sanitarian.
Occupy: To take possession or enter upon for the purpose using. When applied to a trailer or camper coach/travel trailer, to use for sleeping and dwelling purposes.
Off-Street Parking: Parking Spaces provided outside of the right-of-way of a Street
On-Street Parking: Parking Spaces provided within the right-of-way of a Street.
Parcel: Any contiguous piece of land, including one or more contiguous lots of record, unified under the same ownership, whether or not every said piece of land was acquired at the same time; excluding, however, any parcel which is a “lot”, as that term is defined in these Regulations.
Park: An area set apart for recreation of the public, to promote its health and enjoyment, and owned and operated by a public or non-profit agency; excluding, however, the term “Resort”, as defined in these Regulations.
Parking Area: That portion of a Lot set aside, marked, posted, or intended for parking, including total of circulation areas, loading and unloading areas, parking spaces and aisles, landscaped areas, bikeways, and walkways.
Parking Stall or Space: A space in which a single car is parked.
Parking Structure: A Building or Structure consisting of more than one level and Used as a Parking Area.
Paved Area: An area covered with an impervious material such as concrete, asphalt, packed gravel, or bituminous concrete to be used for the storage, passage, or conveyance of products, motor vehicles or pedestrians, including, but not limited to, streets, parking lots, driveways, loading areas, sidewalks, outdoor storage areas or impervious surface drainage swales.
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 19
Percolation Test Pit: A hole dug, and a test performed, to determine the permeability of soils for on-site effluent disposal. Such Percolation Test Pits shall be in accordance with the Connecticut Public Health Code, and the technical Standards for Subsurface Disposal Systems published pursuant thereto, as the same shall be amended from time to time, and as the same shall be administered by the Town Sanitarian.
Person: An individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, club, corporation, estate, trust, receiver, syndicate, or other entity or combination thereof.
Premises: Any lot or combination of contiguous lots held in single ownership, together with the development thereon; a condominium complex constitutes one premises.
Principal Use: The primary purpose or function for which a premise is used, designed, or intended to be used.
Professional Office: The place of business of a person engaged in any occupation, vocation, or calling, not purely commercial, mechanical, or agricultural, in which a professed knowledge or skill in some department of science or learning is used by its practical application to the affairs of others, either advising or guiding them in serving their interests or welfare, including, but not limited to, businesses in which the primary person providing the service is required by law to acquire a governmental license or permit as a pre-condition of activity.
Public: Used or controlled exclusively by any department or branch of a governmental unit; excludes clubs, associations, and other private entities which may serve a public purpose.
Public Facilities and Services: Any activity or use, carried out by the Town of East Haddam or its duly authorized agents, such as public utilities, refuse disposal areas, schools, pollution control plants, highway garages, Town Halls, Town Office Buildings and other similar uses.
Religious Use: A Building or Premises in which worship, ceremonies, rituals, and education pertaining to a particular system of religious beliefs are held.
Refuse: Waste, junk, garbage, debris, rubbish or trash, but not including sewerage collected or disposed of in facilities duly licensed by the State of Connecticut or any agency thereof.
Recreational Camp: Recreational camping shall include the following activities, when undertaken under the supervision of, and with support services provided by, paid staff members and conducted primarily for the enjoyment of persons who register for a term of occupancy: living in “cabins” or other structures for temporary periods, conducting organized camping activities, including but not limited to recreational activities, sports, water-based recreational, “arts and crafts”, team building activities, outdoor pursuits, adventure-type activities, group activities, communal eating, and other activities associated with supervised recreational camping, and shall include both over-night or day camping.
Resort: Buildings, structures, and land designed, arranged, and used or to be used for recreational, athletic, educational, or social activities on a non-profit or profit basis. “Resort” may include, as accessory buildings and uses, restaurants, banquet facilities, stables, meeting rooms, pavilions, houses of worship, lodging for transients, or other similar facilities for the use of persons attending principal resort activities. “Resort” shall not include carnivals, fairs, circuses, live concerts or shows, gambling, horse- or car-racing, or other special events advertised and open to the public at large, except as a Special Exception in accordance with Section 14B of these Regulations. (See Section 7.8 of these Regulations.)
Restaurant: The retail sale of food to the general public for consumption on the premises, with food service primarily to customers seated at tables or at counters in an enclosed building. A restaurant shall not include drive-in, window counter, or other outdoor service, other than outdoor tables.
Retail of crafts and products associated with East Haddam’s traditional agricultural heritage: A Principle use, or an Accessory Use to Farm, for the retail sale of hand-made products at least twenty-five (25%) of which shall be produced on the premises from raw material locally grown or produced, or comparable to raw materials available in East Haddam, such as wood, plants, plant products, minerals, clay, wool, natural dyes, or animal products. Such crafts and products may include, by way of illustration, ornamental planters, ornamental iron work, sign carving, and woodworking.
Right of Way: A servitude imposed by law or by convention, and by which one has a right to pass through the real property of another.
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 20
Seasonal: Any use of land, buildings, or structures which was originally designed or intended to be used exclusively during the 200-day period extending from April 15th through October 31st , and for which no approval required by these Regulations has been granted to permit year-round use.
Seasonal Cottage: A dwelling which was originally designed or intended to be used for residential purposes only during the 200-day period extending from April 15th through October 31st , and for which no approval required by these Regulations has been granted to permit year-round use. (See Section 7.27)
Service Building: A building housing separate toilet and bathing facilities for men and women and also having laundry facilities and a slop water closet.
Sign: Any structure, or part thereof, or any device attached to a building or structure or painted or represented thereon which displays or includes letters, words, symbols, trademarks or any other graphic representation which is in the nature of an announcement, direction or advertisement for commercial purposes or otherwise; similarly, any natural object, such as a tree, stone, or the earth itself, which is painted or arranged so as to represent or display any of the aforesaid graphic representations; any building feature, including roof lines which serve to identify the use or occupancy of any building or site through a recognized motif or symbol. The term “sign” shall not include the flag of any nation, state, or other political unit.
Sign face or Area: The plan defined by one continuous perimeter of that rectangle, triangle, or circle having the smallest area which encompasses all the lettering, wording, design, or symbols together with any background different from the balance of the wall on which it is located, if such background is designed as an integral part of and related to the sign. Such perimeter, however, shall not include any structural elements lying outside the limits of such sign and not forming an integral part of the display. For the purposes of these Regulations, two-sided signs shall be considered to have only one sign face.
Site: Same as lot.
Soil Conservation Service: The Soil Conservation Service of the United States Department of Agriculture, the Middlesex County Soil and Water Conservation District, the Agricultural Extension Service, or any comparable successor agency or agencies
Story: That portion of a building included between the upper surface of a floor and the upper surface of the floor or roof next above.
Story Above Grade: Any story having its finished floor surface entirely above grade, except that a basement shall be considered as a story above grade where the finished surface of the floor above the basement is:
1. More than 6 feet above grade plane.
2. More than 6 feet above the finished ground level for more than 50 percent of the total building perimeter.
3. More than 12 feet above the finished ground level at any point.
Street: An improved right-of-way or fee simple parcel of land accepted for public use by lawful procedure and suitable for vehicular travel; or a proposed street shown on a subdivision plan approved by the Commission.
Street Line: The line separating a street from the abutting non-public property.
Structure: Anything which is constructed or erected and the use of which requires more or less permanent location on ground or water areas to attachment to something having permanent location on ground or water areas, not, however, including wheels; an edifice or a building of any kind; any production or piece or work, artificially built up or composed of parts and joined together in some definite manner, including fences or walls in excess of eight (8) feet in height, a wharf or dock, an above-ground tank, or a detached solar panel.
Studio: The workshop of an artist, sculptor, photographer, or craftsperson.
Subdivision: The definition of the term “subdivision” as used in these Regulations shall be the same as that term is defined in the East Haddam Subdivision Regulations.
Tag Sale: The temporary use of land or the buildings thereon for the purpose of the public sale of personal household goods by the owner or resident thereof in conjunction with the cleaning-out or vacating of residential premises. In no way does the term “tag sale” encompass the sale of any goods brought to the premises for the purpose of public sale except where more than one family may cooperatively enter into such a sale at one location. The term “tag sale” shall include garage sale, yard sale, barn sale, attic sale, and similar term or activity.
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 21
Tavern: A Premises Used primarily for the serving of liquor by the drink to the general public and where food is sold as an Accessory Use to the Principal Use, and licensed under Chapter 545 of the General Statutes
Tract: See “Parcel”.
Tenancy: The use, possession, occupancy, or habitation of land or buildings, regardless of the legal form thereof, as a separate, identifiable residential or commercial use. In identifying and calculating the area of a Tenancy, the following factors shall be considered, but shall not be determinative: Partitions between uses within the same building with no connecting doorways or passageways; separate building with no common wall; separate name and signage for each use, differences in the type of products or services sold; separate business names, advertising, hiring, and management; separate property tax accounts with the Assessor’s Office; separate Federal and State taxpayer identification numbers; and separate corporate entities with different officers, directors and shareholders, and each with its own leasehold or other property interest. The purpose of this definition is to implement maximum square footage of each tenancy where the regulations require such limitations.
Theater, Movie: A Building or Premises Used for the showing motion pictures to the general public for an admission fee.
Theater, Live: A Building or Premises Used: For dramatic, dance, musical, or other live performances open to the general public for an admission fee.
Use: Any purpose for which a building, structure, or premises may be designed, arranged, intended, maintained, or occupied; or, any activity, occupation, business, or operation actually carried on in a building or other structure or on a lot or premises.
Warehouse: A facility whose predominant use in the storage, wholesale and distribution of manufactured products, supplies and equipment, but excluding truck terminals and bulk storage of materials that are explosive or that create hazardous or commonly recognized offensive conditions and whose structure is designed principally to accommodate such use. “Warehouse” shall also exclude so-called “self storage” facilities where storage is offered to the general public, as opposed to commercial and industrial patrons. See, “Commercial Self-Storage Buildings.”
Watercourse: Those areas designated and defined as watercourses by the East Haddam Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Commission, pursuant to its Regulations, as the same may be amended from time to time.
Watercourse Boundary: The boundary of regulated watercourses is determined by the established stream bank. Specifically, the boundary is located where the presence and action of water are so common as to produce soil and/or vegetation types which are distinct from that of the abutting upland.
Wetland: See “Inland Wetland”.
Wholesale Associated with a Farm: An Accessory Use on a Farm for the wholesaling of agricultural products produced on a Farm, including, but not limited to, dairy products, vegetables, fiber, poultry, beef, and other customary agricultural products; but excluding the sale of agricultural equipment, rendering of fat or lard, or other industrial processing of agricultural products not customarily carried on a Farm. The slaughtering of livestock and poultry, as an accessory use to a Farm, is permitted, provided that in normal operation all stock slaughtered is raised on the Farm.
Yard: An open space, other than a court, on the same lot with a building, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward, except for projections expressly permitted by Regulations.
Yard, Front: A yard between any building and the front lot line, extending the full width of the lot, measured by the minimum horizontal distance between any building and the front lot line; or, in the case of a corner lot, a similar open space extending along all streets. The front lot line shall be that property along an adjacent street, or on the side of the lot nearest to the street from which the lot obtains access.
Yard, Rear: A yard extending across the full width of the lot between the rear-most portion of any building and the rear lot line, measured by the minimum horizontal distance between any building and the rear lot line; or, in the case of a corner lot, a similar yard extending across the side of the lot opposite the street on which the building has its street address, or is otherwise the designated front of the lot.
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 22
Yard, Side: A yard between the side lot line and any building, extending on both sides of the lot from the front lot line to the rear lot line; or, in the case of a corner lot, a similar yard extending across the side of the lot opposite the street on which the building does not have its street address, or is otherwise not the designated front of the lot.
Youth Camp: Any parcel or parcels of land having the general characteristic of a camp as the term is generally understood, used wholly or in part for recreation or educational purposes and accommodating five or more children under eighteen years of age for a period of, or portions of, two days or more and including a site that is operated as a day or as a residential camp but excludes a Family Day Care Home, Group Day Care Home, or Day Care Center. Compare to "Camp Ground".
Zone: An area within which certain uses of land and buildings are permitted, certain others are prohibited, and certain others are designated as uses requiring a Special Exception or Special Permit from the Commission or the Board; yards and other open spaces are required; lot areas, building height limits, and other requirements are established; all of the foregoing being identical for all property located within the zone to which they apply.
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 23
SECTION 6 ZONING DISTRICTS AND ZONING MAPS
For the purpose of these Regulations, the Town is hereby divided into various types of Districts and Zones, and to be known, and designated as follows: See maps in Appendix V
RESIDENCE DISTRICTS
R-4 District R-1/2 District
R-2 District R District (Resort)
R-1 District L District (Lake)
COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
East Haddam Village District EHVD formerly C-1 District
C/B/IG District (Moodus Center Area) formerly C-2 District
C-3 District (Moodus Plains Road Area)
INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
IG District IG-1, IG-2, IG-3
C/B/IG District (Light Industrial)
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT
R & D District
ZONES
Conservation Zone
Flood Plain Zone
Eight Mile River Zone
6.1 The boundaries of the various districts/zones except as indicated in other parts of and amendments to these Regulations, are hereby established as shown on the map entitled “Zoning Map of the Town of East Haddam, Connecticut” dated September 1, 2016 and is hereby declared to be a part of these Regulations. Revised 2016
6.2 The district boundary lines are intended generally to follow the center lines of streets, and similar rights-of-way, rivers, lot lines, or Town boundary lines, all as shown on the Zoning Map; but where a district boundary line does not follow such a line, its position is shown on said Zoning Map by a specific dimension expression its distance in feet from a street line of other boundary or lot line as indicated.
6.3 In case of uncertainty as to the true location of a district boundary line in a particular instance, the determination thereof shall be made by the Zoning Enforcement Officer. An appeal may be taken to the Zoning Board of Appeals.
6.4 Conservation Zone In accordance with Section I of Public Act No. 73-349, as amended, “an act concerning the Preservation of the Lower Connecticut River Area”, the “Conservation Zone” is designated as shown on the Town of East Haddam, Connecticut, Zoning Map, dated February, 1966, as revised July, 1974. The “Conservation Zone” is in addition to and superimposed upon those zone(s) and district(s) into which the Town is divided under Section 6.0 of the East Haddam Zoning Regulations.
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 24
SECTION 7 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
7.1. Accessory Buildings or Structures: Accessory buildings or structures shall be subject to the height and yard requirements for the zone in which such building or structure is located. Accessory buildings may be used for dwelling purposes provided that the total number of family units is not greater than permitted by these Regulations for the subject zone, and provided also that the living space, floor area, and lot area per family unit shall not be less than permitted by these Regulations for the subject zone. In addition, occupancy of an accessory building which is accessory to a commercially-operated farming enterprise and which is used by one or more full-time hired hands for sleeping only shall be allowed, as per Section 10.1.4.9 of these Regulations.
Accessory Uses to Agriculture: The following activities are recognized as a normal part of agriculture uses and are therefore allowed as a Permitted Use: 1) retail sale of agricultural products produced on a Farm, including dairy products, vegetable, fiber, poultry, beef, and other customary, agricultural products. No less than twenty-five (25) percent of the products (both by volume and by product type) shall be raised or produced on the Farm. The maximum square footage of a Farm Stand, including both enclosed and outdoor display areas, shall be seventy-five (75) square feet for each acre of land on the same lot with the Farm which is under cultivation.
Other activities that may have greater public participation such as corn mazes, horse shows, seminars/meetings, a tasting or sampling room, on site tours for the public to see the operation or production of the product, training and lessons for individuals, public events (such as rentals for weddings, showers, etc.), and artist exhibitions shall require a Special Exception Review and approval as an accessory use by the Planning and Zoning Commission. Such activities are to be complementary and subordinate to the principal agricultural use. The Commission will be reviewing the proposed frequency of events, event traffic, parking, lighting, noise levels, and the sanitation facilities needed. The accessory activities may be permitted as a Special Exception provided the activity is in harmony with the surrounding properties with respect to scale and density of development, shall not depreciate surrounding property values, and shall blend with the historical character of surrounding buildings and landscape.
7.2. Auto Courts: No auto court shall be constructed or set up unless prior approval is received from the Commission as a Special Exception.
7.3. Buildable Area: For the purpose of determining minimum lot area or parcel size, maximum lot coverage, and maximum building coverage in all zones and districts, including floating zones, the following shall be excluded: the high water level of areas covered by water (such as lakes, rivers, streams, ponds and swamps), as opposed to areas designated as inland wetlands by the East Haddam Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations, but not covered by water.
7.4. Building Coverage: No building or buildings shall occupy in the aggregate a greater percentage of lot area than indicated under the heading “Building Coverage” in the tables applicable to the district or zone in which such building is located.
7.5. Camper Coaches or Travel Trailer: No camper or travel trailer shall be used as a permanent or seasonal dwelling unit.
7.6. Child Day Care Center - Subject to the approval of the Planning and Zoning Commission as a Special Exception following Site Plan Review and meeting the following criteria: (1) A minimum of one space for every three children shall be provided with a minimum of ten spaces provided for any site. (2) Site requirements should show access road and adequate loading and turn around area in the parking area. (3) If any nourishment is going to be provided it should be stated on the site plan. (4) Play area and accessory uses shall be located to the rear of the building and screened from the highway. (5) The site plan shall state all other uses. (6) Days and hours of operation shall be stated on the plan.
7.7. Commercial Radio and Television Towers: Commercial radio, television and radio towers, and other transmitting or relay antenna towers, and towers designed for wind energy conversion systems, when permitted, shall be set back from all abutting streets and adjacent properties a distance of not less than one and one-half times the height of the tower.
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 25
7.8. Conflicting Regulations: When any provision of these Regulations imposes more stringent requirements, regulations, restrictions, or limitations than are imposed or required by the provisions of any other existing ordinance, statute or law, or the approval of any other governmental agency, including other agencies of the Town of East Haddam, the provisions of these Regulations shall apply and govern.
7.9. Construction Prior to Adoption of Regulations: Nothing in these Regulations shall require any change in the plans, construction or designated used of a building for which the construction shall have been commenced prior to the adoption of these Regulations or of any pertinent amendment thereto, provided that such building shall be completed within one year of the adoption of such regulation or amendment.
7.10. Conveyance of Land: The Town Clerk shall be requested to promptly advise the Commission or its Zoning Enforcement Officer of any conveyance of land submitted to him or her for recording in which the grantor conveys less than the entirety of any tract or parcel than owned by such grantor. The designation by a landowner or any person, surveyor or official of portions of any tract or parcel as so-called separate “lots” shall be ineffective for the purposes of these Regulations with the exception of lots included in any subdivision plan which shall have been duly filed and approved by the Commission, or any lots exempt from the East Haddam Subdivision Regulations and complying in all respects with the requirements of these Regulations.
7.11. Corner Traffic Safety. On a corner lot, no wall, fence or other structure shall be erected and no hedge, shrub, tree or other growth shall be maintained between the building line and the street line so as to create a traffic hazard by obstructing the view. On a corner lot in any district hereafter designated as a residential district, no fence, wall hedge or other structure or planting more than three (3) feet in height shall be erected, placed or maintained within the triangular area formed by the intersecting street lines and a straight line joining said street lines at points which are fifty (50) feet distant from the point of intersection, measured along said street lines. When strict enforcement of this section would work genuine hardship upon the owner of a lot which may be legally used under all other provisions of these Regulations, the Zoning Board of Appeals may grant a variance to the extent that such variance does not create a public hazard. Such hardship must be substantial and not concerned merely with convenience or aesthetic preference. In all decisions under this section, the public interest shall be paramount.
7.12. Covenants Not Annulled: These Regulations are not intended, and shall be construed, to abrogate or annul any easement, covenant, or other private agreement which may touch and concern the land within the Town of East Haddam.
7.13. Division or Conveyance of Land: No lot or parcel of land, as defined in these Regulations, existing on the effective date of these Regulations shall be divided, nor shall any easement be granted to any private person, which has the effect of creating a new parcel which will be non-conforming under the provisions of these Regulations. Similarly, no lot or parcel shall be decreased in size, by sale, gift, devise, descent or otherwise, so that it or any part of it will be non-conforming under the provisions of these Regulations. (See Section 8)
7.14. Double Frontage. In the case of a lot with frontage on more than one street, a building or structure thereon shall be set back the required distance from each of said streets.
7.15. Frontage and Access - No building shall hereafter be built on any lot unless such lot has a frontage of at least twenty-five feet on either a public street, or, on a private street approved by the Commission to serve such lot as part of a subdivision approved pursuant to the East Haddam Subdivision Regulations; unless, in the case of a lot of record, it has an unobstructed easement of access or private right-of-way at least twenty-five feet wide to a public street. In the case of an existing lot, under separate ownership as of March 14, 1961, which has no frontage on a public street and which has access to a public street only by a private street which is less than twenty-five feet in width, and where the widening of such street would entail genuine hardship, the Zoning Board of Appeals may authorize the permit-issuing agent to waive the requirement as to the width of said road, but in no case shall such access way serve more than one single-family or one two-family residence or one non-residential building.
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 26
7.16. Group Day Care Home and Family Day Care Home - In residential zones subject to site plan review in Section 14A. Site plan should show parking, screening, and road access. Applicant shall follow the requirements of the Connecticut General Statutes Section 19a-77 as amended.
7.17. Home Occupations - shall be subject to processes set forth in Section 27 of these regulations.
7.18. Liquor Permits: (1) The following liquor permits are permitted in any district and/or subject to the State Liquor Commission approval; Temporary Permit for beer only, Charitable Organization Permit; Temporary Alcohol Permit; (2) Nightclub permits are prohibited in all districts and/or zones; (3) Additionally, the consumption of alcoholic liquors is addressed in Section 9 of these Regulations (Uses Permitted in Districts and Zones).
7.19. Lots in More Than One District: In the case of a lot lying in more than one district, the provisions of the less restrictive district may be applied for a distance of not over thirty feet into a more restrictive district, provided that such lot has frontage on a street in the less restrictive district. In any case in which the strict application of this thirty foot limitation would result in a substantial hardship, the affected owner may apply to the Zoning Board of Appeals for a variance as provided in the Connecticut State Statutes.
7.20. Minimum Floor Area: Every building designated or intended for human habitation, hereafter erected, moved or reconstructed, shall have living space according to Section 10.1 chart figures. Living space shall be included in the computation only if it has minimum headroom of seven feet, and where located above the first floor, only if accessible by a permanent inside stairway. Porches, basement rooms and any part below the grade, garages and other attached accessory structures shall not be computed in the living space.
7.21. Minimum lot width shall be measured at the required building setback line which line shall be measured parallel to and at the distance from the street right-of-way line which establishes the minimum required front yard. For signage, see Section 12.3.12
7.22. More Than One Principle Use: There may be more than one principle use in principle building in the R, C-1, 2, 3, IG and R&D Districts subject to the approval of the Planning and Zoning Commission as a Special Exception. [See Section 22 for addition regulation pertaining to towers]
7.23. Permitted Area, Yards or Lot Coverage; Building Projections. No building or structure shall be erected or enlarged except in conformity with the area, yards and lot coverage regulations for the zone in which the building or structure is located, except as provided in Section 8 (Conformance and Non-Conformance) of these Regulations. Nothing in these Regulations shall prohibit the projection not more than one foot into a required open space of pilaster, columns, belt courses, sills, cornices, or other similar architectural features, nor the planting or landscaping or such open spaces.
7.24. Permitted Uses: No building or structure shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed, or structurally altered in such a manner as to be designed, arranged, or intended for any purpose other than the uses permitted in the zone in which the building or structure is located, except as provided in Section 8 (Conformance and Non-Conformance) of these Regulations. Likewise, no parcel of land shall be used, designed, or arranged for any purpose other than the uses permitted in the zone in which that parcel of land is located, except as provided in Section 8 of these Regulations.
7.25. Prohibited Uses: Any use of land, buildings, or structures not specifically set forth in these Regulations as a permitted use, shall be deemed to be a prohibited use.
7.26. Resort Dimensions: Any resort hereafter established shall be located only upon a lot having a minimum frontage of two hundred (200) feet, a minimum depth of two hundred (200) feet, and such resort shall have no structure less than one hundred (100) feet from the center of any adjacent street.
7.27. Restoration of Unsafe Buildings: Nothing in these Regulations shall be construed to prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any part of any building or structure declared to be unsafe by the Building Official or where required by any lawful order.
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 27
7.28. Seasonal Cottage: Seasonal cottages or other seasonal dwelling or seasonal uses shall be occupied exclusively during the 200-day period extending from April 15th through October 31st
7.29. Special Requirements for Nursing/Rest Home: No home for the aged, nursing home, or rest home shall hereafter be established unless the lot area thereof shall be equal to at least 2,500 square feet per patient capacity and unless all buildings so used are not less than 100 feet from any property or street line.
7.30. Trailers. The trailer ordinances which were adopted by the Town of East Haddam at a Town Meeting held June 27, 1957 and amended at a Town Meeting held June 28, 1971, are hereby adopted into these Regulations and continued in full force and effect, in addition to other provisions of these Regulations relative to trailers.
7.31. Use Variance Prohibited: Pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes Section 8-6, as amended by Public Act 77-509, Section 5, the East Haddam Zoning Board of Appeals is prohibited from granting any variance which would permit a use in any zone not set forth in Section 9, Uses Permitted in Districts and Zones, as a permitted use in the subject zone. The term “permitted use” as used herein shall include a use which is permitted by special exception, site plan review, or permitted by right.
7.32. Waiver of Front Yard Setback: Where two or more occupied dwelling houses already stand on the same side of and face the same street, and wherever a new dwelling is to be erected on a site between any two such existing dwelling houses neither of which is more than seventy-five feet distant from the proposed new dwelling, the Zoning Board of Appeals may waive the required setback and front yard standards to such extent as to permit the new dwelling to be so located that its front yard will have a depth no less than that of the front yard of the adjacent dwelling which has the larger front yard or setback.
7.33. Yards and Open Space: Except as specifically provided herein, no part of any yard or open space required about any building may be counted as part of a yard or other space required for any other building.
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 28
SECTION 8 CONFORMANCE AND NON-CONFORMANCE
Intent. It is the intent of these Regulations to reduce all non-conforming uses, lots, buildings, and structures to conformity as quickly as possible and in no way to allow the extension or enlargement of the non-conformity unless specifically authorized in these Regulations. It is also the intent of these Regulations, however, to minimize undue hardship for those whose purchase, ownership, or use or property predated applicable provisions of these Regulations.
8.1. Existing Non-Conforming Lots:
8.1.1. No Increase in Non-Conformity. No lot or parcel shall hereafter be decreased in size, by sale, devise, descent, gift, or otherwise, so that it or any part of it, or so that any structure or building thereon, shall fail to comply with these Regulations or shall increase the extent of any non-conformity.
8.1.2. Use of Non-Conforming Lots, Merger. The construction of a permitted building or structure, or the establishment of a permitted use, on a non-conforming lot or parcel may be allowed by the Commission, following Site Plan Approval in accordance with Section 14A of these Regulations; provided, however, that whether or not any application for Site Plan Approval or any other type of permit has been sought, if title to a non-conforming parcel or lot, whether improved or not, was, at anytime after the adoption of zoning regulations in the Town of East Haddam (September 5, 1961), or is now, vested in any person(s) that own(s) any parcel or parcels of land contiguous to it, then so much of said contiguous land (including the non-conforming parcel) as is required to conform to these Regulations shall be deemed to be a single parcel for zoning purposes, and thereafter may not be divided, sold, transferred, or improved in any manner which would create or result in a non-conformity or in an increased or further non-conformity. In the event that all contiguous lands of said person(s) are together insufficient to meet the minimum requirements of these Regulations, than all said contiguous land shall be considered as a single non-conforming parcel for the purposes of this Section. The designation by a landowner or any person, including a surveyor or Town official other than the Zoning Enforcement Officer, of any one tract or parcel as so-called separate “lots” shall be ineffective for the purpose of these Regulations, with the exception of lots included in any subdivision which shall have been approved by the Commission under the Subdivision Regulations then in effect and duly filed with the Town Clerk.
8.1.3. Identification and Notice of Merged Lots/Parcels by Zoning Enforcement Officer: The Zoning Enforcement Officer identified in Section 2.1 of these Regulations is hereby authorized to undertake a program, as time and personnel permit, to systemically identify parcels and lots which have merged pursuant to the preceding Section 8.1.2 Upon determining that any parcel(s) and/or lot(s) have so merged, the Zoning Enforcement Officer may issue a written ruling to that effect to the owner(s) of record, which ruling shall advise the recipient of the right of appeal to the East Haddam Zoning Board of Appeals, per Conn. Gen. Stats. 8-6. Upon a failure to appeal such ruling to the Board within the Statutory time limits, or upon the affirmance of the ruling by the Board, the Zoning Enforcement Officer shall provide written notice to the property owner(s); and shall also use his/her best efforts to provide notice of merger of the subject lot or parcel to prospective purchasers. Such notice to prospective purchasers may be provided by amendment to the records of the Town Assessor, with the consent of the Assessor; by suitable notation in the records in the East Haddam Land Records; by notification of real estate professionals, land surveyors, engineers, and attorneys; and/or by any other means determined by the Zoning Enforcement Officer to fulfill the purposes of this Section. The absence of any such notice shall merely indicate that no determination has been made by the Zoning Enforcement Officer, and shall not be deemed to be evidence that any lot or parcel has not merged with any other lot or parcel. In the absence of any ruling under this Section, any property owner may request such ruling and the Zoning Enforcement Officer shall comply with such request as time permits.
8.1.4 More Than One Dwelling On A Parcel. In any situation in which there are two (2) or more dwellings on one parcel of land, both or all of which have existed prior to March 14, 1961, which are so situated that they cannot be sold separately in conformity with these Regulations as to lot areas and other requirements, the Commission may, by Special Exception pursuant to Section 14B of these Regulations, permit the separate sale of such dwellings; provided, however, that such division provides adequate provision of water and effluent disposal, in compliance with the State Health Code, as the same may be amended from time to time, and provided further that all standards set forth in Section 14B of these Regulations are met.
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 29
8.1.5 Voluntary Merger of Lots Separated by a Street or Other Roadway
The Commission may by Special Exception Application in accordance with Section 14B of these Regulations, permit the merger of Lots or Parcels which are separated only by a Street (as defined in Section 5 of these Regulations as a public highway) or by a private roadway, specifically including roadways located upon rights of way or owned in fee simple by a public or private entity. Such merger may be allowed in conformance with the procedures and standards of Section 14B and, in addition, the following requirements:
a) The lots or parcels to be merged shall have at least twenty-five (25) feet of their respective frontages directly opposite each other, separated only by the intervening Street or other roadway.
b) For purposes of determining compliance with the Schedule of Conforming Lots and Buildings in Section 10 of these Regulations, the following shall apply:
i) The required side and rear yards setbacks of Section 10 shall apply to the side and rear lots lines of both lots or parcels individually, notwithstanding their merger.
ii) The required front yard setbacks of Section 10 shall apply to the side of each lot or parcel having frontage on the intervening Street or other roadway.
iii) For new construction, the maximum Lot Coverage and maximum Lot Impervious Surface Cover of Section 10 shall be applied to the entire, merged parcels; provided, however, that neither of the component lots or parcels shall exceed 25% Lot Coverage nor 45% Lot Impervious Surface Cover.
iv) For the purposes of implementing and enforcing these provisions, the map or plan of the proposed merger shall depict the Street or roadway and its boundaries; the area of the individual component lots or parcels and their cumulative area; the setbacks required by this Section, and other information in order to conform compliance with the provisions of these Sections.
c) Upon approval of a merger in accordance with this Section, the applicant shall file a Declaration of Covenants and Restrictions, in a form acceptable to the Commission’s legal counsel, which shall prohibit, in perpetuity, the severance of title of the merged lots or parcels, or any reduction in the area thereof, without the prior approval of the Commission as a modification of the Special Exception.
f) The Commission may impose additional conditions, or may modify any proposed merger under this Section, where the Commission deems such conditions or modifications to be necessary for the public health, safety, and welfare and to further the purposes of these Regulations as contained in Section 1. Such conditions and modifications may include, but are not limited to: limitations on building height below those permitted in the subject zone; limitation of the number or size of accessory buildings; limitation of the size of the principal building; limitation on curb cuts or relocation thereof; improvements to sight lines or the existing Street or roadway; buffering or screening from adjoining properties by landscaping, fencing, berms, or other measures; installation, elimination, or modification of lighting; and submission of easements or other documents to confirm the rights for utilities to cross the intervening Street or roadway.
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 30
8.2. Non-Conforming Uses:
8.2.1. No Extension or Enlargement. Any Non-Conforming use, as defined by these Regulations, shall be permitted to continue, notwithstanding any other provision of these Regulations or any amendment hereof, provided, however:
a). Such use was lawfully existing at the time of its establishment, and has not been abandoned, as defined herein.
b). Such use shall not be enlarged or extended, as those terms are defined in these Regulations;
c). Such use shall not be altered, as that term is defined in these Regulations, in such manner as to increase the non-conformity of such use.
d). No non-conforming use shall be moved to any portion of a building, structure, or any part of a parcel of land where such use did not previously exist.
8.2.2. Restoration and Repair of Buildings Containing Non-Conforming Use. A building or structure containing a non-conforming use may be altered or improved, but not extended or enlarged, and may be repaired or reconstructed as made necessary by normal wear and tear or deterioration. Any building or structure containing a non-conforming use, which has been destroyed or damaged by fire, explosion, flood, or any act of God or public enemy may be restored to the same dimensions, floor area and cubic volume lawfully existing immediately prior to such damage or destruction, provided such restoration is completed within three (3) years of such damage or destruction.
8.2.3. Substitution. Any non-conforming use may be replaced with another non-conforming use, as a Special Exception in accordance with Section 14B of these Regulations, provided that such replacement use is consistent with the public health, safety and welfare; with the character of the neighborhood, adjacent properties and zones; with the appropriate and orderly development of the neighborhood, adjacent properties and zones, in terms or parking, volumes and types of traffic, property values, hours of operation, exterior appearance of the building, structure, or lot, or any other factors to be considered by the Commission pursuant to Section 14B of these Regulations.
8.2.4. Abandonment by Non-Use or Change or Use. Any non-conforming use shall lose its non-conforming status and shall thereafter conform to these Regulations if said use ceases for a period of three (3) years or more, or if it is altered to a conforming use. Such period of cessation, unless extended as provided herein, shall constitute conclusive evidence of an intent to abandon the non-conforming use by the owner or operator thereof. For any non-conforming use which has ceased operation or existence for any period of time, the Zoning Enforcement Officer may require evidence that the use was in fact carried on within the said three-year period prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Zoning Compliance. Refusal or granting of such a Certificate of Zoning Compliance. Refusal or granting of such a Certificate may be appealed by any aggrieved party to the Zoning Board of Appeals, as provided by State Statutes.
8.2.5. Voluntary Abandonment. A person who has the right of re-establishment or reconstruction as provided in this Section 8 may elect voluntarily to abandon such right, in which case the right shall cease to exist. Such abandonment must be evidenced by a document filed in the Land Records of the Town of East Haddam.
8.3. Non-Conforming Buildings and Structures;
8.3.1. No Enlargement or Alteration. Any non-conforming building or structure existing as the effective date of these Regulations shall be permitted to continue notwithstanding any provision of these Regulations or any amendment hereof, provided, however, that such non-conforming building or structure shall not be enlarged or altered in such manner as to increase the non-conformity of such building or structure.
8.3.2. Restoration and Repair of Non-Conforming Buildings and Structures. Nothing in these Regulations shall be deemed to prohibit the repair and maintenance of a non-conforming building or structure, provided such repairs or maintenance do not increase the non-conformity of such building or structure. Any non-conforming building or structure which has been destroyed or damaged by fire, explosion, flood, or any act of God or public enemy may be restored to the same dimensions, floor area, cubic volume, density, and site location as existing
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 31
immediately prior to such damage or destruction, provided such restoration is completed within three (3) years of such damage or destruction.
8.4. Illegal Use. Nothing in these Regulations, including the provisions of this Section 8, shall be interpreted as authorization for or approval of the continuation of the use of land, buildings or structures which are in violation of any zoning regulations in effect prior to the effective date of these Regulations.
8.5. Special Exceptions and Variances. Nothing in these Regulations or any amendment hereof, nor any change in zoning classification, shall be deemed to require any change in the plans, construction, or designated use of any building, structure, or property for which a Site Plan Approval, Special Exception, or variance has been obtained and filed as required by these Regulations or the Connecticut General Statutes, as the case may be, prior to the effective date of these Regulations or such amendment or change in zoning classification, provided, however, that the construction of said building or structure, or the start of the establishment of such use, shall have been completed within three (3) years from the issuance of such Site Plan Approval, Special Exception or variance. No extension of the above time periods may be issued by the Zoning Board of Appeals or the Commission.
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 32
SECTION 9 USES PERMITTED IN DISTRICTS AND ZONES
Intent: No building or structure shall be erected, moved, converted, enlarged or altered, nor shall any building or structure or land be used for any purpose other than the uses permitted in the districts or zones in which the building, structure or land is located, except as provided in Section 9 of these regulations. (Non-conforming lots Section 8 of these regulations.)
9.1. Flood Plain Zone
9.1.1. Agriculture, farming
9.1.2. Parks and playgrounds operated by a governmental unit, non-profit corporation, or community association.
9.1.3. Accessory uses customarily incidental to a permitted use on the same lot; except home occupation in accordance with Section 9.1.8.
9.1.4. Dwelling, single family, subject to the approval of the Commission as a Site Plan Review and with additional criteria as found in Section 18.
9.1.5. Parking area, Commercial, subject to the Commission approval as a Site Plan Review and with additional criteria as found in Section 18.
9.1.6. Aircraft landing field, subject to the Commission approval as a Special Exception and with additional criteria as found in Section 18.
9.1.7. Marina, subject to the Commission approval as a Special Exception and with additional criteria as found in Section 18.
9.1.8. Customary Home Occupation, subject to the Commission approval as a Special Exception and with additional criteria as found in Section 27.
9.1.9. Retail Trade of Marine Craft, Aircraft and Accessories subject to the Commission approval as a Special Exception and with additional criteria as found in Section 18.
9.1.10. Public Facilities and Services, subject to the approval of the Commission as a Special Exception and with additional criteria as found in Section 18.
9.1.11. Tag Sales, subject to the requirements as found in Section 9.2.15.1 through 9.2.15.5.
9.2 Uses Permitted in Residence, R-4, R-2, R-1, R-1/2 Districts.
9.2. Uses Permitted in Residence, R-4, R-2, R-1, R-1/2 Districts
9.2.1 A Single Family Dwelling, except for conversion to year-round dwellings of seasonal cottages which are non-conforming lots, which conversion shall be subject to Section 24 of these Regulations.
9.2.2 A dwelling for two, three or four families in accordance with the following table:
Note: 2-F = two family dwelling, 3-F = three family dwelling, etc.
R-1/2 R-2
2 - F = 1 acre 2-F = 4 acres
3 - F = 1-1/2 acres 3-F = Not Permitted
4-F = 2 acres 4 - F = Not Permitted
R-1 R-4
2-F = 2 acres 2-F = 8 acres
3-F = Not Permitted 3-F = Not Permitted
4-F = Not Permitted 4-F = Not Permitted
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 33
All 2, 3, and 4 dwellings units require Special Exception approval in accordance with Section 14B of these Regulations.
All accessory dwelling units require a Special Exception Review. See Section 10.2 – Accessory Dwelling Units
Existing interior lots require double the acreage of the underlying district.
Examples of minimum acreage requirements
Frontage lot R-1 District Single Family Dwelling = 1 acre, Two Family Dwelling = 2 acres
Existing Interior lots Single Family Dwelling = at least 2 acres, Two Family Dwelling = at least 4 acres]
9.2.3. Home Occupations - shall be subject to processes set forth in Section 27 of these regulations.
9.2.4. The letting of rooms or furnishing of board by the resident of the premises to not more than four persons provided that no accessory building is used for this purpose.
9.2.5. Educational, religious or philanthropic use by a non-profit corporation or government unit. Such use shall be subject to approval of the Planning and Zoning Commission as a Special Exception.
9.2 6. A bonafide club, lodge or community house not operated for profit. Such use shall be subject to approval of the Planning and Zoning Commission as a Special Exception.
9.2.7. Accessory uses customarily incidental to a permitted use on the same lot, including buildings used for permitted home occupations (Section 27.2.3). Accessory buildings may be used for dwelling purposes provided that the total number of family units is not greater than permitted by these regulations and provided also that the living space, floor area and lot area per family unit shall not be less than permitted by these regulations.
9.2.8. Parks and playgrounds operated by a governmental unit, non-profit corporation or community association.
9.2.9 Agriculture and farming provided that all buildings designed for those uses shall be built not less than one-hundred (100) feet from the street line and seventy-five (75) feet from the nearest line of a lot under separate ownership.
9.2.10 – Farm and garden produce: The display and sale of farm and garden produce raised on a residential property. For such purposes one stand not over two-hundred (200) square feet in area and not more than two signs aggregating not over twelve (12) square feet in area advertising such produce may be erected. Such stand or signs shall be on the premises and not less than ten (10) feet from any street line.
9.2.11. A cemetery established and operated by an ecclesiastical society or cemetery association located in Town. Such use shall be subject to approval of the Planning and Zoning Commission as a Special Exception.
9.2.12. Home for the Aged, Nursing Home, Rest Home. Such use shall be subject to approval of the Commission as a Special Exception.
9.2.13. Public facilities and services. Such use shall be subject to the approval of the Planning and Zoning Commission as a Special Exception.
9.2.14. Historical Park. Such use shall be subject to a special permit under Section 16 of these regulations.
9.2.15. Tag Sales
1. Such a sale shall: total no more than 8 days per owner in one calendar year; and occur no more than 4 times per owner in one calendar year.
2. Any sale exceeding these limits shall be considered a permanent business and subject to all regulations regarding such.
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 34
3. Signs advertising tag sales are subject to Section 12.1.2 of the East Haddam Zoning Regulations and Section 23-65(a) of the State of Connecticut Statutes. Signs shall indicate the dates of sale and shall be removed upon termination of the sale.
4. Permits for such a sale shall be obtained from the Zoning Enforcement Officer and such application shall outline off-street parking which is mandatory. No fee is to be charged.
5. These regulations regarding tag sales are not intended to limit the duration of frequency of religious, fraternal, or other non-profit organization’s sales, bazaars, auction, etc. for the purpose of raising funds. State tax laws shall apply.
9.2.16. Private Schools: subject to the approval of the Planning and Zoning Commission as a Special Exception.
9.2.17. Kennel, Commercial, subject to the approval of the Commission as a Special Exception, and subject to the additional requirements that all structures be located at least 100 feet from the street line and 100 feet from the nearest lot line under separate ownership.
9.2.18. Veterinary Clinic or Hospital. Subject to approval of the Commission as a Special Exception, and subject to the following additional requirements.
a). Minimum 250’ frontage and access to and exit from the Veterinary facility must be on State maintained highway with a minimum paved width of 24’, and that the lot contain at east 5 acres. Maximum building coverage 5%.
b). All structures be located at least 100’ from all lot lines.
c). That at least one parking space be provided for every 150 square foot of building area.
d). If kennel facilities are going to be offered to healthy animals, the applicant must also apply and obtain approval under Section 9.2.17.
e). If outdoor runs are proposed for animals under treatment, allowable hours are from 8:00 A.M. to 6:00 P.M.
f). The volume of noise shall be so controlled as to prevent objectionable and excess noise emanating from the premises.
g). The applicant must be a Connecticut State Licensed Veterinarian, and furnish the Commission with proof of a State license to operate a Veterinary Clinic or Hospital.
h). A suitable buffer strip for purposes of visual and auditory screening shall be provided. Normally, this would be a strip of 100 feet from the nearest public highway or land under other ownership, but in cases where there is natural or planned screening, a narrower strip may be adequate.
9.2.19. Bed & Breakfast: Subject to Special Exception Review in the R-4, R-2, R-1, R-1/2, R, LR, EHVD, C-3, & C/B/IG See Section 5
9.3. R District (Resort)
9.3.1. Any use permitted in other Residence Districts except that no activity which gives rise to objectionable smells shall be conducted between June 15th and September 15th.
9.3.2. Resorts as defined in these regulations. Use shall be subject to approval of the Planning and Zoning Commission as a Special Exception.
9.3.3. Auto courts as defined in these regulations.
Such use shall be subject to approval of the Planning and Zoning Commission as a Special Exception.
9.3.4. Campground. Such use shall be subject to the approval of the Planning and Zoning Commission under Section 15 of these regulations.
9.3.5. Public Facilities and Services. Such use shall be subject to the approval of the Planning and Zoning Commission as a Special Exception.
9.3.6. Planned Recreational Development. Such use shall be subject to the approval of the Planning and Zoning Commission under Section 17 of these regulations.
9.3.7 Sale of Alcoholic Liquor For On-Premises Consumption, as an accessory use, by Special Exception approval of the Commission.
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 35
9.3.8. Studios and Associated Shops - To be used by craftspeople for the production and sales of, and classes in, handmade arts and crafts. Such use shall be subject to the approval of the Planning and Zoning Commission as a Special Exception.
9.3.9. Bed and Breakfast: Subject to Special Exception Review - See Section 5
9.3.10. Country Inn: Subject to Special Exception Review - See Section 5
9.4. Uses Permitted in Residence L District (Lake)
9.4.1. Dwelling, single family. Subject to Commission approval as a Site Plan Review.
9.4.2. Dwelling, seasonal cottage, as defined in these regulations. Such use shall be subject to the approval of the Commission as a Site Plan Review.
9.4.3. Dwelling, two family. Subject to the approval of the Commission as a Special Exception Review and with the additional requirement that the subject parcel be two acres in area.
9.4.4. Home Occupation - Home Occupations shall be subject to processes set forth in Section 27 of these regulations.
9.4.5. Letting of rooms or furnishing of board by the resident of the premises to not more than four persons provided that no accessory building is used for this purpose.
9.4.6. Educational, religious or philanthropic use by non-profit corporation or governmental unit. Such use shall be subject to the approval of the Commission as a Special Exception.
9.4.7. A bonafide club, lodge or community house not operated for profit. Such use shall be subject to the approval of the Commission as a Special Exception.
9.4.8. Parks and playgrounds operated by a Governmental unit, non-profit corporation or community association.
9.4.9 – Agriculture and farming provided that all buildings designed for those uses shall be built not less than one-hundred (100) feet from the street line and seventy-five (75) feet from the nearest line of a lot under separate ownership.
9.4.10 – Farm and garden product: The display and sale of farm and garden products raised on a residential property. For such purposes one stand not over two-hundred (200) square feet in area and not more than two signs aggregating not over twelve (12) square feet in area advertising such produce may be erected. Such stand or signs shall be on the premises and not less than ten (10) feet from any street line.
9.4.11. Cemetery established and operated by an ecclesiastical society or cemetery association located in Town. Such use shall be subject to approval of the Commission as a Special Exception.
9.4.12. Home for the Aged, Nursing Home, Rest Home. Such use shall be subject to approval of the Commission as a Special Exception.
9.4.13. Public Facilities and Services. Such uses shall be subject to the approval of the Commission as a Special Exception.
9.4.14. Historical Park. Such use shall be subject to a Special Permit under Section 16 of these regulations.
9.4.15. Tag Sales. Subject to the requirements as found in Section 9.2.15.
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 36
9.4.16. Seasonal commercial uses are permitted as a Special Exception of the Commission. The rental of rowboats and canoes, summer camps, commercial enterprises of a seasonal nature such as gift shops, souvenir shops, soda fountains and refreshment stands.
Additional Requirements:
9.4.16.1. The rental of boats, soda foundations, and refreshment shops and variety or general stores are the only seasonal commercial uses permitted.
9.4.16.2. No seasonal or other commercial uses are permitted within 2500 feet of another seasonal or commercial uses.
9.4.17. Accessory uses with the exception of those to be used for dwelling purposes.
9.4.18. Bed and Breakfast: Subject to Special Exception Review See Section 5
SECTION 9.5 East Haddam Village District (Formerly the C-1 District and areas of R-1)
9.5.1 Boundaries The East Haddam Village District is defined as follows;
Southern Boundary
Beginning at a point on the southerly side of the property now or formerly identified as Assessor’s Map 17, Lot 8 at the Connecticut River, thence crossing easterly along the property line and across Lumberyard Road and including the properties that front Lumberyard Road and crossing Whippoorwill Terrace. The line continues south on Whippoorwill Terrace and includes the southern edge of a property identified as Assessor’s Map 17, Lot 77.
Eastern Boundary
Continuing at the southeast point of Assessor’s Map 17, Lot 77, the line runs north and includes the properties that front Whippoorwill Terrace and Creamery Road. The line follows the eastern edge of Assessor’s Map 17, Lot 48 until it reaches Ray Hill Road, then continues north to the intersection of Ray Hill Road and Norwich Road. The line moves across the street and southwest behind the properties fronting Norwich Road and crossing west on the north side of a property identified as assessor’s Map 17, Lot 37. The eastern border continues north along the backside of the lots fronting Main Street until the line meets Bonfoey Road. The line runs east along Bonfoey to the intersection of Bonfoey and Porges Road and continues north along Porges Road until it crosses Porges Road and runs behind the first four properties on Landing Hill Road.
Northern Boundary
From the Northeast point of the fourth property, now or formerly identified as Assessor’s Map 26, Lot 28, up Landing Hill Road the line runs directly west across Landing Hill Road and Route 149 to the Connecticut River.
Western Boundary
The line runs south from the above point along the Connecticut River to the original start point.
Please refer to the map entitled East Haddam Village District to determine the Sub-sets of the village.
9.5.2 Description of East Haddam Village
East Haddam Village was originally settled as two separate villages, Goodspeed Landing and Upper Landing, which competed for commercial enterprises. Historically, the area has always supported mixed/commercial/residential use and was the location of ship building yards, docks, lumberyards, and warehouses as well as stores, shops and residences. Overtime, the separate villages grew together as one and the village supported mills along Lumberyard and Creamery Roads and east up Succor Brook to Boardman Road, and a large music school (Maplewood). Hotels and banks grew up around the merchant activity along the river as steamships and trains brought commerce, visitors
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 37
and new residents to town. Ferry service operated between Haddam and East Haddam until the opening of the Swingbridge in 1913. The village once supported two local schoolhouses, and several churches and meeting halls. Many of East Haddam’s influential families built grand houses in the Village District. With the decline of the river based commerce and the decline of the mills, the village, while still encouraging mixed use, went through a period when it was more residential in character. Today, with the resurgence of the Opera House and the Gelston House, the village is poised to once again become an area of vibrant economic and cultural activity.
Architecturally, the village reflects its long history including within mill buildings, framed sheds and outbuildings, and more formally, Federal, Georgia, and Greek revival, various Victorian styles (Second Empire, Carpenter Gothic, Italianate) and contemporary post World War II structures. Many structure exhibit characteristics from several periods. Archaeologically, the village retains evidence of its history in the extensive underground storm drains in the upper landing area, and the many dry rock walls and foundations of former structures which indicate that the village was more densely populated in the past.
East Haddam Village is situated on the east bank of the Connecticut River south of the mouth of the Salmon River and just north of Chapman’s Pond. The Village is framed to the east by steep hills and the property from the east shore of the Connecticut River to the peaks of these hills is part of the Connecticut River Gateway Conservation Zone. This Conservation Zone consisting of 25,000 acres spread over eight towns was created to protect the natural, historic, and aesthetic values of the lower Connecticut River Valley. The lower Connecticut River is part of one of the richest and most complex ecological systems in the northeastern Untied States. In 1993, the International Chapter of the Nature Conservancy designated the Lower Connecticut River Tidelands as one of the “Last Great Places” in the world. The Lower Connecticut River area was designated at The Ramsar Convention as a “Wetlands of International Importance”, and especially important for migratory waterfowl habitat and bald eagles. In 1998, the US Fish and Wildlife also designated the Connecticut River and its tributaries as the Silvio O. Conte National Fish and Wildlife Refuge. The United States Council on Environmental Quality selected the Connecticut River as one of the ten “American Heritage Rivers” in the United States. The multiple designations awarded to this watershed area emphasize the unique and abundant natural resources around East Haddam Village.
9.5.3 Intent
These regulations shall protect the distinctive character, landscape and historic structures within the district and may regulate, on and after the effective date of such regulations, new construction, substantial reconstruction and rehabilitation of properties within such district and in view from public roadways, the Connecticut River, and public pedestrian walkways, including, but not limited to,
(1) The design and placement of buildings,
(2) The maintenance of public views,
(3) The design, paving materials and placement of public roadways, and
(4) Other elements that the Commission deems appropriate to maintain and protect the character of the village district.
In adopting this regulation, the Commission shall consider the design, relationship and compatibility of structures, plantings, signs, roadways, street hardware and other objects in public view.
9.5.4 Permitted Uses, Lot Coverage, Lot Impervious Surface Coverage, Side yard, and Height
Any new use of premises, buildings, or structures, or any Substantial Reconstruction or Rehabilitation of an existing premises, building, or structure shall require review by the Commission, the type of review being in accordance with the following table. For the purposes of this Section 9.5, the phrase “Substantial Reconstruction and Rehabilitation” is in accordance with: the meaning and use of the terms 8-2j(b) of the Connecticut General Statutes, and shall be defined as the threshold at which any and all reconstruction or rehabilitation becomes of such a degree as to likely noticeably affect the character of the structure in relation with the East Haddam Village District, as reflected through the Objective and Guidelines enumerated in Section 9.5.6 and Appendix VI.
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 38
The Use areas indicated in the table below are illustrated on East Haddam Village District Map, Appendix X to these Regulations.
Highest Use Moderate Use Lower Use Lower Use
Theater/Town Office EH Village/Norwich Rd Main Street Creamery
Restaurant Section of Main Lumberyard
Permitted Uses
Single Family Home SP SP SP SP
2 family home SE SE SE SE
3 family home SE SE
4 family home SE SE
PRUD-LTSP housing SE SE SE* SE
Antique Sales SE SE SE SE
Bed and Breakfast SE SE SE SE
Country Inn SE SE SE SE
Hotel SE SE SE
Beauty and Barber Shop SE SE SE
F.I.R.E. SE SE SE SE
Groceries SE SE
Liquor Store SE SE
Museum SE SE SE SE
Professional Offices SE SE SE SE
Public Facilities SE SE SE SE
Public/Private parking SE SE SE
Religious use SE SE SE SE
Restaurant SE SE
Retail Trade SE SE
Studio Artist/Crafts SE SE SE SE
Tavern SE SE
Theater, Movie SE
Theater, Live SE SE
Accessory to SE SE SE SE
permitted use
* EHVD - PRUD housing - not actor housing
Highest Use Moderate Use Lower Use Lower Use
Theater/Town Office EH Village/Norwich Rd Main Street Creamery
Restaurant Section of Main Lumberyard
Lot Size .25 acre .25 acre 1 acre .25 acre
Building Coverage ** ** 15% 20%
Lot Impervious Surface
Coverage ** ** 30% 30%
Maximum Building Height *** *** *** ***
Front, side, and rear yard requirements for Live Theaters: Live Theater Uses - Five percent (5%) of the lot shall be assigned to the front, side, or rear yard setback area.
Front, side, and rear yard requirements for Uses other than Live Theaters: The yard requirements is that any building shall have yard dimensions sufficient to insure proper design and placement of a building as determined in the site plan review process and shall generally adhere to the setbacks of the surrounding properties which are in keeping with the historic layout of the neighborhood.
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 39
** - Lot and Building coverage shall have dimensions sufficient to insure proper design and placement of buildings and other surfaces (parking, patios, walkways, etc.) as determined in the site plan review process and shall generally be in keeping with the historic layout of the neighborhood. For Live Theaters, Lot Impervious Surface Coverage shall be (95 %) and Building Coverage shall be (95 %).
SE = Requires Special Exception Review See Section 14B
SP = Requires Site Plan Review See Section 14A
*** Maximum Building Height: See Section 10.1.4. For Live Theaters, Maximum Building Height shall have a maximum peak height elevation of 92.5 feet based on National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD).
9.5.5. Historic Preservation
These regulations shall encourage the conversion, conservation, and preservation of existing buildings in a manner that maintains the historic or distinctive character of the district. New construction shall also incorporate in the design elements that will maintain the historic or distinctive character of the district.
The conversion, conservation, and preservation of existing buildings and sites shall be consistent with:
(A) The “Connecticut Historical Commission - The Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for Rehabilitation and Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings”, revised through 1990, as amended:
Available at http://www2.cr.nps.gov/tps/tax/rhb/stand.htm , the Historic District Commission, or the East Haddam Land Use Office
Please note: For those Buildings, Structures, or Lots located within the Village District which are also within the boundaries of the East Haddam Historic District, the Planning and Zoning Commission may decline to regulate such items and will accept all aspects of a development which are within the legal jurisdiction of the Historic District Commission. Evidence of approval by the East Haddam Historic District Commission shall be provided at the time of application to the Planning and Zoning Commission, which shall not over rule or modify any aspect of a development plan which has been approved by the Historic District Commission and is within the jurisdiction of that Commission.
9.5.6. Site Design and Compatibility Objectives
Applications shall provide a narrative, site plans, and design that demonstrate that the application is in compliance with subsections 9.5.5 and 9.5.6, including the approval of the East Haddam Historic District Commission where applicable, per Section 9.5.5. All development in the village district shall be designed to achieve the following compatibility objectives to the greatest extent possible. It is recognized that not all applications may be able to achieve each and every objective or in some cases a particular objective may not be applicable to the project. In cases where there is no change in the exterior appearance to the building or landscape the application shall still include a narrative and site plan of the existing conditions. These objectives are further defined in Appendix VI “Site Design and Compatibility Objectives and Guidelines”
1. that proposed buildings or modifications to existing buildings be harmoniously
related to their surroundings and to the terrain in the district and to the use, scale and architecture of existing buildings in the district that have a functional or visual relationship to a proposed building or modification,
2. that all spaces, structures and related site improvements visible from public
roadways, the Connecticut River, and public walkways be designed to be compatible with the elements of the area of the village district in and around the proposed building or modification,
3. that the color, size, height, location, proportion of openings, roof treatments, building materials and landscaping of commercial or residential property and any proposed signs and lighting be evaluated for compatibility with the local architectural motif and the maintenance of views, historic buildings, monuments and landscaping, and
4. that the removal or disruption of historic traditional or significant structures
or architectural elements shall be minimized.
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 40
5. The building and layout of buildings and included site improvements shall reinforce existing buildings and streetscape patterns and the placement of buildings and included site improvements shall assure there is no adverse impact on the district;
6. proposed streets shall be connected to the existing district road network, wherever possible;
7. open spaces within the proposed development shall reinforce open space patterns of the district, in form and siting;
8. locally significant features of the site such as distinctive buildings or site lines of vistas from within the district, shall be integrated into the site design;
9. the landscape design shall complement the district’s landscape patterns;
10. the exterior signs, site lighting and accessory structures shall support a uniform architectural theme if such a theme exists and be compatible with their surroundings; and
11. the scale, proportions, massing and detailing of any proposed building shall be in proportion to the scale, proportion, massing and detailing in the district.
9.5.7. Architectural Review and Landscape Design
All special exception and site plan review applications for new construction and substantial reconstruction within the district and in view from public roadways, the Connecticut River, and public pedestrian walkways shall be subject to review and recommendation by an architect or architectural firm, landscape architect, or planner who is a member of the American Institute of Certified Planners selected and contracted by the Commission and designated as the village district consultant for such application. (Note- see fee schedule)
The village district consultant shall review an application and report to the Commission within thirty-five days of receipt of the application.
Such report and recommendation shall be entered into the public hearing record and considered by the Commission in making its decision.
Failure of the village district consultant to report within the specified time shall not alter or delay any other time limit imposed by the regulations.
9.5.8. Additional Reviews and Recommendations
The Commission may seek the recommendations of any town or regional agency or outside specialist with which it consults, including but not limited to the East Haddam Historic District Commission, the Midstate Regional Planning Agency, the East Haddam Historical Society, the Connecticut Trust for Historic Preservation, and the University of Connecticut College of Agriculture and Natural Resources.
9.5.9. Compliance with Regulations
If a Commission grants or denies an application, it shall state upon the record the reasons for its decision.
If a Commission denies an application, the reason for the denial shall cite the specific regulations under which the applicant was denied.
Notice of the decision shall be published in a newspaper having a substantial circulation in the municipality.
An approval shall become effective in accordance with subsection (b) of section 8-3c.
9.5.10. Endorsement and Filing
Within sixty-five (65) days of the Commission/Board approval, the applicant shall submit one (1) set of the final plan(s) on mylar, reflecting all conditions or modifications required by the Commission, with the approval letters of the Planning and Zoning Commission, Zoning Board of Appeals, and Inland/Wetland and Watercourse Commission printed on them and accompanied by signed, sworn statements of the applicant’s land surveyor, engineer, architect,
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 41
and any other professional who has participated in the preparation of the application materials, to the effect that the plans submitted are the same as those approved by the Commission, except for the depiction of modifications and conditions required by the Commission in approval vote. If, upon considering the statements and reviewing the plans submitted, the Commission /Board shall find them to be in accordance with the final approval, they shall be endorsed by the signature of the Chairman or Secretary of the Commission. Thereafter, it shall be the responsibility of the applicant to file one (1) set of endorsed Mylar plans in the office of the Town Clerk, and two paper copies in the Office of the Zoning Enforcement Officer. In accordance with Section 8-3d of the Connecticut General Statutes, no Special Exception shall be effective until the final, endorsed plans are filed with the Town Clerk, and any plans not so filed within ninety (90) days following the Commission’s vote of approval shall become null and void. Any Special Exception site plan filed in the Town Clerk’s Office without the endorsement of the Commission’s Chairman or Secretary shall likewise be void.
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 42
C-3 MOODUS PLAINS ROAD COMMERCIAL AREA
9.6 Uses Permitted In Commercial C-3 District:
In order more adequately to maintain and perpetuate the historic character which contributes so much to East Haddam’s charm, there hereby is established a special type of Commercial District as C-3.
9.6.1.1. Dwelling(s) Units
Dwelling, Single Family (1F) - ½ acre
Dwelling, two, three and four family
(provided the lot area for 2F – is at least 1 acre - max. 4 bedrooms
( “ “ “ “ “ 3F – is at least 1 ½ acre - max. 6 bedrooms)
(provided the lot area for 4F – is at least 2 acres - max. 8 bedrooms)
Any additional bedrooms require area of ¼ acre per bedroom.
All 2, 3, & 4 family dwelling units require a Special Exception Review Approval in accordance with Section 14B of these Regulations.
9.6.1.2. The following uses are permitted by Special Exception approval of the Commission:
Professional Offices
Insurance and Real Estate
Retail Trade - Apparel & Accessories, Jewelry, Antique Shops
Business Services - such as Advertising, Employment
Bed & Breakfast
Country Inn
Child Day Care Center
Accessory uses customary with or accessory to a permitted use.
Education, religious or philanthropic - use by a non-profit corporation or government unit.
Additional Standards:
In order to further the Intent and purpose of the C-3 District, the Commission shall consider the following criteria, in addition to those set forth in Section 14A and 14B of these Regulations, when reviewing any Special Exception application in the District and the Town of East Haddam:
a. The extent to which the application preserves or restores an existing building or buildings which reflect(s) and enhance the architectural and historic character of the District and the Town of East Haddam;
b. The extent to which the application proposes new buildings(s) and site improvements which reflect(s) and enhance the architectural and historic character of the District and the Town of East Haddam;
c. The extent to which the application preserves existing large trees, stone walls, topography, and other natural or man-made features which provide character to the site and District;
d. The extent to which the application proposes amenities, such as walkways, plazas, benches, ornamental lighting, and other improvements to both public and private spaces which reflect(s) and enhance the streetscape, architectural and historic character of the District and the Town of East Haddam, and provide opportunities for pedestrian circulation, rest, and relaxation by persons living or working in and around the District.
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 43
9.7. IG District
9.7.1. Purpose: The original, single IG District has evolved as an area where potentially incompatible uses have become intermingled without any comprehensive plan or adequate consideration for how the various uses and parcels will function. The District now contains residential, agricultural, industrial, office, personal service and commercial uses. The District is intended to allow as a diverse center of employment opportunities that will enhance the tax base of the Town of East Haddam and provide space for the products and services which Town residents require. The Commission has created three (3) separate IG Districts designed to form a unified pattern of development, and has imposed special architectural and site guidelines to balance the need for economic growth, diversity of uses, and protection and enhancement of the Town’s historical, architectural, and environmental quality.
9.7.2. Requirements for All IG Districts: The following shall apply to all IG Districts:
9.7.2.1. Bulk Requirements: Bulk requirements for each of the IG Districts is as set forth in Section 10.1 of these regulations.
9.7.2.2. Special Exception Requirement: All uses in the IG District shall be permitted only by Special Exception in accordance with Section 14B of these Regulations, except for the Principle Use of a Farm, which shall be a Permitted Use. Where a Use requires a Special Exception when conducted as a Principal Use, it shall also require a Special Exception when conducted as an Accessory Use, including Accessory Uses to a Principal Use as a Farm.
9.7.2.3. Additional Standards: In order to further the Intent and purpose of the New District, the Commission shall consider the following criteria, in addition to those set forth in Section 14A and 14B of these Regulations, when reviewing any Special Exception application in the District:
a. The extent to which the application preserves or restores an existing building or buildings which reflect(s) and enhance the architectural and historic character of the District and the Town of East Haddam;
b. The extent to which the application proposes new buildings(s) and / or site improvements which reflect(s) and enhance the architectural and historic character of the District and the Town of East Haddam; Existing structures located within and immediately adjacent to the District typify East Haddam’s historic and architectural character. New buildings or structures should be in harmony with buildings constructed between 1700 and 1900 and enhance these existing buildings and the historic character of the Town. Architectural Guidelines for all IG Districts are contained in Appendix II of these Regulations, and are incorporated herein by reference.
c. The extent to which the application preserves existing large trees, stone walls, agricultural features, topography, and other natural or man-made features which provide character to the site and District;
d. The extent to which the application proposes amenities, such as walkways, plazas, benches, ornamental lighting, and other improvements to both public and private spaces which reflect(s) and enhance the streetscape, architectural and historic character of the District and the Town of East Haddam, and provide opportunities for pedestrian circulation, rest and relaxation by persons living or working in and around the District.
e. To the extent in which the application proposes the use of appropriate vegetation (trees, plants, shrubs, bushes) and / or natural fencing (rock walls, embankments, wood fencing) and / or existing structure(s) to screen the proposed addition and / or new structure(s)
f. Those properties on Matthews Drive which do not have frontage on Route s 82 and 151 have already been developed in a pattern which does not reflect the more traditional and historic character of other properties in the District. Therefore, the Commission may permit greater design flexibility for new buildings or structures on those properties, and may allow more diversity and contemporary designs; provided, however, that design quality of these sites, buildings, and structures shall otherwise comply with the goals of Section 14A and 14B, and these Additional Standards
g. No Special Exception approval is required for roof mounted solar panel units that are not visible from any street or highway and no Special Exception approval is required for roof mounted solar panel units that are mounted flush and match the roof pitch. Mounting bracket shall be no higher than twelve inches above the roof. If the building is on the National Historic Register or in a Historic District, approval will be required by the Historic District Commission.
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 44
9.7.3 IG Districts, Uses by subsection (See map for property boundaries)
9.7.3.1 IG-1 District, Uses (Special Exception unless indicated otherwise)
No changes in the language for IG-1
Light Industrial
Manufacturing, sales/repairs Architectural Review and Landscaping Required
Warehouse See Appendix VII – Standards for Construction in
Commercial Self-Storage Buildings the IG District
Health club
Retail as an accessory use.
9.7.3.2 IG-2 District, Uses (Special Exception unless indicated otherwise)
Former IG 2, 3, 4, 6, 7, 9, 11, and a portion of 10.
Professional Office
F.I.R.E. – Financial, Insurance, Real Estate
Health Care – products and service
Dance Studio, Health Club
Restaurant
Bed & Breakfast, Country Inn
Retail Sales, Antique Sales
Retail of Crafts and Products Associated with East Haddam’s Traditional Agricultural Heritage Arts
Craft & Art Galleries
Farm (Permitted use), Greenhouse, Nursery, Wholesale Associated with a Farm, Farm Stand
Landscaping Product
Grocery, Bakery, Liquor Store – new use
Beauty and Barber Shop
Public Facilities and services Architectural Review and Landscaping Required
Light Industrial See Appendix VII – Standards for Construction in
Manufacturing sales/repairs the IG District
Sales & repair of Industrial Machinery
Warehouse
Commercial Self storage buildings
Recreational / Open Space
Dwelling, Single or multi family only if in existence on the effective date of this amendment,
Dwelling, Single family, only as an accessory use to Permitted or Special Exception Use.
[No single building area shall exceed 10,000 sq. ft ]
9.7.3.3 IG-3 District, Uses (Special Exception unless indicated otherwise)
Former IG 8 and a portion of IG-10 Same language as existing IG-8 except for single & multi-family homes
Building Trade and storage, repair, and office Accessory to Building Trade.
Retail sales accessory to Building Trade (cabinets, plumbing fixtures, and other consumer products capable of owner installation).
Retail Sale of Landscaping Products. Architectural Review and Landscaping Required
Light Industrial See Appendix VII – Standards for Construction in
Warehouse the IG District
Public Facilities and Services
Commercial Self storage buildings
Dwelling, Single or multi-family only if in existence on the effective date of this amendment,
Dwelling, Single family, only as an accessory use to Permitted or Special Exception Use.
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 45
9.8 R & D District (Research & Development)
9.8.1 The following uses are permitted subject to approval by the Planning and Zoning Commission as a Special Exception:
Research and Development Facility
Laboratory
Consumer Product Testing
Public Facilities and Services.
Buildings or land may be used and buildings may be erected or altered as long as such use is not dangerous by reason of fire or explosion hazard, nor injurious, noxious or detrimental to the community or neighborhood by reason of the emission of dust, odor, fumes, smoke, wastes, refuse matter, noise, vibration, or because of any other objectionable feature.
Accessory uses clearly subordinate to, and customarily incidental the principle use.
9.9 Conservation Zone (Gateway)
9.9.1 Setback
Within the Conservation Zone, no building or other structure shall be constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, extended, moved or structurally altered within one hundred (100) feet of the high tide line, as defined in the Connecticut General Statutes, of the Connecticut River or any of its tributaries or associated wetlands. At its discretion, upon determination of functional need, the local commission having jurisdiction may issue a special permit to reduce the setback for structures that require direct access to the water as an operational necessity such as piers, docks, and boathouses.
9.9.2 Signs
No sign shall be constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, extended, moved or structurally altered in such a manner so as to move or rotate mechanically or be illuminated by a light source which visibly flashes, oscillates or otherwise automatically changes in intensity or color, nor shall any sign be permitted which calls the attention of the general public to any commercial activities, services or products not available on the premises where the sign is located.
9.9.3 Building Height
No building or other structure shall be constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, extended, moved or structurally altered in such a manner as to exceed a height of thirty-five (35) feet. However, spires, cupolas, towers, flagpoles, and other similar architectural features occupying not more than ten(10) percent of the building footprint and not designed or used for human occupancy may be constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, extended, moved or structurally altered to a reasonable and necessary height upon the granting of a special exception by the Commission, provided that the architectural features will not have a significant visual impact on the River scene. Exceptions to the height limitations within the East Haddam Village District will be by Special Exception, and governed by the standards of the District.
9.9.4 Cutting of Timber
1. Required Vegetative Buffer
Within the Conservation Zone, there shall be no cutting of vegetation within a strip of land extending fifty(50) feet in horizontal distance inland from the high tide line, as defined in the Connecticut General Statutes, of the Connecticut River or any of its tributaries or associated wetlands, except as provided in this section.
a. There shall be no clear cut openings, and a well distributed stand of trees and other vegetation, including existing ground cover, shall be maintained. Existing vegetation less than three (3) feet in height and other ground cover shall not be removed except to provide for a footpath or other permitted uses. Pruning of tree branches on the bottom third of trees is permitted. Fields which have reverted primarily to shrubs, trees or other woody vegetation shall be
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 46
regulated under the provisions of this section. Cleared openings legally in existence on the effective date of these regulations may be maintained but shall not be enlarged.
b. There shall be no timber harvesting within the buffer area except to remove safety hazards. When removal of storm-damaged, diseased, unsafe or dead tree results in the creation of cleared openings, these openings shall be replanted with native tree species unless existing new tree growth is present. Prior to cutting of diseased or damaged trees, a determination about the conditions of such trees shall be made to the zoning enforcement officer by a public or consulting forester.
c. In no event shall an opening be cleared for development, including but not limited to surface regrading, stormwater drainage structures, construction of retention walls, construction of principal or accessory structures, driveway construction, sewage disposal areas, and lawns and gardens.
d. A footpath not to exceed five (5) feet in width is permitted provided that a cleared line of sight to the water through the buffer strip is not created.
e. Stairs or similar structures may be allowed with a permit from the Inland Wetlands and WatercoursesCommission to provide shoreline access in areas of steep slopes or unstable soils, provided that the structure is limited to a maximum of five (5) feet in width and does not extend below or over the high tide line of the Connecticut River or its tributaries or the upland edge of a wetlands, and the applicant demonstrates that no reasonable access alternative exists on the property.
f. A vegetated buffer shall not be required for areas within the Conservation District which have been mapped and designated by the Planning and Zoning Commission as “developed areas”. In such developed areas, property owners are encouraged, where feasible, to maintain a vegetated area of trees and shrubs immediately adjacent to the water to avoid erosion and enhance the scenic quality of the River scene.
Developed Area; An area adjacent to the Connecticut River or its tributaries and associated wetlands within the Conservation Zone which has, within the 50 foot riparian area immediately landward of the high tide line as defined in Section 22a-359(c) CGS, been developed in the sense of being armored through the use of bulkheads, rip-rap or other structural stabilization methods or materials. The 50 foot riparian area shall also be considered "developed" if clearing and or construction activities have occurred in such a manner so as to make the retention or replacement of vegetation within the 50 foot riparian area impractical, infeasible, or undesirable.
(Note: Developed areas are identified in appendix IX)
2. Non-Commercial Cutting
A non-commercial cutting plan shall be submitted as part of the supporting documentation filed with a required site plan or as one of the required exhibits to be submitted for land subdivision approval.
3. Commercial Cutting - See Section 20 – Commercial Cutting of Timber
4. Burning of Undergrowth
The burning of undergrowth shall be in accordance with those regulations of the Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection which are in effect from time to time to control and abate air pollution and in accordance with all other applicable provisions of law.
9.9.5. Removal of Soil and Earth Materials
The removal of soil and earth materials shall be prohibited except for (1) valid non-conforming uses in existence as of May 14, 1974; (2) those exceptions set forth in Section 19.2 of these Regulations. See Section 19, Regulations of Earth Material Operations
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 47
9.9.6. Dumping and Storing of Refuse
No dumping or storage of refuse shall be permitted other than the temporary dumping or storage of small amounts of such material for brief periods pending final lawful disposition nor shall any new public solid waste disposal facility be established or an existing facility be expanded in area.
9.9.7. Additional Requirements for Residential Structures over Four Thousand (4000) Square Feet in Gross Floor Area
A special exception is required for all construction, reconstruction, enlargement, or structural alterations of principal and accessory residential structures which results in one or more buildings or structures having a combined Gross floor area in excess of four thousand (4000) square feet of total floor area (all floors). The purpose of this requirement is to assure that large scale residential structures and significant site modifications located within the Gateway Conservation Zone will not cause deterioration of the natural and traditional river scene.
1. Exception: A special exception under this Section may be waived by the Commission for residential structures over four thousand (4000) square feet in gross floor area under this Section if it can be demonstrated by the applicant that the proposed structure or structures will not be visible from the Connecticut River. Demonstration that a structure will not be visible from the Connecticut River shall consist of an area topographic map showing that there is intervening ground at an elevation at least thirty-five (35) feet above ground elevation of the proposed structure.
2. Submission: In addition to other town requirements for special exception applications, the applicant will provide site plans and building elevations prepared by an architect and/or landscape architect which show information on existing and proposed topography, building design and height measurements, proposed grading including cuts, fills and retaining walls, any required buffer area, proposed landscaping and plans for access to the waterfront, if applicable.
3. Special Exception Criteria:
a. Proposed site development shall maintain the essential natural characteristics of the site, such as major landforms, natural vegetative and wildlife communities, hydrologic features, scenic qualities and open space that contributes to a sense of place.
b. Structures shall be adapted to the existing terrain, rather than altering the earth form to create a platformed development site.
c. Structures located above the crest of hillsides facing the River shall be held back from the crest of the hill to maintain a clear sense of the hillside brow in its natural condition.
d. Vertical architecture elements shall not be over emphasized in a manner which disrupts the natural silhouette of the hillside. Structures shall be designed so that the slope angle of the roof pitch is generally at or below the angle of the natural hillside or manufactured slope.
e. Building forms shall be scaled to the particular environmental setting to avoid excessively massive forms that fail to enhance the hillside character. Massing of structural elements such as large roof areas shall be broken up to approximate natural slopes.
f. Roof lines shall relate to the slope and topography. Rooftop treatment shall be designed to avoid monotony of materials, forms and colors. Dark colored roof treatments, which reduce visual impact of the structure on the landscape, are preferred.
g. Site design shall preserve the existing natural landscape where possible and include new landscaping which is compatible with existing natural vegetation, the scenic character of the area, and increases visual buffering between the building and the River or its tributaries within the Gateway Conservation Zone.
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 48
h. Development shall be located so as to minimize disturbance of sensitive areas. The smallest practical area of land should be exposed at any one time during development and the length of exposure should be kept to the shortest practical time. Disturbed areas shall be replanted with trees, shrubs and ground cover which are compatible with existing vegetation.
i. Site grading shall avoid straight and unnatural slope faces. Cut and fill slopes shall have curved configurations to reflect as closely as possible the forms and shapes of surrounding topography. At intersections of manufactured and natural slopes, abrupt angular intersections should be avoided and contours should be curved to blend with the natural slope.
4. Findings: A special exception shall not be granted until the Commission has determined that all of the following conditions have been satisfied.
a. Proposed structures and site work have been designed to fit the hillside, rather than altering the hillside to fit the structure and site design.
b. Disturbance to existing topographic forms is minimized and proposed grading and excavation will not result in soil erosion and silting of lower slopes.
c. The proposed development retains or enhances the visual character of the site and the area by utilizing proper structural scale and character, varied architectural treatments and appropriate plant material to buffer the mass of the building from the River or its tributaries in the Gateway Conservation Zone.
d. The proposed design preserves or enhances significant natural features and maintains or restores the natural and traditional character of the River scene.
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 49
9.10 COMMERCIAL/BUSINESS/ LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT (C/B/IG)
(former C-2 Moodus Center Area)
INTENT - To create a district that allows the combined uses of businesses, light industrial, and residential neighborhoods. This combination of permitted uses through special exception review will allow for a more versatile commercial and light industrial district. Presently each District is restrictive to particular uses listed in the Zoning Regulations even though mixed uses already exist. Each application will go through a special exception application that requires architectural design review, signage criteria, landscaping, traffic patterns changes and impacts, and emergency services accessibility.
THE INTENT OF INCLUDING LIGHT INDUSTRIAL USES WOULD BE FOR buildings to be used for the manufacture, processing, assembling, or storage of products to standards set forth in the Special Exception Review process to insure a compatible relationship between such use and the existing pattern of land use in the Moodus Center Area. To these ends, development would be limited to a relatively low density; external effects that are minimized; and are permitted uses confined to those administrative, storage of products and distribution, and manufacturing activities that can be carried on in a stable and orderly manner, and to permit those facilities that are necessary to serve the needs of the district. Such use shall not be dangerous by reason of fire or explosion hazard, nor injurious, noxious or detrimental to the community or neighborhood by reason of the emission of dust, odor, fumes, smoke, wastes, refuse matter, noise, vibration, or because of any other objectionable feature.
No Special Exception approval is required for roof mounted solar panel units that are not visible from any street or highway and no Special Exception approval is required for roof mounted solar panel units that are mounted flush and match the roof pitch. Mounting bracket shall be no higher than twelve inches above the roof. If the building is on the National Historic Register or in a Historic District, approval will be required by the Historic District Commission.
9.10.1. Permitted uses:
Dwelling, Single or multi family only if in existence on the effective date of this amendment,
Dwelling, Single family, only as an accessory use to Permitted or Special Exception Use.
Home Occupations accessory to permitted single family dwellings and as permitted under Section 27 of the these Regulations
Farm
9.10.2. The following uses are permitted by Special Exception approval of the Commission
Business or Professional Office and Financial Institutions, Insurance and Real Estate, Business Services,
Greenhouse and nurseries; commercial - Wholesale and retail
Child Day Care Services -Adult Day Care Services
Medical Facility
Place of Worship, Religious Institutions
Retail Trade - Hard ware, Lumber, Apparel & Accessories, Jewelry, Drug, Book, Groceries, Bakeries, Antique Shop
Country Inns and Bed and Breakfast
Automobile Service Station, Automobile and Machinery Repair Shops
Newspaper Plant or Print Establishments
Wholesale Trade
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 50
Funeral Homes
Laundry and Dry Cleaning Services
Restaurants - except drive-through as an accessory use
Repair Services - Electric, Watch, Re-upholstery, Furniture
Theaters - Motion Picture Projection
Public Facilities and Services
Package Store - Sale of Alcoholic Liquor for Off-Premises Consumption,
Beauty and Barber Services, Photographic Services, Dance Studio - Schools
Light Industrial - light manufacturing; processing; assembly; storage or warehousing; product testing; research and development; laboratory; distribution; and accessory office and other uses customarily accessory to the principal use, provided, however, that this definition shall not be construed to permit any use which is dangerous by reason of fire or explosion hazard, injurious or detrimental to the community or neighborhood by reason of the emission of dust, odor, fumes, smoke, wastes, refuse matter, noise, vibration, radiation, or any other objectionable element. Further, no use within this definition shall be permitted to store, process, or otherwise locate or use any product or material except in an enclosed building.
Accessory uses customary with a permitted use.
C/B/IG DISTRICT - Bulk Requirements
Minimum Lot Area ½ acre
Minimum Lot Width 100 feet
Minimum Front Yard 30 feet
Minimum Side Yard 10 - 40* feet
Minimum Building Size 1000 square feet
Maximum Building Coverage 20 percent
Maximum Lot Coverage 60 percent
Maximum Building Height See Section 10.1.4
* Side yard setback is an aggregate of 40 feet with the narrowest being 10 feet except when it bounds a residential zone or Town road, the setback is a minimum of 20 feet.
A landscape strip will be required when facing or abutting a residential area.
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 51
Section 9.11 – Eightmile River Watershed Overlay District
9.11.1 Purpose and Intent
The Town of East Haddam desires to protect its natural resources and to control development’s deleterious effects on its watersheds. The riparian and wetland features of the Eightmile River Watershed are a key component of the largely intact watersheds and natural character of East Haddam. In order to preserve a fully-functioning aquatic system in the Eightmile River Watershed, and to prevent damage to the critical buffer zone around it's water bodies, the Eightmile River Watershed Overlay District is hereby established. Please note that this does not replace any obligation of the applicant to have a determination made by the East Haddam Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Commission or any other regulatory agency as whether additional reviews and permits are necessary.
Protection of a buffer around water bodies and wetlands is crucial for public health, safety, and welfare because it protects water quality, regulates flow, preserves wildlife habitat, and maintains important cultural and historical features of the Town. This buffer serves many specific functions:
Regulation of water flow:
a. Promotes water infiltration and groundwater recharge.
b. Reduces flooding.
c. Reduces streambed scour.
Preservation of wildlife habitat:
a. Provides a unique habitat that supports a diverse species assemblage.
b. Shades, filters, and moderates stream flow, improving habitat for fish and other aquatic organisms.
c. Provides an effective travel corridor for terrestrial wildlife.
Protection of water quality:
a. Reduces sedimentation.
b. Filters out pesticides, heavy metals, and biocontaminants.
c. Removes excess nutrients that lead to eutrophication, including nitrogen and phosphorus.
d. Prevents erosion through bank stabilization by vegetation.
Preservation of views:
a. Provides a screen that protects privacy of riverfront landowners
b. Enhances landscape diversity resulting in improved aesthetics
The purpose of this Eightmile River Watershed Overlay District is to maintain a continuous buffer of native forest and shrubs around all watercourses and wetlands. The most effective riparian buffers should include a mix of trees, shrubs and herbaceous plants native to the region and appropriate to the environment in which they are to be planted.
9.11.2. Eightmile River Watershed Overlay District - Buffer Area
Major Rivers and Streams within R-2 and R-4 Districts of the Eightmile River
(Not the (L) Lake Zone)
The buffer from all major watercourses within the Eightmile River Watershed shall be one hundred feet measured horizontally from all boundaries of the watercourse. The major watercourses are defined by the official Eightmile River Watershed Overlay District Map and includes the Eightmile River, the East Branch of the Eightmile River, Cranberry Meadow Brook, Hedge Brook, Burnham Brook, Early Brook, Muddy Brook, Strongs Brook, Malt House Brook, and Lake Hayward Brook and three unnamed brooks labeled as A, B, and C. See Appendix X
For all other streams and intermittent streams within R-2 and R-4 District the buffer from these watercourses within the Eightmile River Watershed shall be fifty feet measured horizontally from all boundaries of the watercourse. The official map does not include all intermittent streams.
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 52
9.11.3 Zoning District overlap
The Eightmile River Watershed Overlay District overlaps other zoning districts and federal, state, or municipally regulated areas and in all cases the more restrictive regulation will take precedence.
9.11.4 Prohibited Activities
Within the buffer specified in Section 10.1.3.2.2, all land-disturbing activity not specifically allowed as exceptions in subsection (d) below are prohibited unless approved following Special Exception review, in accordance with Section 14B of these Regulations. The standards and requirements of this Section 10.1.3.2 shall be in addition to those of Section 14B of these Regulations. "Land-disturbing activity" shall include any activity which involves the alteration of the surface of the earth as it existed on the effective date of these Regulations, including but not limited to; filling, removal, or regarding of earth; placement, construction, removal, or alteration of building or structures; establishment, removal, or alteration of uses of land; or planting or removal of vegetation; but not including those activities listed as exceptions in subsection (d) below.]
a. Planting of invasive species
The planting of invasive plants within the District is prohibited.
b. Native plantings encouraged
In all areas where preexisting uses or new activities result in a buffer that does not meet the standards of this regulation, native landscaping is preferred. Specifically, landowners are encouraged to create, enhance, or restore native vegetation and soil grades appropriate to the water resource being buffered. A list of suggested native plants for riparian buffers can be found in Appendix X
c. Exceptions
The following are as-of-right uses and activities within the Eightmile River Watershed Overlay District. Please note that this does not replace any obligation of the applicant to have a determination made by the East Haddam Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Commission or any other regulatory agency as whether additional reviews and permits are necessary.
1. Existing structures or continuing activities, such as agriculture, that were legally in existence before the effective date of this regulation.
2. The building of new structures, modification of existing structures, or commencement of activities that were granted all applicable permits before the effective date of this regulation.
3. Vegetation management
In general, vegetation is to be left in a natural state wherever it existed within the District before the effective date of this amendment. The exceptions to this requirement are as follows:
a. Mowing and maintenance of lawns, gardens, or agricultural crops is allowed in the District if these uses were already in place on the effective date of this amendment.
b. The removal or pruning of dead, dying, diseased, or invasive plants is allowed. Replanting with native trees or shrubs is encouraged if natural regeneration is not sufficient to restore vegetative cover. Leaving some downed and standing woody debris is also preferable, to provide a greater variety of wildlife habitat unless the spread of plant diseases is a concern.
c. The clearing of one footpath per property, 5 feet wide or less is allowed. In order to prevent erosion and the creation of a channel of surface runoff, the path cannot create a straight line of sight from the outer boundary of the District to the water resource. The property owner must use erosion control measures such as waterbars or mulch to prevent erosion on slopes.
4. Emergency operations necessary for public safety or protection of property.
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 53
5. State, municipal, and utility improvements and operations for which activity within the Eightmile River Watershed Overlay District is unavoidable and necessary. This includes activities such as the replacement, rehabilitation, or creation of infrastructure such as sewer, water, and power lines, bridges, highway maintenance, drainage facilities. Any activity within the District must be undertaken only if there is no practical and feasible alternative for provision of these services, and only if all measures will be taken to minimize any adverse impacts to natural features and the functions of the watershed. These activities are subject to all other applicable regulations.
6. Surveying and boundary posting for the purpose of marking boundary lines, subject to any other applicable regulations.
7. Septic system maintenance such as pumping and inspections or repair as directed by the local health official / town sanitarian. This does not include expansion of systems for addition to structures.
8. Fish and wildlife conservation activities that does not require removal of native vegetation or alteration of stream beds or banks.
9.11.5. Activities and Uses which Special Exception Review can be applied for.
No land-disturbing activity, as set forth in Section 10.1.3.2.4 above, shall be commenced within the buffer specified in Section 10.1.3.2. unless and until a Special Exception for such activity has been granted by the Commission. In all cases of the granting of such Special Exception, the permittee is encouraged to expand the vegetative buffer in another area abutting the setback area to compensate for the total area of encroachment. Please note that this does not replace any obligation of the applicant to have a determination made by the East Haddam Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Commission or any other regulatory agency as whether additional reviews and permits are necessary.
a. If the size of a lot is such that the Eightmile River Watershed Overlay District regulations prevent the placement, expansion, or alteration of a structure in compliance with all other zoning regulations, owners may request a special exception review and approval to encroach on the District setback. Every reasonable effort must be made to minimize impacts on the functions of the watershed, and a permit will only be granted for the minimum encroachment necessary. No Building or Structure shall be permitted within 30 feet of a major watercourse boundary, as defined in this Section.
b. Conservation activities, non-commercial thinning, and commercial timber harvesting practices that aim to restore natural ecosystems or enhance wildlife habitat are allowed by special exception. As part of the application for a special exception review, the appropriateness of the vegetation removal must be verified in a written statement to the Commission by a certified forester or other expert opinion accepted by the Commission.
c. Structures used for shoreline access (docks, boathouses, stairs, etc.) may be built after granting of a special permit. The permit application must demonstrate that the construction and installation of the proposed structure does not contribute to significant flow alteration, channel modification, or create any other deleterious effects on the watercourse.
9.11.6. Permitting process
a. Application for permits
The applicant shall submit a Special Exception Application, as defined in Section 14B, and provide documentation demonstrating the need for a special exception approval, the efforts made to minimize disturbance to the functions of the buffer and water resources, or other documentation that may be reasonably requested by the Commission. Applicants should look at the criteria for consideration of waiver of a Special Exception hearing if they believe the impacts will be insignificant when measured by the standards of this regulation. Such waiver shall only be granted if the Commission determines the impacts are insignificant when measured by the standards of this regulation.
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 54
b. Application fee
Each application for a Special Exception in the Eightmile River Overlay District to be considered by the Commission shall be accompanied by a fee payable to the Town of East Haddam in accordance with the schedule adopted by the Commission.
c. Standards
The Commission shall consider the following standards when reviewing an application for a Special Exception Approval within the setback area:
1. The compatibility of the permitted activity with the purposes of the District, shall have an insignificant impact on the purpose of the overlay district (See Section 10.1.3.2), the Plan of Conservation & Development, and the health, safety and welfare of the public.
2. Whether strict application of the Eightmile River Watershed Overlay District regulations would deny the applicant reasonable use of the property, or whether this regulations would render the property unusable or unsuitable for development.
3. Whether there is a feasibly or prudent alternative through plan modification that will lessen the impacts and protect the buffer as intended in these regulations.
4. That the relief granted is the minimum necessary and does not conflict with other municipal, state, or federal regulations.
9.11.7 Enforcement
Violations of the Eightmile River Watershed Overlay District regulations shall be punishable as defined in Section 2.2 of these Zoning Regulations.
9.11.8. Severability
Should any section, subsection, or provision of this amendment be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the amendment in whole or any part thereof other than the part so declared to be invalid.
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 55
SECTION 10 Section 10.1 - Schedule of Conforming Lots and Buildings
District Minimum Minimum Minimum Minimum Maximum Lot
Lot Area Lot Width Front Yard Side & Rear Lot Coverage Impervious
Yard (each) Surface Cover
R-4 4 acres 250 ft. 40 ft. 50 ft. 5% 10%
R-2 2 acres 200 ft. 40 ft. 40 ft. 5% 10%
R-1 1 acre 150 ft. 30 ft. 25 ft. 10% 20%
R 1 acre 150 ft. 30 ft. 25 ft. 10% 20%
R-1/2 ½ acre 100 ft. 30 ft. 20 ft. 15% 20%
L 1 acre 150 ft. 25 ft. 25 ft. 10% 15%
C/B/IG ½ acre 100 ft. 30 ft. 10-40 ft.*** 20% 60%
C-1 ½ acre 100 ft. 30 ft. 20 ft. 20% 60%
C-3 ½ acre 100 ft. 30 ft. 20 ft.* 20% 60%
R & D 10 acres 250 ft. 100 ft. 100 ft. 20% 30%
IG-1 1 acre 150 ft. 30 ft. ** 35% 50%
IG-2 1 acre 150 ft. 30 ft. ** 20% 50%
IG-3 1 acre 150 ft. 30 ft. ** 20% 50%
East Haddam Village District See Section 9.5.4
1. Maximum building height - See Section 9.9.3 Gateway/Conservation Zone, Section 9.5.4 East HaddamVillage District, or 10.1.4 for the rest of the Districts.
2. * Rearyard setback is 30 ft, and sideyard increases to 30 ft. when it bounds a residential zone.
3. ** Sideyard setback is an aggregate of 60 ft. with the narrowest side being 20 ft. except when it bounds a residential lot or Town road, the setback is a minimum of 40 ft.
4. Agriculture, farming, forestry, truck or nursery gardening, including greenhouses incidental thereto, provided that all buildings designed for those uses shall be built not less than 100 feet from the street line and 75 feet from the nearest line of a lot under separate ownership (Section 9.2.9)
5. Setback from water In any zone, the setback from a lake, pond, river, perennial stream or other body of water shall be a minimum of 50 feet from the high water mark. In the Conservation Zone the setback shall be 100 feet from the Connecticut River. (Section 10.1.3) In the Eightmile River Watershed, the buffer requirements are defined in Section 10.1.3.2.2
6. Minimum floor area per family dwelling - in sq. ft. R4 = 1000, R2 = 900, R1 or R = 800, R ½ = 600,
C, IG, L = 600, C/B/IG = 1000, C-1 or C-3 = 600
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 56
7. Wetland Review Area Please note, the East Haddam Inland / Wetlands Commission regulations require review of any activity proposed within 100 feet from any wetlands soil, flood plain, or watercourse or 400 feet from an identified vernal pool.
Section 10.1 continued
10.1.1. Minimum lot width shall be measured at the required building setback line which line shall be measured parallel to and at the distance from the street right-of-way line which establishes the minimum required front yard.
10.1.2. Minimum front yard; If there is no established street right-of way line, then the minimum front yard shall be determined by adding 25 feet to the requirement shown in the above schedule and measuring from the centerline of the existing road pavement.
10.1.3 Setback from waterbodies: In any zone, except the Conservation Zone and the Eightmile River Watershed Overlay District, the setback from a lake, pond, river, perennial stream or other body of water shall be a minimum of 50 feet from the high water mark.
10.1.4. Building Height - Special Provisions
10.1.4.1. Building Structures- Height and Occupancy. The maximum height of any building structure shall be thirty feet, measured from the grade plane to the mean roof height (see new building height definition). In no case shall any peak or other building feature exceed forty feet when measured from the grade plane to that roof peak or other building feature, except chimneys may be of such height as regulated by the building code as amended time to time. There shall be no habitable space (see new definition) on the third story above grade; provided, however, that in connection with the issuance of a Certificate of Zoning Compliance, the Zoning Officer may permit the occupancy of the third story above grade of a residential building where in the review of the building plan and site plan, it is demonstrated that the health, safety, and welfare of the potential habitants is not put to risk. This shall be determined by demonstrating, in the sole discretion of the East Haddam Fire Chief , that access from an East Haddam Fire Department ground ladder can be provided to at least 50% of the egress openings (windows of adequate size or doors) for the habitable space located on the third story above grade. No Certificate Zoning Compliance for third story above grade occupancy shall be issued without a written report from the Fire Chief indicating compliance with the standards with of this Section. The site plan submitted shall contain final grading plans to allow proper review. The building plans shall contain views from all sides and floor plans of all stories. In addition, the Zoning Enforcement Officer may require a lesser building height, or the provision of special site or building improvements, after consideration of written reports from the Building Official and/or the Fire Chief concerning the adequacy of fire protection measures, emergency access, and the Town’s capacity to deal with anticipated public safety challenges. See Appendix VIII
For those stories of a building that have been determined incapable of providing a Fire Department ground ladder access in accordance with this Section, a permanent stairway to such story shall be prohibited, and such story shall not be used for habitable space.
Exception in Lake Districts (L)
In consideration of the residential character and architectural style of the existing houses and cottages, the confined spacing between structures, the general steepness of slopes around the lakes, and narrow street access, structures in the L Districts shall have a maximum building height of twenty-four feet measured from the grade plane to the mean roof height. In no case shall any peak exceed thirty two feet when measured from the grade plane to that peak or other building feature, except chimneys may be of such height as regulated by the building code as amended time to time. See Appendix VII
Exceptions in the Conservation Zone
In consideration of the residential character and architectural style of the existing houses and cottages, the confined spacing between structures, the general steepness of slopes around the lakes, and narrow street access, structures in the Conservation Zone shall have a maximum building height of twenty-four feet measured from the grade plane to the mean roof height. In no case shall any peak exceed thirty five feet when measured from the lowest point of the building which is visible above existing natural grade to that peak or other building feature, except chimneys may be of such height as regulated by the building code as amended time to time. In the East Haddam Village District these exceptions and height limits do not apply. See Appendix VIII
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 57
10.1.4.2. Exceptions to Height Limits. A greater height may be authorized by the Commission as a Special Exception, and may be of such reasonable height as may be necessary to accomplish the purpose to be served by the structure. Where the structure is the principal structure on the lot, the height limits for the subject zone shall apply, except as provided for Wireless Telecommunications Facilities. See Section 22 of these Regulations.
10.1.5. Double Frontage: In the case of a lot with frontage on more than one street, a building or structure thereon shall be set back the required distance from each of said streets.
10.1.6. Frontage and Access - No building shall hereafter be built on any lot unless such lot has a frontage of at least twenty-five feet on either a public street, or, on a private street approved by the Commission to serve such lot as part of a subdivision approval pursuant to the East Haddam Subdivision Regulations; unless, it has an unobstructed easement of access or private right-of-way at least twenty-five feet wide to a public street. In the case of an existing lot, under separate ownership as of March 14, 1961, which has no frontage on a public street which is less than twenty-five feet in width, and where the widening of such street would entail genuine hardship, the Zoning Board of Appeals may authorize the permit-issuing agent to waive the requirement as to the width of said road, but in no case shall such access way serve more than one single-family or one two-family residence or one non-residential building
10.1.7. Yards and Open Space: Except as specifically provided herein, no part of any yard or other open space required about any building may be counted as part of a yard or other space required for any other building.
10.1.8. Building Projections: Nothing in these regulations shall prohibit the projection not more than one foot into a required open space of pilaster, columns, belt courses, sills, cornices, or other similar architectural features, nor the planting or landscaping of such open spaces.
10.1.9. Waiver of Front Yard Setback: Where two or more occupied dwelling houses already stand on the same side of and face the same street, and wherever a new dwelling is to be erected on a site between any two such existing dwelling houses neither of which is more than 75 feet distance from the proposed new dwelling, the Zoning Board of Appeals may waive the required set back and front yard standards to such extent as to permit the new dwelling to be so located that its front yard will have a depth no less than that of the adjacent dwelling which has the larger front yard set back.
10.2. Accessory Uses and Buildings For a Dwelling
10.2.1 Accessory Building or Structure: Accessory Building for a Dwelling includes buildings such as garages and barns. Accessory structures for a Dwelling include swimming pools, sheds, gazebos detached solar panels, wind mills, and similar structures. Accessory buildings or structures shall be subject to the yard requirements for Principle Buildings. Accessory buildings may be used for dwelling purposes provided that the total number of family units is not greater than permitted by these regulations and provided also that the living space, floor area and lot area per family unit shall not be less than permitted by these regulations. An accessory building includes a small building or cabin which is accessory to a commercial farming enterprise and which is used by one or more full time hired hands for sleeping only. In the East Haddam Village District, Accessory Buildings need not be located on the same lot as the Principle Building when both buildings are submitted as a single development proposal.
10.2.2. Accessory Use: Accessory uses, as defined in these Regulations, are permitted in all zones, provided, however, that if the principle use requires Site Plan Review, Special Exception, variance, or other review under these Regulations, then the accessory use will require the same review.
10.2.3. Accessory Dwelling Units
10.2.3.1. Purpose and intent - The intent of this regulations is to allow the creation of accessory dwelling units within residential zones with the purpose of providing housing for the elderly, single persons, or small families. This regulation is designed to ensure that in creating an accessory dwelling unit, the single family character of the existing principal dwelling and the neighborhood shall be retained. Accessory dwelling units are subject to a Special Exception Review by the Commission.
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 58
10.2.3.2. Standards:
a. An accessory dwelling unit may be used for dwelling purposes provided that the property contains the required additional area noted below. All accessory dwelling unit construction is subject to the required yard and building heights of these Regulations, the Building Code, and the Public Health Code.
1. An accessory dwelling unit with no more than one bedroom that is constructed attached to or part of an existing single family dwelling or customary accessory building will require no additional acreage as long as the lot meets the minimum lot area for the District in which the lot is located. The minimum square footage of habitable space for an attached accessory unit is 300 square feet and the maximum square footage of habitable space is 500 square feet. For purposes of this paragraph, no accessory building may be used for an accessory dwelling unless it is the only one of its type on the property, i.e., the only garage, the only barn, etc.
2. An accessory dwelling unit with one or two bedrooms that is constructed as a detached building will require an additional one-half acre above the required minimum for the District in which the lot is located. The minimum square footage of habitable space for a detached accessory unit is 300 square feet and the maximum square footage of habitable space is 700 square feet.
3. An accessory dwelling unit with one or two bedrooms that is constructed as a detached building that proposes more than 700 square feet of habitable space will require double the acreage of the district.
b. The total number of dwelling units may not exceed two units for dwelling purposes per lot in the R, R1, R-2, R-4, and LR Zones
c. Only one accessory dwelling unit is allowed on a lot.
d. The owner of the lot must be an occupant of one of the dwelling units. Either in the principal dwelling unit or the accessory dwelling unit. Accessory units may be utilized for rental purposes as well as unpaid family accommodations.
e. There shall be no more than two bedrooms in an accessory dwelling unit.
f. The application for an accessory unit shall be accompanied by to scale drawings of a floor plan of the existing building layout and the proposed layout. Where exterior changes are proposed, architectural drawings shall be presented of all elevations affected. All applications will be reviewed by the Chatham Health District, the Building Official, and the Fire Marshall for code compliance.
g. Exterior appearances of an attached accessory dwelling unit. The accessory dwelling unit shall be designed so that the appearance of the structure maintains that of a one family dwelling, subject further to the following conditions and requirements:
h. Any new entrances shall be located on the side or in the rear of the dwelling.
i. Detached Accessory Unit The exterior materials, roof form, and window spacing and proportions of the accessory dwelling unit shall be in harmony with those of the existing or proposed principal single family dwelling unless the new structure is designed in a traditional New England form such as a barn or other historic structures in the neighborhood. For an accessory dwelling unit located within an existing garage or other outbuilding, the structure is not required to approximate the exterior features of the existing single family dwelling, but any exterior modifications should be consistent with the architectural style of that structure unless the building is upgraded per the requirement for new structures.
k. Off-street parking. There shall be provided at least two off-street parking spaces for the principal dwelling unit and at least one off-street parking space for every bedroom in the proposed accessory dwelling unit. In order to maintain the single-family appearance of the property, all parking spaces on the lot shall be subject further to the following conditions and requirements:
(1) Each parking space and the driveway leading thereto shall be paved or shall have an all-weather gravel surface. No motor vehicles shall be parked on the premises other than in the parking spaces depicted on the approved site plans.
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 59
(2) No parking space shall be located within the boundary of a street right-of-way.
(3) Screening shall be sufficient to minimize the visual impact on abutters and to maintain the single-family appearance of the neighborhood.
10.3. Schedule for Non-Conforming Lots In case of any construction on lots, which with respect to area and dimensions, were non-conforming as of March 14, 1961 or where made non-conforming by any subsequent amendment, the following side yard requirements shall be observed:
10.3.1. Lots 99 feet or less in width: In the case of any lot 99 feet or less in width, the minimum combined width of both side yards and the minimum width of the narrowest side yard shall be respectively as follows, except in cases where either side yard fronts on a lake, river, perennial stream or body of water. In such cases a set back of 50 feet from the waterfront is required.
COMBINED WIDTH MINIMUM WIDTH OF
LOT WIDTH OF SIDE YARDS NARROWEST SIDE YARD
Under 50 feet 20 feet 8 feet
50 feet to 55 feet 22 feet 10 feet
56 feet to 59 feet 25 feet 10 feet
60 feet to 69 feet 30 feet 15 feet
70 feet to 79 feet 34 feet 17 feet
80 feet to 99 feet 40 feet 20 feet
100 feet to 125 feet 40 feet 20 feet
126 feet to 150 feet 50 feet 25 feet
10.3.2. Lots 99 feet or less in depth: In case of any lots, with respect to area and dimensions, were non-conforming as of March 14, 1961, and which are 99 feet or less in depth, the minimum depth required for front yards and rear yards respectively shall be reduced to 20 feet except in cases where either yard fronts on a lake, river or perennial stream or body of water. In such cases a setback of 50 feet from the waterfront is required.
10.3.3. If the above table does not apply, refer to Schedule of Conforming Lots, Section 10.1
10.4. MINIMUM BUILDABLE LAND REQUIREMENTS
Scope of Requirement
No proposed plan of a new Subdivision in any district except the R1/2, C/B/IG, and C3 districts shall hereafter be approved unless the proposed lots equal or exceed the minimum size, width, and criteria requirements set forth in the various districts of these Regulations except as may otherwise be specifically provided in a Conservation Subdivision. Each proposed lot shall include an area of minimum buildable land which complies with all of the criteria as defined in the section below. Lots constructed in the past that have not met these requirements have demonstrated undesirable effects such as unnecessary and excessive blasting, flooded basements, ground water management problems, stormwater management issues, questionable long term septic viability, ground water contamination, and erosion control problems. Additional testing in the field may be required as directed by the Town of East Haddam representative to verify compliance with the Minimum Buildable Land Area.
Minimum Criteria of Buildable Land
Each lot shall meet the following criteria:
(a) In the R2 and R4 Districts an area of at least ¾ acre (32,670 square feet) shall be delineated, having at least four sides with the shortest side being no less than 130 linear feet. The shape of such an area shall generally resemble a rectangle, pentagon or other like geometric figure.
In the R and R1 District an area of at least 2/3 acre (28,750 square feet) shall be delineated, having at least four sides with the shortest side being no less than 115 linear feet. The shape of such an area shall generally resemble a rectangle, pentagon or other like geometric figure.
(Hereinafter the “MBL Area”)
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 60
(b) Within the MBL Area, naturally occurring topography not exceeding twenty percent (20%) slope in grade, as measured in 40 foot increments throughout the MBL Area. Topography exceeding 20% slope shall only be permitted to comprise 20% of the MBL Area. Areas exceeding twenty percent (20%) slope shall be shaded on the proposed plans.
(c) Lots where testing indicates that there is less than twenty four inches (24”) of naturally occurring soil to ground water shall not to be included in the MBL Area.
(d) Ledge rock no higher than four (4) feet below the natural ground surface as observed during soil testing shall not be included in the MBL Area.
(e) No Inland or Tidal Wetlands or Watercourses, determined by a professional soils scientist, who is certified by the Society of Soils Scientists of Southern New England or Upland Review Areas as defined by the East Haddam Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Commission, shall be contained in the MBL Area.
(f) No MBL Area shall contain areas of vehicular travel easements, right of ways, utilities, drainage easement areas, restrictive cutting easements or conservation easements used a in lieu of Stormwater Management, and other easements for public or private facilities.
10.4.2 Alternative Minimum Buildable Land Regulations - Alternative Soil Based Subdivision Review
Intent – for existing lots which cannot meet the minimum lots criteria in Section 10.4 of the Zoning Regulations and Section 4.06 of the Subdivision Regulations but with additional land area may be able to meet the Stormwater Management Criteria in Section 4.02 of the Subdivision Regulations and the Public Health Code.
For an existing parcel which is unable to meet the Subdivision Regulations under the current minimum buildable land area regulations (Section 10.4 and 4.06), an alternative soil based investigation may be explored and implemented if the following conditions are met. As with all subdivisions, it is recommended that all subdivisions be reviewed on a preliminary layout. See Section 3.01 through Section 3.03 of the East Haddam Subdivision Regulations.
a. In the R2 and R4 Districts an area of at least ¾ acre (32,670 square feet) shall be delineated, having at least four sides with the shortest side being no less than 130 linear feet. In the R and R1 District an area of at least ½ acre (21,780) shall be delineated, having at least for sides with the shortest side being no less than 90 linear feet. The shape of such an area shall generally resemble a rectangle, pentagon or other like geometric figure. (Hereinafter the “MBL Area”). This MBL Area is to be within the Proposed Lot Development area.
b. One acre of additional land will be required in each District, but the proposed lot and the additional acreage should be comprised of soils designated as Class A, B, and C soils. If the addition of one acre of soil does not meet the requirements of these regulations, additional acreage in one (1) acre increments shall be added to meet the requirements of these regulations.
(See Section d, e, and f below for exceptions and conditions and the soil listings in Appendix XII. This exploration is to occur after standard soil testing required in the Subdivision Regulations has occurred. The services of a soils scientist will be required to report on the property’s soil characteristics compared to the soil information prepared by USDA Natural Resources Conservation Services (NRCS). For any soils not listed in Appendix XII, the characteristics shall be derived from the soil information prepared by USDA Natural Resources Conservation Services (NRCS).
c. All newly proposed lots will have to meet the Connecticut Public Health Code.
d. All newly proposed lots will have to meet the Stormwater Management criteria in Section 4.02 of the Subdivision Regulations. Stormwater Management shall be contained on each subject lot and will not be subject to restrictive cutting easements or conservation easement to obtain the Stormwater Management goals.
e. Within the proposed lot development area, naturally occurring topography exceeding twenty five percent (25%)
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 61
slope in the grade, as measured in 40 feet increments throughout the lot area shall be shaded on the proposed plans. Topography exceeding 25% slope shall only be permitted to comprise twenty five percent (25%) of the proposed lot development area.
f. Within the proposed lot development area no more than twenty five percent (25%) of the lot area can contain soils classified as Class D and E soils combined. Areas consisting of Class D and E soils shall be identified on each lot and the percentage of the area of Class D and E soils on each lot shall be noted on the proposed subdivision map. See Appendix XII for soil classifications.
g. No proposed lot area shall contain existing areas of vehicular travel easements, right of ways , underground utilities, drainage easement areas, nor shall restrictive cutting easements or conservation easements be used in lieu of Stormwater Management. Easement areas of overhead electrical wires can be used for the MBL area as long as the plan does not violate any easement prohibitions (ie – buildings/structures).
h. All proposed lots shall meet the other requirements of the Subdivision and Zoning Regulations. Applicant has to choose one method of subdivision review process for the proposed lot under Section 4.06.1 or Section 4.06.2. Under the filing of an alternative subdivision review under Section 4.06.2 the application can not apply with part of the property as a Conventional of Conservation Subdivision. Existing parcels as the effective date of this regulation shall not be brought in for review in phases to circumvent the intent of these regulations.
10.5. Other Bulk Regulations
10.5.1. Agriculture, farming, forestry, truck or nursery gardening including greenhouses incidental thereto, provided that all buildings designed for those uses shall be built not less than 100 feet from the street line and 75 feet from the nearest line of a lot under separate ownership.
10.5.2. The display and sale of farm and garden produce raised on the premises. For such purposes one stand not over 200 square feet in area and not more than two signs aggregating not over 12 square feet in area, advertising such produce, may be erected. Such stand or signs shall be on the premises and not less than ten feet from any street line.
10.5.3. Resort Dimensions: Any resort hereafter established shall have a minimum frontage of two hundred feet, a minimum depth of two hundred feet, and shall have no structure less than one hundred feet from the center of the street.
10.5.4. Lots In More Than One District: In the case of a lot lying in more than one district, the provisions of the less restrictive district may be applied for a distance of not over thirty feet into a more restrictive district, provided that such lot has frontage on a street in the less restrictive district. In any case in which the strict application of this thirty foot limitation would result in a substantial hardship, the affected owner may apply to the Zoning Board of Appeals for a variance as provided in the Statutes.
10.5.5. Minimum Floor Area: Every building designed or intended for human habitation, hereafter erected, moved or reconstructed, shall have living space of at least six hundred square feet. Living space shall be included in computation only if it has a minimum headroom of seven feet, and where located above the first floor, only if accessible by a permanent inside stairway. Porches, basement rooms in any part below the grade, garages and other attached accessory structures shall not be computed in living space.
10.5.6. Construction Prior to Adoption of Regulations: Nothing in these regulations shall require any change in the plans, construction or designated use of a building for which the construction shall have been commenced prior to the adoption of these regulations or of any pertinent amendment thereto, provided that such building shall be completed within one year of the adoption of such regulations or amendment.
10.5.7. Reduced side and rear yard for small structures. Sheds, gazebos, and other accessory structures (except garages) under 150 square feet in floor area and up to 12 feet in height - Side and rear yard in LR, R1/2, R, R-1, R-2, and R-4 may be reduced to 10 feet from the property line.
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 62
10.6 Interior Lot Regulations
Section 1 - Purpose and Intent
The purpose and intent of allowing interior lots is to allow for some flexibility in site design to:
1. allow for the creation of environmentally sensitive, low density, residential development with design requirements that will preserve and protect significant areas of natural resources and historical features;
2. preserve East Haddam’s rural character and natural resources;
3. reduce impervious surfaces by avoiding the creation of new roads and reduce the loss of forest canopy; and to reduce long term infrastructure cost,
4. take advantage of unique topographical situations;
All of which are goals of the Plan of Conservation and Development.
Section 2 – Requirements
1. An interior lot is defined as a lot that does not have the required minimum lot width for the District as required in these regulations but does have street frontage, and is situated generally behind a lot or lots fronting the street. The lot must be accessible from the street over an access strip that is owned in fee simple by the owner of the interior lot. A right of way or easement of access shall not satisfy this requirement except where such right of way existed prior to June 1, 1979.
2. Interior lots shall be created as part of a formal subdivision/ resubdivision application, where required by the East Haddam Subdivision Regulations and upon the issuance of a Special Exception application for the creation of interior lots. The intent of this provision is that all remaining parcels of land are to be in compliance with the Zoning and Subdivision Regulations.
3. It is the obligation of the applicant to demonstrate that the use of the interior lots provisions of this Section or the standard road construction method of development are both feasible under the regulations. Once the applicant has demonstrated that both the interior layout and the standard road construction layout are feasible for this location, it shall be the burden of the applicant to prove to the satisfaction of the Commission that the land characteristic and physical site conditions make interior lot development preferable to the standard road construction method of development; and that such interior lot(s) will be in harmony with the Plan of Conservation and Development, and will be in compliance with all applicable Town Regulations and Ordinances.
4. The building setback line for an interior lot shall be measured from the point where the lot meets the minimum lot width requirements for the applicable zone.
5. The minimum street frontage and the minimum width of the access strip shall be twenty-five feet (25’) for each lot, except where the Commission deems it necessary to increase the minimum width. When issues concerning the access strip such as, but not limited to, safety, sight lines, and buffering are raised, the Commission may require a width in excess of twenty-five (25’) to insure proper design and public safety.
6. The number of adjoining interior lot drive access strips shall not exceed two unless the Commission determines that the creation of more interior lots furthers the intent of this regulation. Adjoining interior lot drives are to be common drives to the furthest greatest extent possible.
7. Driveway Standards. To promote traffic safety, reduce erosion, and to prevent drainage and icing problems, all proposed interior lots shall be designed by a professional engineer and constructed in conformance with the provisions of this Regulation, the Driveway Design Criteria of the Subdivision Regulations, and the Connecticut Stormwater Quality Manual guidelines, except as modified below:
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 63
a. Interior lot driveways whether single or common shall follow to the greatest extent possible the natural terrain while minimizing regrading, cuts and fill sections.
b. Common driveways must be paved for the length of the common drive surface and the common driveway shall be a minimum of fifty feet (50’) from the street line.
c. Interior lots must be serviced by underground utilities. (The
Commission may allow overhead utilities where excessive conditions
such as ledge or wetlands exist).
d. When common driveways are employed, easement and maintenance
agreement language acceptable to the Commission must be used. Said easements and maintenance agreement language shall be filed in the land records of the Town Clerk prior to endorsement of any record map.
e. The Commission will seek reviews from the East Haddam Fire
Department and the East Haddam Ambulance Association for
adequacy of access to ensure that the public health, safety, and
welfare of the residents are protected on these driveways.
8. Minimum Lot Size
a. Each interior lot shall contain twice the minimum lot area required for
that zone or district. Two family units on an interior shall require
four the times the minimum lot area required for that zone or
district.
Frontage lot R-1 District – 1 acre 1 Family = 1 acre, 2 Family = 2 acres
Interior lots 1 Family = 2 acres, 2 Family = 4 acres
b. Each interior lot for an open space/conservation subdivision under the provisions of Section 23 shall contain twice the Aggregate Maximum Lot Average of the minimum lot area required.
R-4 R-2
Minimum lot Area 1 acre .75 acre
Maximum Lot Area 1.5 acres 1.25 acres
Aggregate Maximum
Lot Average 1.25 acres 1 acre
Interior Lot Size 2.5 acres 2 acres
9. Landscape Requirements – Interior lots and their road frontage access area shall be adequately buffered with suitable native vegetation so as to ensure (a) a scenic and rural appearance from the public way and (b) suitable privacy for occupants of all adjoining properties.
a. A permanent and contiguous landscaped buffer strip shall be provided on the interior lot to buffer existing and potential occupants of the front lot with a minimum buffer of twenty five feet and buffering may be required for other adjoining properties. Suitable existing trees and shrubs may be preserved or augmented by plantings to provide the required buffer. The landscaping planting requirements may be waived by the Commission if a substantial vegetative buffer exists. The preservation and maintenance of the said buffer strip shall be recorded as a deeded restrictive covenant and the buffer strip shall be maintained by the property owner as required in the restrictive
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 64
covenant. The restrictive covenant language acceptable to the Commission must be used. Said restrictive covenant shall be filed in the land records of the Town Clerk prior to endorsement of any record map.
b. The access strip of an interior lot shall be maintained in a suitable fashion as to provide safe access to the interior lot and to prevent degradation to the abutting properties. No materials are to be stored and no vehicles may be parked on a regular basis on the access strip.
10. The distance between the nearest point of the access strip frontage serving interior lots shall be a minimum of 300 feet measured along the road right of way. When there are common interior lot access strips serving two or more interior lots, the minimum distance to any other interior lot access strip frontage shall be 600 feet.
11. In the case where an interior lot is situated in two different districts, the area and bulk requirements of the more restrictive district shall be adhered to.
12. The Commission may require open space which includes a variety of landforms, habitat, and vegetation, including wetlands and uplands, steep topography and level areas, vistas and visual screens, riverine areas and hilltops, historic sites, or other natural resources.
See 4.09.02 of the Subdivision Regulations and Section 23.7a of the Zoning Regulations.
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 65
Section 11 General Parking Requirements
11.0 Intent:
Off-street parking shall be provided for the total use in structures hereafter constructed, reconstructed, or enlarged in accordance with the following requirements. Said parking shall be part of the site plan or prepared as a separate plan and shall include boundary screening and landscaping, landscaped islands, parking sites, traffic circulation patterns, loading areas, storm drainage facilities and traffic access and egress including driveways.
Section 11.1 Number of Parking Spaces
Off-street parking shall be provided and maintained in connection with the use, substantial change in use, construction, conversion, or increase in intensity of use of buildings or structures, such spaces to be provided in the following amounts per 1000 square foot (SF) of Gross Floor Area (GFA):
Land Use Maximum Minimum
Bank 5 3
Theater, Movie 1 space per seats 3 space per seats
Theater, Live 2.6 2.2
Retail 5 2
General Office Building 5 2
Light Industrial 8 2
Medical Office Building 10 2
Nursing Home 4 1
Restaurants 12 6
Small Shopping Centers 6 3
Bed and Breakfast & Country Inn 1.2 space per guest 1 spaces per guest
room or suite room or suite
Personal Services 3 2
Day Care Centers 1 space per 4 children 1 space per 8 children
at max. capacity at max. capacity
Churches and Places of Worship 1 space per 3 seats in 1 space per 5 seats in
the portion of the building the portion of the building
used for services used for services
Museum and Libraries 2 1
Social, Fraternal Clubs and Organizations 4 3
Elementary, Middle, and High Schools 1 space per 3 seats in 1 space per 5 seats in
the auditorium the auditorium
Warehouse 1 1
Home Occupation 4 per dwelling unit plus 2 per dwelling unit plus
1.5 per non-resident employee 1 per non- resident employee
Multi-Family Residences 2.5 per dwelling unit 1 per dwelling unit
Commercial Kennel 3 1
Automotive Sales and/or Rental 3 1
Automotive Repair and/or Service 4 2
Gymnasiums, Physical Fitness Centers, Health 4 2
Spas, Martial Arts Centers, and Dance Studios
Indoor Recreation Facilities 5 5
Outdoor Recreation Facilities As determined by the As determined by the
Commission based on a Commission based on
parking demand study a parking demand study
For uses not listed in this section, the minimum and maximum number of parking spaces required shall be comparable to the closet other similar use as determined by the Commission. Loading Areas shall be determined by the proposed use and frequency of deliveries.
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 66
Section 11.2 Handicapped Parking Space Requirements
All off-street parking areas shall include paved handicapped accessible parking spaces. Pursuant to subsection (h) of section 14-253a of the Connecticut General Statutes, parking spaces for passenger motor vehicles designated for handicapped shall be as near as possible to a building entrance or walkway and shall be at least 15 feet wide including 5 feet of cross hatch and twenty feet long. Handicap accessible parking spaces and access aisles shall be provided in the following amounts relative to the total number of spaces provided in the parking area:
Total Required
Parking Accessible
Spaces In Lot Spaces
1-25 1
26-50 2
51-75 3
76-100 4
Add one handicap parking space for every additional 25 spaces or a portion over the 25 spaces.
For every six or fraction of six handicap accessible parking spaces, at least one shall be van-accessible parking space. Van parking spaces shall be 20 feet long, 16 feet wide including 8 feet of cross hatch.
Section 11.3. Waivers and Exceptions
Section 11.3a. Intent
It is the intent of these regulations that all structures and land uses be provided with a sufficient amount of off-street motor vehicle parking, while allowing for some flexibility of site design to accommodate the unique characteristics of individual properties. This section of the regulations is intended to set standards for conditions under which a waiver or exception from the general parking requirements may be allowed.
The Commission may require the submission of a parking demand analysis as part of any request for a waiver or exception from the general parking requirements.
Section 11.3.b. Waivers
Except for buildings used or occupied for residential use, all or part of the off-street parking requirements may be waived by the Commission where the proposed planning, design, and construction includes the following:
1. Sufficient publicly owned or shared parking spaces within 500 feet of the proposed development site.
2. Access to a regularly scheduled transit stop within 500 feet of the proposed development, with service available during the hours necessary to serve the activities of the use for which a waiver is sought.
Section 11.3.c. Parking Reduction Requests
In the case that an applicant believes that the required parking amounts are in excess of what is needed for the proposed use, the applicant may submit a request with justification to the Commission for a reduction in parking space requirements. The Commission will consider and act on this request concurrent with and as part of the application process.
Section 11.3.d. Parking in the East Haddam Village District or C/B/IG Center District
All requirements for number of off-street parking spaces as listed in Section 11.1 “Maximum” shall be reduced by 25% where the use and associated required parking would be located within the East Haddam Village District or C/B/IG - Moodus Center District.
Section 11.3.e. Parking for Mixed-Use Developments
In Mixed-Use developments, or developments where parking is affected by cooperative agreements between different land uses, for any proposed use, substantial change in use, construction, conversion, or increase in intensity
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 67
of use of any buildings or structures, the applicant shall submit a parking demand analysis that demonstrates parking demand patterns. The parking demand analysis must be approved by the Commission and will thereafter serve as the basis for determination of required parking at the mixed-use site.
11.3.f. Parking in Excess of the Maximum
The Commission may approve parking lots with more spaces that the allowed maximum provided that all of the spaces above maximum number are constructed of a pervious surface, and where adequate stormwater management is provided as specified in Section 11.8 of these regulations.
The Commission may also approve parking lots with additional impervious parking spaces above the allowed maximum spaces where the use of pervious spaces would not be environmentally sound and where a stormwater management plan is included with the application and implemented, employing, at a minimum, the stormwater management measures specified in Section SWM of these regulations.
Section 11.3.g. Parking Space Held on Reserve
For phased developments, the Commission may provide that up to 50 percent of the parking spaces required by this section will not be immediately constructed and may be kept in reserve. Such reserve parking areas must be kept planted and maintained rather than surfaced for parking until such time as the additional parking space is necessary to serve completed phases of the associated development. No above ground improvements shall be placed or constructed upon such reserve parking areas. The areas designated as reserve parking must be clearly depicted on the phased development site plan and the terms and conditions of phasing of the parking area completion, as determined by the Commission, must clearly be set forth in notations on the approved site plan.
Section 11.4. Parking Lot Design
Parking lots shall be designed to achieve the greatest efficiency of use of space practicable. In general, the preferred layout should have:
1. 90 degree parking, rather than angled parking;
2. Parking provided around the periphery of the site with no parking located between the building and street.
11.4.a. Minimum Design Requirements
At a minimum, all parking lots shall:
1. Have a minimum stall size of 9’ x 18’
2. Have rectangular parking stalls
3. Have aisle widths and parking angles in a minimum ratio as shown as follows:
Parking Minimum Direction
Angle(degrees) Aisle Width of Flow
45
50 12’9” One way
55 13’3” One way
60 14’3” One way
65 15’2” One way
70 16’ One way
75 24’ Two way
90 24’ Two way
4. Have no greater than 5% slope
5. Have a number and location of access drives compatible with traffic circulation patterns both within the site and on the abutting street system
6. Provide sufficient stacking area (area where cars may need to wait in line to exit onto the street or to enter to circulate in the parking lot), and stacking for at least 2 vehicles at the inbound access drives to the site.
7. No parking space shall be designed to allow a vehicle to protrude or overhang sidewalks or any landscaped area.
8. Minimize potential conflict points between pedestrians, bicycles, and motor vehicles. Required off-street parking facilities shall be maintained as long as the use or structure exists for which the facilities are designed to serve.
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 68
Section 11.5: Pervious Parking Area
In all districts, off-street parking provided and maintained as paved/impervious surface shall be counted as part of the Lot Impervious Surface Coverage. Parking areas composed of pervious surfaces are encouraged for all land uses and lots, unless there are overriding environmental limitation, and may be provided to meet all or part of any required parking spaces on a lot
Measures that shall be considered to reduce the amount of impervious surfaces in all proposed parking lots include:
1. Provide pervious parking stall surfaces
2. Provide pervious overflow parking
3. Provide pervious snow-storage space
4. Conserve existing natural areas, including trees on-site
5. Minimize clearing to the extent practicable while retaining access, sight distance, and safe vehicle flows
Section 11.6: Shared Parking
11.6.a: Shared Parking
The Commission encourages parking lots for different structures or uses, or for mixed uses, to be shared in any zoning district. At the applicant’s request, shared parking may be provided, subject to the following provisions:
1. A reciprocal written agreement has been executed by all the parties concerned that assures the perpetual joint use of such common parking, a copy of which has been submitted to and is acceptable to the Commission. The Commission may forward such agreements to the town legal counsel for review.
2. The Commission may require the applicant to provide a parking study with all information deemed necessary to its decision-making on a shared parking agreement. This information includes but is not limited to a) the type and hours of operation and parking demand, for each use, b) a site plan displaying shared use spaces in the lot and walking distance to the uses sharing the lot, c) a description of the character of land use and parking patterns of adjacent land uses, and d) an estimate of anticipated turnover in parking space use over the course of 12 to 24 hours at the site.
2. Parking spaces to be shared must not be reserved for individuals or groups on a 24-hour basis.
3. Uses sharing the parking facility do not need to be contained on the same lot, but shall be a maximum of 500 feet from the parking space in the parking lot which is to be used and allow for safe, convenient walking for most parkers, including safe pedestrian crossings, signage, and adequate lighting. A waiver of the maximum allowable distance from the proposed use to the parking area may be approved by the Commission with written justification and supporting information provided by the applicant.
4. If the conditions for shared parking become null and void and the shared parking arrangement is discontinued, this will constitute a violation of zoning regulations for any use approved expressly with shared parking. The applicant must then provide written notification of the change to the Zoning Enforcement Official and, within 60 days of that notice, provide a remedy satisfactory to the Commission to provide adequate parking.
11.6.b: Reduction in Parking Space Required for Shared Parking:
Where shared parking is provided for a Mixed Use of land, the Commission may allow the following, at the applicant’s request:
1. Up to 30% of the parking spaces required for the predominant use on a site may be shared with other uses operating during the same time of day and days of the week. The predominant use is considered to be that which requires the most parking of those sharing the parking facilities.
2. Up to 75% of parking spaces required for uses such as theaters (Movie and Live), public auditoriums, bowling alleys, nightclubs, movie theaters, and similar predominately evening uses may be shared with such uses such as banks, offices, and similar predominately daytime uses.
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 69
3. Up to 75% of the parking spaces required for such uses such as Houses of Worship and other uses exclusively in operation during the weekend may be shared with such uses as medical offices, banks, and other similar uses predominately in operation on weekdays.
Section 11.7: Bicycle and Pedestrian Accommodations
Section 11.7.a Intent
It is the intent of these Regulations to promote and support access by bicycle and walking throughout the community. To this end, all parking lots must be designed to provide safe and convenient pedestrian and bicycle access as a part of any Parking Area or Structure design including safe and convenient pedestrian and bicycle movement to and from public walkways and/or bikeways, streets, or transit stops.
Section 11.7.b Bicycle Access Design Standards
A minimum of two bicycle parking space shall be provided for each 40 off-street automobile parking spaces within the East Haddam Village District or C/B/IG District.
At a minimum, all bicycle parking spaces shall be provided in the form of bicycle racks with locking capacity. Bicycle parking facilities shall be designed and installed to include:
1. Spaces that are a minimum of 2 feet by 6 feet per bicycle
2. The minimum number possible of potential conflict points between bicycles and motor vehicles
3. Lighting
4. Provision for locking of bicycles to the rack or bicycle locker
5. Adequate spacing for access to the bicycle and locking device when the spaces are occupied.
6. Where possible, bicycle parking shall be located within view of building entrances or in view of windows, and/or security personnel stations.
Section 11.7.c Pedestrian Access Design Standards
Provision for safe and convenient pedestrian access shall be incorporated into landscaping plans for any parking area or Parking Structure. This shall be clearly shown on all site plans.
Any parking Area designed, constructed, and maintained, as part of a development must be designed such that the flow of pedestrians can be directed though a system of convenient routes that bring them to central walkways leading to main entrances. All walkways shall be constructed to provide for:
1. Safe separation of all walkways from motor vehicle traffic shall be done through the use of raised sidewalks and/or landscaping between sidewalks and parking spaces and/or driving aisles.
2. Safe, well-articulated pedestrian crossings demarcated with pavement markings, pedestrian warning signs, and lighting
3. A minimum of 4 feet in width
4. Inclusion of plantings, benches, and lighting along walkways and at all pedestrian crossings
5. Design, construction and maintenance to accommodate disabled individuals per Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) requirements.
Section 11.8: Design Standards for Stormwater Management and Landscaping in Parking Lots
Section 11.8.a Intent:
It is the intent of these regulations to encourage the use of Best Management Practices (BMPs) to minimize, treat, prevent and/or reduce degradation of water quality and flooding potential due to stormwater runoff from parking. In all districts, all developments shall be designed to the extent practicable with the goal of no increase in peak rate runoff from the site. In addition, the peak volume of runoff from the site after development shall not, to the extent practicable, exceed the peak volume of site run-off prior to the proposed development. In addition, the stormwater management system shall be designed, constructed, and maintained with BMPs to minimize run-off volumes, prevent flooding, reduce soil erosion, protect water quality, maintain or improve wildlife habitat, and contribute to the aesthetic values of the project.
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 70
Section 11.8.b General Standards
Stormwater management systems in parking lots shall be designed in accordance with BMPs as described in the most recent version of the Connecticut Stormwater Quality Manual (CTDEEP), and to meet the following general standards as described in Section 28 of the East Haddam Zoning Regulations:
1. Infiltration of stormwater shall be accommodated to the extent possible though limitation of land disturbance and grade changes, retention of existing natural drainage area and wetlands, and use or creation of vegetated islands, vegetated medians, and vegetated perimeter buffer strips.
2. All stormwater detention and conveyance structures shall be constructed to control the post-development peak discharge rates from 10, 25, and 100-year storms to the corresponding pre-development peak discharge rates.
3. Site plans must include information regarding all existing and proposed landscaping and stormwater management structured and features.
4. Natural drainage patterns shall be maintained to the extent practicable. The applicant must demonstrate though information provided on and in association with the proposed site plan, the existing and proposed drainage patterns and calculated flows.
Section 11.8.c: Landscaping Standards for Parking Lot Stormwater Management:
The landscaping requirements in this section are intended to maximize the natural areas retained in any Parking Area in order to optimize natural infiltration of rainwater, intercept and manage stormwater runoff, and provide an aesthetic setting for development. In order to accomplish these goals the following standards shall apply:
1. Developments with proposed parking spaces of fifteen (15) spaces or more shall provide a minimum of 15% of the total parking area as landscaped open space. The Parking Area shall be defined as in Section 5 of these regulations. Such landscaped open space may be provided in the form of islands, aesthetic landscape treatments, pedestrian refuge/oasis areas, and may include the perimeter buffer between the Parking Area and adjacent streets, residential/commercial developments, or open space areas. Planting plans shall not include invasive species. This list is available from the Department of Environmental Protection.
2. Developments with proposed Parking Areas of fifteen (15) or more Parking Spaces should provide landscaped islands and perimeter landscaping throughout the parking area planted with a mix of shrubs and trees. Such islands and perimeter plantings should be located:
a. At each parking lot entrance
b. At the ends of each parking Aisle
c. As intermediate islands in long rows of spaces, located every 15 spaces
d. As separation between long rows of Parking Spaces where that abut other rows
e. As separation between pedestrian walkways and Parking Spaces and/or driving Aisles
3. A minimum of two deciduous or evergreen tree and two shrubs shall be planted on the parking lot islands for every 40 feet of linear measurement of the proposed island or perimeter landscaping. Trees and shrubs shall conform, to the following standards:
a. Deciduous trees shall be planted at 2.5 inches in caliper with a mature height of at least 35 feet.
b. Evergreen trees shall be coniferous species planted at 6 feet in height.
c. Shrubs shall be either deciduous species planted at 2 ½ feet in height or evergreen species planted at 2 ½ feet in spread.
d. Trees and shrubs shall be situated such that they do not obstruct vehicle sight lines when at full growth.
4. Failure to maintain any landscaped area or buffer strip shall constitute a violation of these Regulations.
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 71
SIGNS
12.1 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE
It is the intent of this section to accommodate the establishment of signs necessary for identification, direction, and reasonable commercial promotion, while assuring compatibility of signs with the surrounding land use and to conserve property values in all zones and districts. Through these regulations, East Haddam’s rural and historical character shall be considered in all signs and sign construction. An additional purpose of this section is to permit signs that will not through their proliferation, extension, location, or height be detrimental to the public health and safety by creating signs that confuse, mislead, or obstruct the vision necessary for traffic safety or otherwise endanger public health and safety.
12.2 DEFINITIONS
Billboard: A sign which directs the attention of the viewer to a business, commodity service, entertainment, or other use which is conducted, sold, offered, or occurring, either presently or in the future, at a location different from the lot upon which such sign is displayed, or only incidentally occurring upon such lot, or any sign that is larger than four (4) feet by eight (8) feet.
Building Facade Area: The building facade area is calculated by multiplying the linear distance that the building fronts the street by the height to the eaves of the building section that front the street. The building height may vary requiring calculating each section separately for compliance.
Egress sign: A sign directing a vehicle out of an area.
Ingress sign: A sign directing a vehicle into an area.
Sign: Any structure, or part thereof, or any device attached to a building or structure or painted or represented thereon which displays or includes letters, words, symbols, trademarks or any other graphic representation which is in the nature of an announcement, direction or advertisement for commercial purposes or otherwise; similarly, any natural object, such as a tree, stone, or the earth itself, which is painted or arranged so as to represent or display any of the aforesaid graphic representations; any building feature, including roof or other special illumination, special colors or effects, or building or roof lines which serve to identify the use or occupancy of any building or site through a recognized motif or symbol. The term “sign” shall include pennants, flags, and banners but not include the flag of any nation, state, or other political unit.
Sign Area or Face: The plane defined by one continuous perimeter of that rectangle, triangle, circle, or other shape having the smallest area which encompasses all the lettering, wording, design, or symbols together with any background different from the balance of the wall on which it is located, if such background is designed as an integral part of and relation to the sign. Such perimeter, however, shall not include any structural elements lying outside the limits of such sign and not forming an integral part of the display. For the purposes of these Regulations, two-sided signs shall be considered to have only one sign face.
Sign, Directly Illuminated and Internally Illuminated.: Any sign designed to give forth any artificial light directly or indirectly through any transparent, reflective, translucent or similar material, from a source of light contained within, upon, or otherwise structurally integrated into such sign, including neon signs.
Sign, Indirectly Illuminated: A Sign illuminated by a light source which is remote from the sign structure or is affixed to the sign or sign structure and so shielded that no direct rays there from are visible elsewhere than upon the Sign Face, or the area immediately around it, but in no event shall light rays be directed off the lot where said Sign is located. If such shielding is defective or fails to conform to the criteria of this definition, such Sign shall be deemed to be a Directly Illuminated Sign. Lighting is to be mounted to be directed downward onto the Sign Face, and not upwards from the ground or from the sides of the Sign.
Temporary Sign: Any sign which is intended to advertise community or civil projects, construction projects, real estate for sale or lease, or other special events of a temporary nature, erected on a temporary basis.
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 72
12.3 GENERAL RESTRICTIONS AND CONDITIONS:
Attachment: No sign shall be attached to any tree, fence, highway sign, utility pole or be permitted to be painted directly upon the wall or roof of any building.
Billboards: No billboards shall be permitted in any district.
Dynamic Signs: No signs shall be of the type that moves or rotates mechanically or is illuminated by a light source, which visibly flashes, oscillates, pulsates, or otherwise automatically changes in intensity or color.
Elevation: No free-standing sign shall have a height greater than fifteen (15’) feet above the average grade in the area at the base of, or below the sign or extend above the highest portion of the main exterior wall of the structure on the site nearest the street, whichever is less.
Frontage: In the case where a building faces two (2) or more public streets or has two (2) or more sides facing one (1) street, only one (1) side shall be considered as having frontage except buildings in Commercial Districts (C/B/IG, C-3, IG-1) may count two (2) of the sides facing a street as frontage. In the C/B/IG, C-3, IG-1 the signage on the face of the building has to correlate with the frontage of that side.
Government Signs: Nothing in these Regulations shall prohibit the State of Connecticut or the Town of East Haddam from erecting signs intended for the health and safety of the public provided such signs meet the applicable requirements of these regulations.
Hazardous Signs: Any sign which has been found to be hazardous to the public by the Zoning Enforcement Officer or the Building Official shall be repaired, replaced, or removed within ten (10) days after notification of such finding. Failure to comply with such notification shall be deemed a violation of these Regulations, and subject the violator to such penalties as may be provided by law.
House Identification Signs: House identification signage shall not exceed three (3) square feet. This signage shall include Historical plaques.
Illumination: Indirectly illuminated signs Any sign which includes illumination shall be arranged so that all light is concentrated on the sign and there shall be no direct light cast on the street, sidewalk, or adjacent property.
Neon and internally illuminated signs Neon and internally illuminated signs are prohibited in all residential zones, all Historic Districts, the East Haddam Village District, C-3 District, and all IG Districts except for IG-1, IG 4, IG 7, IG 9). Internally illuminated signs (not including neon) are permitted in IG-1, IG 4, IG 7, IG 9 Districts but are limited to one “open sign” 12” X 18” and must be mounted on the building below the first floor ceiling level and is to be illuminated only during business hours.
Internally illuminated and neon signs are permitted in C/B/IG District but are limited to two per establishment, one “open sign” 12” X 18” and one other internally illuminated or neon sign not to exceed 6 square feet. Internally illuminated or neon signs are to be mounted on or in the building and are to be illuminated only during business hours. No internally illuminated sign may be mounted on the building above the first floor ceiling level without a application and approval for second floor occupants.
Interference with Traffic: No sign or sign structure shall be permitted at any location where it could interfere with, or obstruct the view of traffic or be confused with any authorized traffic signal, sign, or device.
Maintenance. All signs shall be maintained in a clean, proper working order, free and clear of rubbish and weeds. Normal maintenance shall include painting, changing, replacing broken light fixtures and lenses, adding, or removing advertising or information on display surfaces and routine repairs necessary to keep the sign in a neat, clean, attractive and safe condition, and reflecting the current occupancy of the site.
Non-Conforming Signs: Signs existing upon the effective date of this Regulation and not conforming to its provisions, or any amendment thereto, shall be deemed a non-conforming sign. No non-conforming sign shall be
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 73
structurally altered, relocated, or replaced other than changes in content; nor shall any non-illuminated non-conforming sign be illuminated; and no new signs shall be installed on the lot, except those in compliance with these Regulations. See Section 12.4 regarding changes in content or text.
Obsolete Signs. Any Sign Face now or hereafter existing which no longer advertises a bona fide business or product sold shall be removed by the owner, agent, or person having the beneficial use of the building or structure upon which such sign may be located within thirty (30) days after written notification from the Zoning Agent. Failure to comply with such notification shall be deemed a violation of these Regulations, and subject the violator to such penalties as may be provided by law. This paragraph shall not require the removal of the Sign structure absent evidence of an intent to abandon a non-conforming sign.
Obstruction of Egress: No sign shall be erected or located so that it could prevent free ingress or egress from any window, door, or fire escape.
Obstruction of Light or Air: No sign shall be placed in such a position that it could obscure any window or doorway intended for light or air.
Other Permits Required: All signs that are considered structures and shall meet the required Electrical and Building Codes of the State of Connecticut. Only materials permitted by the Building Code governing structural materials and equipment as approved by the Building Official, conforming to standard engineering practices, shall be used in the manufacture and erection of signs.
Projection: Signs affixed flat or parallel to buildings or other structures shall not project more than eighteen (18”) inches there from or project beyond the side of the structure, and shall be located so that the highest part of the sign shall not extend above the highest portion of the main exterior wall nearest the street.
Setback: Signs shall be set back at least fifteen (15’) feet from the edge of any paved roadway, or that portion of a road which is improved, designed or ordinarily intended for vehicular use, or located on the applicant’s property, whichever is greater, except that ingress and egress signs may be located on that portion of the applicant’s property immediately adjacent to the road right-of-way, provided each such sign shall not exceed one (1) square foot in area and twenty-four (24”) inches in elevation and is limited to one such sign per ingress or egress.
Warning and Traffic Control on Private Premises: All signs for the purpose of traffic control on private property shall be in conformance with the size, shape, color, and use provisions as specified in the latest revisions of the State of Connecticut, Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
Window Signs: Any sign located on or within two (2’) feet of the interior surface of a window, and if intended for viewing from the exterior of the window, shall be considered a sign and subject to the provisions of this Section 12.
12.4 SIGNS NOT REQUIRING PERMITS
The following signs may be erected without the issuance of a Certificate of Zoning Compliance, and without review by the Commission, provided such signs conform to the requirements set forth below and meet the general restrictions of Section 12.3.
Change in Text/Content: A change in the text or content of a sign, with no other change in size, location, color, illumination, or any other aspect of the sign, shall not require the issuance of a new Sign Permit, provided such change in text or content does not change the classification or method of illumination of such sign, as set forth in these Regulations. If the property is within a Historic District, the applicant is still required to have the sign reviewed and approved by the Historic District Commission.
Non-Advertising Traffic Control Signs. Directional signs whose purpose is to reduce street congestion by directing traffic flow to entryways and parking areas, provided that such signs are not designed to become an additional form of advertising by displaying company logos, symbols, motif colors, or products.
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 74
Temporary Building Signs: Temporary building signs located on land where building or buildings are actually under construction limited to a maximum of six (6) square feet. Such signs shall be removed within thirty (30) days of the completion of the activity advertised. Signs may include the names of the contractors, architects, engineers, and similar information about the building under construction.
Temporary Commercial Signs: Signs advertising a sale or special event as part of an ongoing business are permitted, will be treated as part of the sign coverage area for the lot (see Section 12.5b.2) and must be removed within 48 hours of the end of the advertised sale or event. One temporary sign per business. Temporary Commercial Signs (portable signs) shall not exceed six (6) square feet per side.
Temporary For Sale/For Rent Signs: In any district, two (2) non-illuminated, signs containing not more than six (6) square feet each may advertise the sale or rental of the premises on which the sign is situated and shall be removed within one (1) week of the sale or rental of the premises.
Temporary Political Signs: Signs shall not exceed eight (8’) feet in height and thirty-two (32) square feet in area, shall be erected no sooner than 90 days before the activity advertised and shall be removed within fourteen (14) days of the completion of the activity advertised.
See Temporary Non-Profit Organization Signs
.
Temporary Non-Profit Organization Signs: Any sign for a civic, charitable, religious, patriotic, or similar non-profit organization event with the permission of the property owner or when placed on property of the Town of East Haddam with the permission of the First Selectman. Such sign shall not exceed eight (8’) feet in height and thirty-two (32) square feet in area, shall be erected no sooner than sixty (60) days before the activity advertised and shall be removed within fourteen (14) days of the completion of the activity advertised.
Temporary Signs for Public Auction, Permits and Public Projects: Temporary signs required to comply with Town, State, or Federal regulations or orders shall not exceed the minimum size required by statute or regulation. Duration of display shall not exceed the minimum time required by statute or regulation.
Temporary Sale Signs: One (1) temporary sign, accessory to a dwelling, not more than two (2) square feet in area, advertising the sale of an item of personal property owned by a person residing on the premises may be displayed.
12.5 SIGNS REQUIRING PERMITS:
12.5A RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
The following signs shall require review and approval by the Commission of the proposed location, dimensions, illumination, height, color, and other details of each sign, and an application fee set forth in the Town of East Haddam Town Ordinance Book. All signs in Residential Districts shall be compatible with the rural, New England character of the Town, and, in addition, shall conform to the following requirements:
1. Home Occupation: In any Residential District one (1) sign may advertise the business or services legally conducted or offered on the same lot on which the sign is situated. The sign shall not exceed three (3) square feet and shall not be illuminated.
2. Temporary Signs for Residential Development: On subdivisions or other residential developments involving six (6) or more lots or units, the developer and/or Realtor may display a non-illuminated sign not to exceed twenty (20) square feet. Such sign shall comply with all other requirements of the Zoning Regulations. Also, such signs shall be removed within one (1) week of the sale or rental of the last lot or structure in the subdivision.
3. Non-Residential Uses: On lots containing a farm, church, place of worship, parish hall, cemetery, museum, school, college, university, membership club, philanthropic institution, hospital, recreation facility, nature preserve, wildlife sanctuary, convalescent home, sanitarium, public utility facility, or building, use or facility of the Town of East Haddam, or other non-residential use permitted in residential zones by these Regulations, one (1) sign not exceeding twenty (20) square feet
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 75
4. Residential Development: Signs depicting the name or address of a subdivision, multi-family development, residential common interest community, or similar residential development are limited to one (1) sign of six (6) square feet and shall be permitted only when provisions for its maintenance has been made through a homeowners association agreement or similar device.
12.5B COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
1. Residential District Signs: Any sign permitted in the Residential Districts.
2. Commercial Signs: Signs may advertise the business or service conducted or offered on the same lot on which the sign is situated. The total sign face or area of all signs shall not exceed 10% of the building facade area for the building for which the sign appears; provided, however that no sign shall exceed 32 square feet. Window signs, temporary signs, and banners are included in the maximum sign face area authorized by this Section. One freestanding sign per lot not to exceed twenty (20) square feet may be permitted. The freestanding sign shall be counted towards the maximum sign face area. For buildings having multiple occupancy, the allowable signage shall be divided based on each occupant's square footage share of the building. Directory signs shall not be counted toward maximum sign face area authorized by this Section.
3. Directory Signs: Directory signs are intended to direct attention to various non-residential land uses. Directory signs may display a horizontal area not to exceed four (4) square feet for each unit of occupancy or land use. Maximum height shall be twelve (12’) feet, maximum width shall be eight (8’) feet. Signs located at strategic points are to be consolidated as directed by the Commission.
4. Pennants, Flags, and Banners: Pennants, flags, and banners, such as those made of cloth, aluminum or plastic, if used to advertise goods sold, services rendered, or activities shall be considered and calculated in the total signage allowed and must comply with all applicable sections of these regulations.
5. Temporary Commercial Signs: Signs advertising a sale or special event as part of an ongoing business are permitted, will be treated as part of the sign coverage area for the lot and must be removed within 48 hours of the end of the advertised sale or event. One temporary sign per business. Temporary (portable signs) Commercial Signs shall not exceed six (6) square feet per side.
12.5C INDUSTRIAL ZONE (C/B/IG and IG-1 through IG-3)
1. Residences in Industrial Zones: Any sign permitted in the Residential Districts for uses allowed in Residential Districts.
2. Industrial Signs: Signs may advertise the business or service conducted or offered on the same lot on which the sign is situated. The total sign face area of all signs shall not exceed 10% of the building facade area for the building for which the sign appears, provided, however that no single sign shall exceed 32 square feet. Windows signs, temporary signs, and banners are included the maximum sign face area authorized by this Section. No freestanding signs shall exceed twenty (20) square feet each. The freestanding sign shall be counted towards the maximum sign face area. For buildings having multiple occupancy, the allowable signage shall be divided based on each occupant's square footage share of the building.
3. Directory Signs: Directory signs are intended to direct attention to the various non-residential land uses offered. Directory signs may display a horizontal area not to exceed (4) square feet for each unit of occupancy or land use. Maximum height shall be twelve (12’) feet. Maximum width shall be eight (8’) feet. Sign locations at strategic points are to be consolidated as directed by the commission.
12.6 APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS AND CRITERIA FOR EVALUATION OF SIGN PERMIT APPLICATIONS
1. Regulated Signs: Except for those signs enumerated in Section 12.4, no sign shall be erected or established until the issuance of a Sign Permit. For any use of land or buildings requiring Site Plan Approval pursuant to Section 14A of these Regulations; for any use or activity requiring a Special Exception pursuant to Section 14B of these Regulations; and for any use of land or buildings requiring Floating Zone approval pursuant to Section 17 of these
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 76
Regulations; all required information shall be submitted as part of the application for such Site Plan Approval, Special Exception, or Floating Zone. Any modification (other than content of text) of the signs approved in connection with a Site Plan Approval, Special Exception, or Floating Zone shall require modification of such approval in accordance with the applicable Section of these Regulations for that type of approval. Where no application for Site Plan Approval, Special Exception, or Floating Zone is involved, the application for Sign permit shall be filed separately with the Commission.
2. Application for Sign Permit: Information and Fees Required: Unless specifically waived by the Commission, every application for Sign Permit shall contain, at a minimum, the following information:
a. A site plan depicting the location of the sign(s) on the subject site and its relation to adjacent buildings and structures, and any associated landscaping, lighting sources, structural components, and the like.
b. An illustration of the proposed sign(s), including dimensions, text/content, materials, color, and structural support.
c. A narrative description of the sign(s), including its purpose, method if illumination, materials (if not evident from the illustration), the section of the Regulations under which such sign is permitted, a description of the Regulations under which such sign is permitted, a description of the total area, location, type and other information for all other signs on the lot, and any other information not contained in the sign plan or illustration.
d. For a temporary sign (other than those listed in Section 12.4), the dates upon which the sign is to be displayed, and the purpose thereof.
e. Such other information as the Commission may require to determine compliance with these Regulations.
f. An application fee in the amount of set forth in the Town Ordinance.
3. Criteria for Review:
a. That the proposed sign(s) conforms with all applicable requirements of these Regulations.
b. That the proposed sign(s) is appropriate in size, location, illumination, and character for the building or use with which it is associated, and the area in which it is proposed; in harmony with the historic, rural character of the Town of East Haddam; and will not adversely impact property values, public safety, or the general welfare.
c. That the proposed sign(s) are designed, constructed, located, erected and maintained in accordance with all applicable requirements of the State Building Code.
d. For signs associated with users requiring a Site Plan Approval; Compliance with the criteria of Sections 14A ( Site Plan Approval) of these Regulations; for signs associated with uses requiring a Special Exception: Compliance with the Regulations; and for signs associated with uses requiring approval as a Floating Zone: Compliance with the criteria of Section 17 (Floating Zones) of these Regulations.
e. In addition to the minimum and maximum parameters contained in this Section 12, the Commission may also impose more restrictive requirements where required to protect the public health, safety, welfare, property values, the natural environment, the character of historic areas, or the other purposes of these Regulations. The situations where such additional restriction may be imposed include, but are not limited to, the following: Areas of historic importance; nonconforming non-residential uses in Residential Zones; signs in locations where sight line hazards may be created or maintained; developments adjacent to uses requiring special protection from light and the other characteristics of signs, such as hospitals and rest homes, schools, churches, and other public or community buildings.
4. Action: The Commission may approve, modify and approve, or deny an application for Sign Permit. Such modifications may include, but are not limited to, requirements for certain dimensions, illumination, lettering size, location, height, landscaping, and other characteristics or dimensions of the sign(s), even when such requirements are more restrictive than the minimum and maximum requirements contained in this Section 12. In determining such
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 77
requirements, the Commission shall consider the character of the area where such sign is located, the use with which it is associated, the types, sizes, dimensions, and the like of surrounding signs (both existing and proposed), and the general compatibility of the sign(s) with the most desirable and tasteful developments (both existing and proposed), located on parcels in the general area.
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 78
SECTION 13 TRAILERS
13.0 Single Trailers: On or after September 30, 1972, no person, firm or corporation shall park a single trailer within the limits of East Haddam except in a manner provided for by the 1957 Trailer Ordinance as amended by Town Meeting June 28, 1971; and that this provision by the Zoning Regulations for the parking of single trailers in the Town of East Haddam. The licensing and enforcement of these regulations shall be carried out by the Planning and Zoning Commission and their enforcement officer.
13.1 Trailer Parks: On or after September 30, 1972, no person, firm, or corporation shall construct, extend, establish, maintain, conduct or alter any trailer park within the limits of East Haddam except as provided for by the Trailer Ordinance amended by Town Meeting held June 28, 1971; and that this provision be the Zoning Regulations for the Trailer Parks in the Town of East Haddam. The licensing and enforcement of these regulations shall be carried out by the Planning and Zoning Commission and the enforcement officer.9/5/61a 10/15/69r 9/30/72r
13.2 Commercial Trailers:
13.2.1 Application may be made to the Planning and Zoning Commission for a permit to locate and park a commercial trailer off the public streets or highways, such permit to be effective for a period of time not in excess of 18 months plus renewal. Such application shall be made in writing and shall set forth the following:
1. The name and address of the owner of the commercial trailer.
2. The make, model and identifying number of license of such trailer.
3. The location where the trailer is to be parked.
4. The proposed use of the trailer.
13.2.2 The Planning and Zoning Commission may grant such initial permit upon payment of a license fee of $5.00 where it finds the use of such trailer is required for temporary office purposes in connection with a construction project. Such permit may be extended where necessary for additional periods of time, not in excess of said period of 18 months.
13.3 Storage of Camp Trailers: A camper coach body which is or may be mounted on wheels may be stored by its owner in the rear yard, wherever possible, of a lot occupied for dwelling purposes or for carrying on a business in any zone in the Town of East Haddam.
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 79
SECTION 14A SITE PLAN REVIEW
14A.0. Intent. To aid the Commission and the Board in determining the conformity of a proposed building, use or structure with provisions of these Regulations.
14A.1. Site Plan Approval. In addition to those uses, land, buildings or structures for which a Site Plan Approval is specifically required by these Regulations, any use of land, buildings, or structures, or any alteration or expansion of such use, or the erection, extension, or alteration of any building or structure, for which a Certificate of Zoning Compliance or Special Exception is not required under these Regulations shall require Site Plan Approval pursuant to Section 14A of these Regulations. The Commission may, by resolution, prescribe application forms and fees.
14A.2. Required Information for Site Plan Approval. The following information shall, at a minimum, be provided by any applicant for Site Plan Approval:
A. Site Plan A site plan, which shall conform to the following requirements, and contain the following information:
1. Property/Boundary Survey. A boundary survey prepared and sealed by a Connecticut Registered Land Surveyor, which survey shall be prepared pursuant to the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies minimum standards for Surveys and Maps. Said survey shall include the dimensions of the subject property, and its acreage or square footage.
2. Location Map. A location map, at a scale of one inch equals 1,000 feet, showing the location of the site in relation to existing roads which would assist the Commission and the public to orient themselves to the site and its boundaries.
3. General Information:
a) The name and address of the applicant, property owner of record, the name of the development, and the names of the owners of record of all adjacent properties;
b) The name, address and professional seal of each design professional responsible for, or participating in, the design of the site;
c) The assessor’s map and lot numbers for the subject property and the properties within one hundred (100) feet of the perimeter of the site;
d) The date of the site plan, a north arrow, and the scale of the plan;
e) A description of any existing deed restrictions, covenants, easements, rights of way, or similar encumbrances which run with the land, including the identity of the dominant and servant estates, the volume and page of the East Haddam Land Records where the same are recorded, and the date upon which they will expire, if any;
f) The words, “Approved by the East Haddam Planning and Zoning Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals” with a designated place for the signature of the chairman or secretary of the Commission or the Board, as the case may be, and the date of signing.
4. Site Features, Existing. On the site, and within one hundred (100’) feet of the perimeter of the site:
a) All existing uses of land including uses not requiring buildings or structures, such as outside storage; property lines, streets, utility lines, ledge outcrops, specimen trees, major tree or shrub areas, and other significant features of the site, both natural and manmade;
b) Wetlands and watercourses as defined by the Regulations of the East Haddam Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Commission; the high water level of areas covered by water (such as lakes, rivers, streams, ponds, swamps, and the like);
c) Areas having slopes in excess of twenty (20%) percent;
d) Flood hazard areas as designated on the most current Federal Flood Insurance Rate Map for the Town of East Haddam, and the rate map designation for such areas;
e) Existing structures and their uses, general type of construction, height, and the like;
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 80
f) The location of all existing wells, existing septic systems, public water supply watersheds, and other public or private water supplies;
g) Existing monuments, iron pins, and other boundary indicators;
h) The soil classifications, as per the US Soil Conservation Service/Middlesex County Coding of Soil Types;
i) Existing contours of the land at intervals of two (2) feet, or less, certified to Class T-3 or T-2 vertical accuracy where the topography of the site and the area around it cannot be otherwise accurately and fairly represented.
j) Existing roads, paths, major and unique natural, scenic, historic, and open space features.
5. Site Features, Proposed. On the site, and for any area off the site where any alteration whatsoever is proposed:
a) Any change whatsoever to any of the existing features depicted on the site plan in accordance with the preceding paragraph, including, but not limited to: proposed uses of land, including uses not requiring a structure or building;
b) The location, dimensions, square footage (both ground floor and total), height, and type of construction of all buildings or structures, including fences, walls, signs, lighting fixtures, flagpoles, and the like;
c) The location of any proposed well, septic system, and the location of, and test results for, any and all percolation and deep test holes, as verified by the Town Sanitarian and/or Health Official;
d) Any regrading, excavation, filling, and the volumes of material to be brought onto or removed from the site;
e) The percentage of building coverage, combined building and paved area coverage;
f) Alterations in property boundaries, easements, utilities, and the like;
g) The location of any roads, curbs, sidewalk, driveway, parking and loading area(s) paths, and similar improvements;
h) Phase lines, proposed future division of the property, long-term lease boundaries, and the like.
i) In any site plan requiring the erection of any structure, grading, drainage work, paving or other improvement, those aspects of the plan shall be prepared, signed, and sealed by a Connecticut Registered Professional Engineer.
j) The areas of wooded portions of the site, or specimen trees, to be removed or retained, and the location, design, and content of landscaping to be created, including the size, number, and type of all landscaping material to be planted, and the proposed treatment of all buffer strips, screens, and islands.
k) The expected intensity and frequency of noise which may be emitted from the site or use, and the methods to be used to control the same.
l) The height, bulk, use and location of all buildings; typical floor plans or other plans for the use of interior spaces of proposed buildings; the exterior appearance of proposed buildings, including a minimum of two exterior elevations, designation of materials, colors, and textures of exterior finishes, roofing, trim, and the like; location of heating, air conditioning, ventilation, and similar equipment; and special exterior features, such as building mounted signs, drive-in windows, building or roof lighting, roof drainage/gutters, and features of the interior of the building designed to be capable of being seen from the exterior. A rendering consisting of a minimum of two exterior elevations shall be submitted.
6. 14A.2.A Parking and Drainage:
a) The site plan shall include all information necessary to establish conformance with the requirements of Section 28 Stormwater Management and Section 11 Parking of these Regulations, Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements, and shall also include the calculations utilized to determine the parking and loading areas as depicted on the site plan.
b) The site plan shall depict the dimensions of all parking and loading spaces, the total number of such spaces, and any proposed future or expansion parking or loading spaces. In addition, the site plan shall include the location, invert elevations, pipe sizes, flow calculations, and all other similar information as may be required by the Commission’s engineering consultant to properly evaluate the storm water management plan for the site.
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 81
c) For any site plan which depicts more than five thousand (5,000) square feet of impervious surface, be it building areas or paved areas, the site plan shall include provisions to retain stormwater runoff so as to produce no increase in peak runoff. See Section 28 – Stormwater Management
d) For any site plan, the proposed design, location, and illumination level of all outdoor lighting, which shall be used particularly in pedestrian and vehicular areas. See Section 28 – Stormwater Management
B. Sanitary Waste Disposal Plan.
For any site which is to be served, and is capable of being served, by an operational public sanitary sewer line prior to occupancy, the site plan shall depict the sewer lateral and other engineering information suitable to determine that connection to an operational sanitary sewer line is feasible. In addition, the applicant shall provide an approval letter from the East Haddam Water Pollution Control Authority stating the site if approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission is authorized to connect to the Town’s system.
For any site which is not to be served by public sanitary sewers, the applicant shall submit a sanitary waste disposal plan which shall include, at a minimum, the following:
1. Report of Soil Test and Percolation Data. A Report of Soil Test Data signed by the Town Sanitarian or his representative which shall be in conformance with the Connecticut Public Health Code, as the same may be amended from time to time. All percolation tests and observation test pits for groundwater and ledge shall be dug and, tests performed, in accordance with the Technical Standards of the Connecticut Public Health Code, as the same may be amended from time to time, and shall be supervised and certified by the Town Sanitarian or his designee, who shall provide to the applicant, for inclusion with his Site Plan Approval Application, a verified approval of the application for subsurface disposal in accordance with the Connecticut Public Health Code, as the same may be amended from time to time. At least one (1) observation test pit for groundwater and ledge shall be dug in the designated location for each and every primary and reserve leaching field.
2. Soils with Severe Limitations. If any existing soils in the immediate area of the site designated for sanitary waste disposal are classified as having “severe” limitations for on-site sewerage treatment (as set forth in Section 4.3(1)(a) the East Haddam Subdivision Regulations), in accordance with the current soils map of the US Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service, then a subsurface sewerage disposal plan shall be presented to the Commission. Said plan shall specifically address the methods utilized to overcome the limitations identified in the soils of the site; shall be prepared by a licensed Connecticut Professional Engineer, and shall be accompanied by a written report of the Town Sanitarian or his representative certifying that the plan will resolve the limitations of the soils, and will pose no significant risk to the public health or safety. All sanitary waste disposal systems to be located in the immediate area of soils with “severe” limitations, as set forth above, shall have 100% replacement leaching fields at least equal in size to the original leaching fields, and the location of both the original and replacement leaching fields shall be designated on the site plan. Both the original and replacement fields shall be located so as to contain the percolation and deep test pits.
C. Soil Erosion and Sediment Control for Land Development:
1. Definitions. For the purposes of this Section, the following definitions shall apply:
a) “Certification” means a signed, written approval by the East Haddam Planning and Zoning Commission, or its designated agent, that a soil erosion and sediment control plan complies with the applicable requirements of these Regulations.
b) “Disturbed area” means an area where the ground cover is destroyed or removed leaving the land subject to accelerated erosion.
c) “Erosion” means the detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by water, wind, ice, or gravity.
d) “Sediment” means solid material, either mineral or organic that is in suspension, is transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by erosion.
e) “Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Plan” means a scheme that minimizes soil erosion and sedimentation resulting from development and includes, but is not limited to, a map or narrative.
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 82
2. Requirements. Pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes Section 8-2, as amended by Public Act 83-388, all site plan approval applications shall include a soil erosion and sediment control plan whenever the site plan indicates a change in the contour of any land, or grading or excavation, or the removal or destruction of any natural topsoil, trees, or other vegetative covering on the property, for any reason or purpose whatsoever, when the disturbed area of such development is cumulatively more than one-half (1/2) acre. To be eligible for certification, said plan shall contain property provisions to adequately control accelerated erosion and sedimentation and reduce the danger from stormwater runoff on the site based on the best available technology. Such principles, methods, and practices necessary for certification may be found in the Connecticut Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control as published by the Connecticut Council on Soil and Water Conservation, as the same may be amended from time to time (hereinafter referred to as, “Connecticut Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control”).
Said plan shall contain, at a minimum, the following:
a). A narrative describing:
1). The site and development.
2). The schedule for grading and construction activities including:
a) Proposed start and completion dates of the proposed plan;
b) Sequence of grading and construction activities;
c) Sequence for installation and/or application of soil erosion and sediment control measures;
d) Sequence for final stabilization of the project site.
3). The design criteria for proposed soil erosion and sediment control measures and storm water management facilities.
4). The construction details for proposed soil erosion and sediment control measures and storm water management facilities.
5). The installation and/or application procedures for proposed soil erosion and sediment control measures and storm water management facilities.
6). The operations and maintenance program for proposed soil erosion and sediment control measures and storm water management facilities.
7). The person or firm responsible for overseeing the self monitoring of control measures shall be noted.
b). A site plan map at a linear scale of 1 inch equals 40 feet with 2 foot contour intervals unless otherwise approved by the Commission, to show:
1). The location of the proposed development and adjacent properties.
2). The existing and proposed topography including soil types, wetlands, watercourses and water bodies.
3). The existing structures on the project site, if any.
4). The proposed area alterations including cleared, excavated, filled or graded areas and proposed structures, utilities, roads and, if applicable, new property lines.
5). An outline of the narrative required shall be noted on the plans to the extent required by the Commission.
6). Any other information deemed necessary by the applicant or requested by the Commission or its designated agent.
3. Procedure. The Commission or its duly authorized agent shall certify that the soil erosion and sediment control plan, as filed, complies with the requirements and objectives of these Regulations; or shall certify with specified limitations and/or modifications; or shall deny certification where the plan does not comply with requirements and purposes of these Regulations. Prior to certification, any plan may be submitted for review by the Middlesex County
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 83
Soil and Conservation District, or any other agency of the State of Connecticut or the United States deemed relevant by the Commission, provided, however, that the failure of any such agency to comment shall not render the Site Plan Approval Application incomplete, nor shall it extend the time limits for action by the Commission as set forth in the Connecticut General Statutes.
4. Standards. No land shall be developed and no use shall be permitted which cause erosion, flood, or sediment damage to: properties being developed, surrounding properties, or public waters. Runoff water shall be properly channeled into a storm drain, watercourse, ponding area or other suitable facility. Measures used to control soil erosion and sedimentation shall as a minimum meet the following standards and specifications:
a) Have plans for soil erosion and sediment control developed in accordance with these Regulations using the principles as outlined in Chapters 3 and 4 of the Connecticut Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control. Soil erosion and sediment control plans shall result in a development that: minimizes erosion and sedimentation during construction; is stabilized and protected from erosion when completed; and does not cause off-site erosion and/or sedimentation.
b) The minimum standards for individual measures are those in the Connecticut Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control. The Commission may grant exceptions when requested by the applicant if technically sound reasons are presented.
c) The appropriate method from Chapter 9 of the Connecticut Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control, shall be used in determining peak flow rates and volumes of runoff unless an alternative method is approved by the Commission.
D) Protection of Surface and Ground Water Supply. Pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes Section 8-2, as amended by Public Act 85-279, every application for site plan approval shall include an evaluation of the impact of the proposed development upon existing and potential public surface and ground drinking water supplies. Such evaluation shall contain, at a minimum:
a) A statement describing the nature of the use of any buildings or areas of the site and their method of disposal;
b) The nature of any discharges anticipated;
c) The nature of any materials to be stored, processed, or otherwise present on the site, and the period of time for which, and conditions under which, such materials shall be present on the site;
d) The nature of the ground or surface waters on and around the site, including any public or private domestic users of such waters, their classification, as designated by the Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection’s Groundwater Classification System, and the depth to any groundwater, the nature of the soils surrounding such groundwater, and the like;
e) Measures to be taken by the applicant to control any potential adverse impact on surface and ground drinking water supplies;
f) Other information which might assist the Commission in determining that such waters will be protected from potential adverse impacts created or increased by the proposed development. The Commission may refer such evaluations to any governmental agency for review and comment.
E. Certificate for Community Wells. In accordance with Section 8-25a of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended by Public Act 84-330, any development providing water by means of a “water company”, as that term is defined in Connecticut General Statutes Section 16-262m(a), shall provide to the Commission a certified copy of a Certificate of Public Convenience and Necessity issued for the development by the Connecticut Department of Public Utility Control. No application for Site Plan Approval involving such a water company shall be deemed complete without said Certificate, unless the applicant shall provide a resolution of the East Haddam Board of Selectmen waiving said Certificate and agreeing to be responsible for the operation of the subject water company in the event that the company is at any time unable or unwilling to provide adequate service to its consumers.
F. Inland Wetlands and Watercourses. No application for Site Plan Approval shall be deemed complete without the submission of a certified copy of a motion for approval of an Inland Wetlands permit as issued by the East Haddam Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Commission, provided such a permit shall be required under regulations
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 84
adopted by said Commission. Any plans submitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission shall conform, in all relevant respects, to those plans submitted to the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Commission as the same were approved, or modified and approved, by said Commission.
G. General Provisions. Any of the foregoing plans, reports, and evaluations may be presented on one or any number of separate sheets or documents, depending upon the complexity of the application. It shall be the duty of the applicant, however, to provide plans and other documents which incorporate all of the above information, and demonstrate compliance with all of the requirements and criteria of these Regulations, in a way that is clear and comprehensible to the Commission and its staff. All plans shall contain the words “Approved by the East Haddam Planning and Zoning Commission” with a designated place for the signature of the Chairman or Secretary of the Commission and the date of signing. The applicant shall submit no less than five (5) copies of all plans, reports, and other documents enumerated above, together with such application forms and fees as the Commission may, by resolution, prescribe.
14A.3 Site Plan Review Application Procedure
A. Applicants shall submit three (3) full size and ten reduced (11” x 17”) size copies of the Site Plan, the required fee (check payable to the Town of East Haddam), and a completed application form to the Commission’s Zoning Enforcement Officer.
The date of receipt (acknowledgment) by the Commission shall be the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Commission immediately following the day of submission of the complete application to the Zoning Enforcement Officer, or thirty-five (35) days after such submission, whichever is sooner.
An application to be complete must include: 1) application form; 2) fee; 3) all Site Plans required by Section 14A.2, and all supporting documentation required therein. If the application is not complete, the Commission may deny it without prejudice and require a new application, including fee, be submitted.
B. The Commission/Board shall at its discretion have any plans (Section14A.2) reviewed by consultants, employees, or governmental bodies or their agents for comment and recommendations.
C. In the case of Site Plan Review, not requiring Special Exception, approval shall be presumed unless a decision to deny or modify is rendered within 65 days after the date of receipt as defined by Section 8-7d Connecticut General Statutes, as amended and revised. Extensions may be granted in accordance with State Statute.
D. A decision to deny or modify a Site Plan Review shall set forth the reasons for which such denial or modification is required to conform with the Regulations.
E. A copy of any decision shall be sent by certified mail to the person submitting such plans within fifteen (15) days after such decision is rendered.
F. The Commission/Board may, by resolution, waive Site Plan requirements contained in Section 14A.2.A upon finding that such requirements are not applicable to a specific application. The requirements of Section 14A.2.B, 14A.2.C, 14A.2.D, 14A.2.E, and 14A.2.F may not be waived.
G. In the case of a Site Plan Approval not requiring a Special Exception, the applicant shall submit three (3) complete sets of plans, as the same may have been modified by the Commission, at least one (1) of which shall be printed on mylar. Final copies, including the mylar, shall have the approval letters, if applicable, of the Planning and Zoning Commission, Zoning Board of Appeals, and Inland/Wetlands and Watercourses Commission printed on them. Said sets shall be signed by the Chairman or Secretary of the Commission, and the mylar set retained by the Clerk of the Commission; the remaining sets shall be distributed to other officials of the Town who may require them.
14A.4 Criteria for Decision. In reviewing the application for site plan approval, the Commission shall consider the following criteria:
A. Complete Application. The application shall contain all information required by this Section 14A, and the number of copies required, and said information shall be prepared by persons possessing the necessary expertise to prepare it. Information shall be presented with adequate clarity and professionalism to permit the Commission to understand it and determine compliance with these criteria. The presentation of a complete application, as described herein, is the obligation of the applicant, and failure to meet this criteria shall be grounds for denial without prejudice to future, complete applications.
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 85
B. Compliance with Regulations. The application shall conform in all respects with these Regulations, unless a certified copy of a variance from any such provision is submitted with the application, or the Zoning Enforcement Officer has issued a finding that the nonconformance is a legal, pre-existing nonconformity in accordance with Section 8 of these Regulations. Further, the application shall conform to the East Haddam Subdivision Regulations; the East Haddam Inland/Wetlands and Watercourses Commission; the Public Health Code, as evidenced by a report of the Health Director of his authorized designee; and all relevant provisions of the Connecticut General Statutes, whether or not cited in these Regulations.
C. Landscaping and Screening. All parking, service and storage areas shall be reasonably screened by landscaping of the site, shall be designed so as to protect and enhance the historic and rural character of the Town and the subject neighborhood, and to provide all-season visual buffers between the proposed use and any incompatible use of adjacent property through the use of grade separation, landscaping, buffer areas, and/or open spaces. No lighting shall create glare, nor the luminare be visible from any property line of the site. No pole-mounted light shall be greater than twelve (12) feet in height. See Section 11 – Parking, See Section 26 – Outdoor lighting
D. Frontage Improvements. Where the subject site has frontage on an existing street, the pavement and shoulders shall be improved in accordance with the pattern existing on said street and any special requirements created by the proposed development, including, but not limited to, street widening, acceleration/deceleration lanes, curbing, stormwater drainage, street trees, and sidewalks.
E. Traffic Access. All driveways, parking areas, paths, and sidewalks shall be interconnected and/or combined, where possible, with adjacent parking areas, driveways, paths and sidewalks for similar uses, to minimize curb cuts and to maximize pedestrian and vehicular movement between adjacent site without excessive curb cuts, access movements, and congestion. Provision shall be made for such interconnection, and for the extension of any road or driveway, terminating at or upon the subject site so as to serve adjacent undeveloped land in the same or a comparable zone. Such provision shall include rights of way to the Town and/or to the adjacent property owner(s). No driveway into a public street shall exceed 30 feet in width, excluding the radius fillets, and no proposed driveway shall be closer than one hundred (100’) to any other existing or proposed driveway, unless the site is of such width that compliance with this requirement would preclude access, in which case the separating distance between driveways shall be the maximum feasible for the site. In the interests of public safety, the number of driveways onto public streets shall be minimized, and access to adjacent sites shall be by common driveways wherever feasible. The Commission may require that any driveway be designed, and easements to adjacent properties be conveyed, in order to facilitate present or future sharing of such driveways.
F. Public Safety. All site plans shall make adequate provision for facilities and access for fire, police and other emergency protection. Such provision shall include, but not be limited to, fire lanes, access drives to otherwise remote portions of a building or site, adequate lighting of remote or visually obscured building or site areas, fire hydrants where surface or subsurface water supplies exist, and the like.
G. Sanitary Waste Disposal Plans. All plans submitted pursuant to Section 14A.2.B shall provide for the disposal of sanitary waste in conformance to the Connecticut Public Health Code, and in addition, in a manner which protects surface and groundwater supplies, inland wetlands and watercourses, and insures the protection of the public health and safety. Any sanitary waste disposal plan located in or in the immediate area of soils having “severe” limitations, as set forth in Section 14A.B.2 herein above, shall have a 100% replacement area. No site plan shall be approved, or modified and approved, if the soil percolation and groundwater and ledge observation test pits, which must be taken in situ (original undisturbed soil), indicate:
a) Soil percolation rates faster than one (1) minute per inch, or slower than sixty (60) minutes per inch;
b) Where there is less than 18 inches depth of suitable existing soil over impervious soil, or where the groundwater level is less than 18 inches below the surface of the ground for a duration of one month or longer during the wettest season of the year.
c) In soils where there is less than four feet depth of suitable existing soil over ledge rock, two feet of which is naturally occurring soil,
d) Slopes in the area of the proposed leaching and reserve area are in excess of twenty five (25%) percent.
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 86
e) Review and approval of the East Haddam Water Pollution Control Authority when necessary.
f) Groundwater and ledge observation test pits shall be filled in immediately after witnessing by the Town Sanitarian and / or the applicant’s engineer. Test pits which remain open more that 72 hours after witnessing are in violation of the zoning regulations. Applications received in which test pits remain open shall be subject to denial on that basis.
H. Erosion, Sediment, and Runoff Control Standards. No site plan shall be approved which will cause erosion, flooding, or sedimentation on watercourses, as the same are defined by the regulations of the East Haddam Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Commission. Stormwater runoff in accordance with proper civil engineering practice. There shall be no increase in the peak stormwater runoff from any site as a result of the proposed development. Measures used to control erosion and sedimentation shall, at a minimum, meet the standards and specifications of the Middlesex County Soil and Water Conservation District.
I. Wetland and Water Course Protection. No sanitary disposal system shall be located within seventy-five (75) feet of an area designated as a wetland or watercourse as defined by the East Haddam Inland/Wetlands and Watercourses Commission, nor within seventy-five (75) feet of any lake, pond, river, seasonal stream, or other surface body of water.
J. Surface and Groundwater Protection. No site plan shall be approved which poses a risk of degradation of surface or groundwater supplies arising out of any element of the proposed use or site plan.
K. Water Supply. No site plan depicting a development to be served by a water company, as defined herein above, shall be approved unless and until a Certificate of Public Convenience and Necessity, or the waiver thereof by the East Haddam Board of Selectmen, has been obtained in accordance with Section 14A.E. of these Regulations.
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 87
SECTION 14B SPECIAL EXCEPTION
Date adoption 11/1/78 Revision Date 9/28/87 Effective Date of Revision 10/14/87
Revision date 3/10/98 Effective date 4/2/98
14B.0 INTENT: In dividing the Town of East Haddam into Districts/Zones, it is recognized that there are certain uses which may be necessary or desirable to the Town, but which may be detrimental to the Town or the neighborhood in certain locations if proper safeguards are not provided. The Commission and/or the Zoning Board of Appeals, herein after referred to the Commission, must evaluate the impact of each proposed use upon neighboring uses and the Town as a whole in determining the appropriateness of any use requiring a Special Exception for the proposed location.
14B.1 Special Exception Requirement: In any instance involving a use or uses requiring a Special Exception as set forth in these Regulations, no land or water areas shall be used, nor uses altered or expanded in space, time, or intensity, nor buildings or structures erected, altered, enlarged, the use substantially changed, or used until the Commission grants a Special Exception as defined in this Section 14B, or amend a previously granted Special Exception.
The Commission may waive the requirement for a Special Exception public hearing and other application requirements where it finds that:
a) One Special Exception use is being substituted for another similar use on the same lot.
b) The new use will require no greater parking or loading requirements than the original, as set forth in Section 11 of these Regulations.
c) The new use shall entail no exterior change to the building or site, except no Special Exception approval is required for roof mounted solar panel units that are not visible from any street or highway and no Special Exception approval is required for roof mounted solar panel units that are mounted flush and match the roof pitch. Mounting bracket shall be no higher than twelve inches above the roof. If the building is on the National Historic Register or in a Historic District, approval will be required by the Historic District Commission, and
d) The new use shall have no impact on the site, the neighborhood, or the Town which is different from the original, such impact to be measured by the standards set forth in Section 14B.4 of these Regulations.
Substantial changes are considered changes that involve (a) alterations in use from that set forth in an approved statement of use and site plan; or (b) alteration in an existing use, including such alterations that would:
1. Increased the parking demand of the use; or
2. Increase or change the hours of operation of the use; or
3. Increase the noise generation of the use or change the octave band frequency of such noise; or
4. Increase or change the emission of smoke, dust or other contaminants into the air, including both point sources and fugitive emissions; or
5. Increase or change the demand for outdoor storage, truck or equipment traffic (type or volume), water consumption, or effluent disposals; or
6. Involve the use of different equipment, processes, chemicals, or materials; or
7. Increase the amount of lighting.
14B.2 Required Information for Special Exception: The following information shall, at a minimum, be provided by any applicant for Special Exception:
A. A completed application form and fee.
B. All material required to be submitted for a Site Plan Approval in accordance with Section 14A.2 of these Regulations. The Commission may, upon the written request of the applicant, waive the submission of information set forth in Section 14A.2.A (Site Plan) which are not required in order to determine compliance with the criteria set
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 88
forth in this Section 14B. The Commission may not waive the submission of information set forth in Section 14A.2B. through 14A.2.G.
C. The Commission may require additional information as may be needed to evaluate the appropriateness of the proposed use in the proposed location, including, but not limited to: information concerning surrounding land uses, building locations, driveways, streets, topography, watercourses and wetlands, utilities, and the like; a traffic impact study prepared by a Connecticut Registered Professional Engineer qualified to prepare such studies; an environmental impact statement prepared by professionals qualified to prepare such studies; detailed architectural information, such as color samples, screening of roof- or ground-mounted heating and air conditioning equipment and ventilation ducts, building illumination, samples of construction materials, and the like; detailed landscaping plans, including the type, size, number and location of material to be planted, the location and construction material of any fences, walls, flag poles, street furniture, walkways, trash disposal areas, and the like; reports from its own consultants and staff, or from government agencies.
14B.3 Application Procedure:
A. Who May Apply: The following persons may apply for a Special Exception: An owner, or all of the joint owners, of the property upon which the use is to be located; the prospective purchasers of such property, pursuant to a written purchase agreement, option agreement, bond for deed, or similar document, provided, however, that either the said document accompanies the application and authorizes the prospective purchaser to apply for zoning permits from the Town, or, in the alternative, that the written consent of the owner of the fee simple interest accompanies the application; the lessee of a leasehold interest, provided that either the written consent of the owner of the fee simple interest accompanies the application or, in the alternative, that a written lease, which must accompany the application, provides that the lessee is authorized to apply for zoning permits from the Town.
B. Informal Discussion: Any proponent of a use permitted by Special Exception may request and is encouraged to use the opportunity to place such proposal on the agenda of a regular or special meeting of the Commission/Board for the purpose of presenting preliminary plans or concepts and receiving preliminary comments, observations, questions, or areas of concern. Neither the proponent nor the Commission/Board shall be in any way bound by statements made in such informal discussions, their purpose being only to minimize delay, expense and inconvenience to the public, the proponent, and the Commission upon the future receipt, if any, of a formal application for Special Exception. Following any informal discussion, the Commission/Board may suggest that the proposal, or certain aspects thereof, be referred to other municipal, State, or Federal agencies for review and comment, or may suggest that additional information is or will be required prior to action on a formal application for Special Exception.
C. Submission of Application:
1. Complete Application: A complete application shall consist of the application form and fee, together with the required information set forth in this Section 14B. The date of receipt of any such application shall be the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Commission or the Board, as the case may, or 35 days following the submission of such application, whichever shall first occur. If the Commission or the Board determines that the application is incomplete, the same shall be denied without prejudice to any future complete application.
2. Notices Mandated by Statute: In accordance with C.G.S. 8-3h, the Commission shall notify the clerk of any adjoining municipality of the pendency of any application concerning any Special Exception in which (1) any portion of the property affected is within five hundred (500’) feet of the boundary of the adjoining municipality; (2) a significant portion of the traffic to the completed project will use streets within the adjoining municipality to enter or exit the site; (3) a significant portion of the sewer or water drainage from the project on the site will flow through or significantly impact the drainage or sewerage system within the adjoining municipality; (4) water run-off from the improved site will impact streets or other municipal or private property within the adjoining municipality. Such notice shall be made by certified mail application, and no public hearing shall be held on any Special Exception application unless or until such notice has been received. The adjoining municipality may, through a representative, appear and be heard at any hearing on such application.
In accordance with C.G.S. 8-3i, in any Special Exception application for any property which is within the watershed of a water company, as defined in C.G.S. 16-1, the applicant shall provide written notice of the application to the water company, provided such water company has filed a map showing the boundaries of the watershed on the Land Records of the Town. Such notice shall be by certified mail, return receipt requested, and shall be mailed at the time
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 89
of application. The applicant shall submit evidence of such notice to the Commission at the time of application. Such water company may, through a representative, appear and be heard at any hearing on such application.
3. Notice to Adjoining Owners. The applicant shall also notify all adjoining landowners and those property owners of record within one hundred (100) feet of the site, as indicated in the current records of the Town Assessor, of the date, time and place of the public hearing of the Commission at which said Special Exception is to be considered no less than fourteen (14) days preceding the date of said hearing by certified mail, and shall submit proof of such notification to the Planning and Zoning Office on or before the date of the public hearing. No notice shall be required for the continuation of a public hearing once it has been opened.
4. Submission for Review. The Commission may, in its sole discretion, submit any plans or other information to consultants, employees, or other governmental agencies for comment and recommendations.
5. Time Limits. The Commission shall, within sixty-five (65) days of receipt of any application, schedule a public hearing thereon, said public hearing to be noticed in accordance with the requirements of the Connecticut General Statutes and Town ordinances. The hearing shall be held within a thirty-five (35) day period. Within sixty-five (65) days following said public hearing, the Commission shall act upon said application. If the Commission fails to act within said sixty-five (65) day period, the application shall be deemed approved. The applicant may request an extension of any of the time limits set forth in this paragraph for a period not to exceed the original time limit. These time limits are in accordance with Connecticut General Statutes 8-7d as of the time of adoption of these Regulations; any subsequent amendment to such Statutes shall control, and be used in place of the preceding, without amendment of these Regulations.
6. Action. The Commission shall review the application for conformance with the criteria of Section 14A, Site Plan Approval, and, in addition, with the criteria of this Section 14B. The Commission may approve, modify and approve, or disapprove the application. Such conditions may specifically include hours of operation, restrictions on days of the week, and similar restrictions as to time. Where appropriate (e.g., for non structural uses such as excavations, outdoor events, and the like), the Commission may grant a Special Exception which is temporary and will be effective only commencing on, or terminating on, specified dates.
The Commission may approve any application subject to certain conditions of approval as it may deem necessary and desirable for the purpose of preventing or diminishing any noncompliance with the criteria set forth in this Section 14B.
The Commission shall state, upon the record, the reasons for its action, and shall publish notice of such action as required by Connecticut General Statutes. The Commission shall, in addition, send written notice of its decision under the signature of the Commission’s Secretary or clerk, by certified mail, to the applicant within fifteen (15) days of its action.
7. Endorsement and Filing. Within sixty-five (65) days of the Commission/Board approval, the applicant shall submit one (1) set of the final plan(s) on mylar, reflecting all conditions or modifications required by the Commission, with the approval letters of the Planning and Zoning Commission, Zoning Board of Appeals, and Inland/Wetland and Watercourse Commission printed on them and accompanied by signed, sworn statements of the applicant’s land surveyor, engineer, architect, and any other professional who has participated in the preparation of the application materials, to the effect that the plans submitted are the same as those approved by the Commission, except for the depiction of modifications and conditions required by the Commission in approval vote. If, upon considering the statements and reviewing the plans submitted, the Commission / Board shall find them to be in accordance with the final approval, they shall be endorsed by the signature of the Chairman or Secretary of the Commission. Thereafter, it shall be the responsibility of the applicant to file one (1) set of endorsed Mylar plans in the office of the Town Clerk, and two paper copies in the Office of the Zoning Enforcement Officer. In accordance with Section 8-3d of the Connecticut General Statutes, no Special Exception shall be effective until the final, endorsed plans are filed with the Town Clerk, and any plans not so filed within ninety (90) days following the Commission’s vote of approval shall become null and void. Any Special Exception site plan filed in the Town Clerk’s Office without the endorsement of the Commission’s Chairman or Secretary shall likewise be void.
14B.4. Criteria for Decision: In reviewing an application for Special Exception, the Commission/Board shall consider the following criteria and shall make a finding that:
A. Complete Application: The application contains all information required by this Section 14B, and the number of copies required, and said information has been prepared by persons possessing the necessary expertise to prepare
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 90
it. Information has been presented with adequate clarity and professionalism to permit the Commission / Board to understand it and determine compliance with these criteria. The presentation of a complete application, as described herein, is the obligation of the applicant, and failure to meet this criteria shall be grounds for denial without prejudice to future, complete applications.
B. Compliance with Regulations: The application conforms in all respects with these Regulations, unless a certified copy of a variance from any such provisions is submitted with the application, or the Zoning Enforcement Officer has issued a finding that the nonconformance is a legal, pre-existing nonconformity in accordance with Section 8 of these Regulations. Further, the application shall conform when applicable to the East Haddam Subdivision Regulations; the East Haddam Inland/Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations, as evidenced by the submission of an Inland Wetlands Permit issued by the East Haddam Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Commission; the Public Health Code, as evidenced by a report of the Health Director or his authorized designee; and all relevant provisions of the Connecticut General Statutes, whether or not cited in these Regulations.
C. Compliance with Criteria of Section 14A: The application complies with all of the Criteria for Decision set forth in Section 14A.4 of these Regulations.
D. Public Health and Safety: The site and building plans are designed so as to minimize any delay, inconvenience, and expense of providing for the public health, safety, and welfare, including, but not limited to the following: Adequate access for emergency vehicles and equipment; adequate utility capacity; floodproofing measures which may be desirable, even if over and above the minimum requirements of these Regulations or applicable State or Federal standards; protection of the natural environment; avoidance of glare visible from public streets or adjacent properties.
E. Appropriateness of Use: The proposed use shall be appropriate for the designated location with regard to: The size and intensity of the proposed use, and its relation to existing land uses, and shall be such as to be in harmony with the appropriate and orderly development of the area in which it is to be situated and will not be detrimental to the orderly development of adjacent properties; the capacity of adjacent and feeder streets to accommodate peak and average traffic volumes and special traffic characteristics of the proposed use, and the avoidance of primary use by non-residential traffic through residential streets; the development will not hinder or discourage the appropriate development and use of adjacent land and buildings or impair the value thereof; the obstruction of light or air, or the emission of noise, light, smoke, odor, gas, dust, and/or other offensive emissions without adequate buffering or controls; the overall impact on neighborhood property values, and the special problems of fire or police protection inherent in the proposed use; the preservation of the character of the neighborhood in terms or scale, density and intensity of use, architectural character, and similar factors; the availability of adequate effluent disposal, water supplies, stormwater disposal systems, and other special burdens on utilities which the use may entail; the degree of population concentration and building density resulting from the use is not excessive and existing provisions for fire and police protection, transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks and other public requirements are adequate; the use may be carried out so as to protect and enhance valuable historic or natural resources without undue destruction of and or the pollution of lakes, streams, and other water bodies, while providing the best possible design of structures and land uses compatible with the shape, size and topographic and natural character of the site.
F. Architectural Character, Historic Preservation, Site Design: The overall architectural character of the site and building designs shall not be detrimental to property values in the neighborhood or the Town, and shall preserve and enhance the Town’s historic and rural character in terms of scale of buildings, the preservation of scenic vistas and public access, materials used, roof lines, door and window details, site and building lighting, street furniture, paving materials, landscaping, signs, colors, and all other features of the site and buildings which are visible from the exterior of any building on the site or from adjoining properties or streets, or which may impact the character or quality of life on adjoining properties, in the neighborhood, or throughout the Town.
In multi-building commercial or industrial developments, all buildings shall reflect a common architectural theme through the use of similar materials, roof lines, and other exterior treatments.
G. Uses In, Adjacent to, or Impacting Residential Areas. In addition to the above, in the case of any use to be located in, or directly adjacent to, or served by way of, a residential zone or area of residential uses, the Commission shall find that:
1. The location and size of such use, and the nature and intensity of operations involved in or conducted in connection therewith, shall be such that both pedestrian and vehicular traffic to and from and in the vicinity of the use will not be hazardous or inconvenient to, or detrimental to the character of the said residential district or conflict
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 91
with the traffic characteristics of the neighborhood. Commercial and industrial buildings shall be oriented away from residential areas and access to them shall not substantially disrupt or disturb adjacent residential areas or residential zones. Access, parking, service areas, lighting, signs and landscaping shall be designed so as to protect the residential character of surrounding residential neighborhoods or residential zones.
2. The location and height of buildings, the location, nature and height of walls and fences, and the nature and extent of landscaping on the site shall be such that the use will not hinder or discourage the appropriate development and use of adjacent land and buildings or impair the value thereof.)
3. No outside storage of materials, products or refuse shall be permitted unless specifically authorized by the Commission, and such authorized outside storage shall be screened in such manner as the Commission may require. All loading areas shall be oriented away from residential areas and public ways and adequately screened from view by appropriate landscaping.
4. All buildings in multi-building developments shall be logically related to provide convenient access to a common open space. Incompatible building types and uses shall be separated by open space and suitable screening.
H. Frontage Improvements Where the subject site has frontage on an existing street, the pavement and shoulders shall be improved in accordance with the pattern existing on said street and any special requirements created by the proposed development, including, but not limited to, street widening, acceleration/deceleration lanes, curbing, stormwater drainage, street trees, and sidewalks.
I. Traffic Access All driveways, parking areas, paths, and sidewalks shall be interconnected and/or combined, where possible, with adjacent parking areas, driveways, paths and sidewalks for similar uses, to minimize curb cuts and to maximize pedestrian and vehicular movement between adjacent sites without excessive curb cuts, access areas, and congestion. Provision shall be made for such interconnection, and for the extension of any road or driveway, terminating at or upon the subject site so as to serve adjacent undeveloped land in the same or a comparable zone. Such provision shall include rights-of-way to the Town and/or to the adjacent property owner(s). No driveway onto a public street shall exceed thirty (30’) feet in width, excluding the radius fillets at the point of intersection with the street, and no proposed driveway shall be closer than one hundred (100’) feet to any other existing or proposed driveway, unless the site is of such width that compliance with this requirement would preclude access, in which case the separating distance between driveways shall be the maximum feasible for the site. In the interests of public safety, the number of driveways onto public streets shall be minimized, and in non-residential zones, access to adjacent sites shall be by common driveways wherever feasible. The Commission may require that any driveway be designed, and easements to adjacent properties be conveyed, in order to facilitate present or future sharing of such driveways. Driveway widths and site lines shall comply with State standards, where applicable.
J. Emergency Access All site plans shall make adequate provision for facilities and access for fire, police and other emergency protection. Such provision shall include, but not be limited to, fire lanes, access drives to otherwise remote portions of a building or site, adequate lighting of remote or visually obscured building or site areas, fire hydrants where surface or subsurface water supplies exist, and the like.
14.B.5 Specific Recommendations and Requirements for Sites and Buildings. The following recommendations and requirements are provided to assist the applicant in determining the specific items which the Commission will examine in evaluating any application for Special Permit, and the preferred or required features, as the case may be:
A. Building Materials. Preferred building materials should be brick, stone, or narrow-width siding, or the like. Roofing materials should, where visible, be cedar shake, slate, copper, or reasonable equivalents. Tar paper, metal, or plastic roofing surfaces are strongly discouraged. Building-mounted lighting shall utilize shielded light sources, and shall be of a style and character which is in harmony with the character of the Town. Building-mounted flood-lights, and ornamental building lighting are discouraged. All roof-mounted ventilation, heating, and air conditioning equipment, including solar collectors, should, where possible, be recessed or otherwise incorporated into the roof design so that they are not visible from any adjacent property at the height of the proposed building.
B. Lighting. All commercial, industrial, and multi-family residential parking lots shall be illuminated. Lighting standards in parking areas shall not exceed twelve (12’) feet in height. Luminaries shall have shielded light sources to prevent glare. Pedestrian ways shall be illuminated by light bollards or other low-level lighting standards with shielded light sources. All loading areas, rear entries, and other high crime areas shall be illuminated to the level of parking areas. See Section 26- Outdoor Lighting Regulations
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 92
C. Site Plan. All site plans shall provide for pedestrian walkways and circulation in commercial, industrial, and multi-family residential parking areas and around buildings. Walkways along public streets when required should be constructed of slate, brick, stone, block, asphalt or concrete and be a minimum width of four (4’) feet. Interior walkways should be constructed of slate, brick, stone, suitable paving blocks, concrete or other such material as approved by the commission. See Section 11 – Parking Regulations
D. Landscaping and Screening.
All parking, service and storage areas shall be screened by landscaping and/or fences or walls; the general grading, improvement and landscaping of the site shall be designed so as to protect and enhance the historic and rural character of the Town and the subject neighborhood, and to provide all-season visual buffers between the proposed use and any incompatible use of adjacent property through the use of grade separation, landscaping, buffer areas, and/or open spaces. Landscaped areas shall be strategically placed to enhance property values and to protect adjacent uses. All parking areas should include landscaped islands to direct vehicular and pedestrian circulation and to reduce the visual impact of large paved areas. All deciduous trees shall have a minimum caliper measured at six inches above the ground up to and including 4-inch caliper size, and 12 inches above the ground for sizes larger, all evergreen trees shall have a minimum height of six (6’) feet, and all shrubs shall be of a size at least one-third their mature potential. All artificial trees, shrubs or grass are prohibited, except for seasonal, festive, or other temporary decoration.
The Commission Board may require that any or all buildings shall have foundation plantings. All commercial and industrial uses shall include landscaped areas of not less than ten (10%) percent of the developed lot area. Failure to maintain any landscaped area or buffer strip required by these Regulations shall constitute a violation of these Regulations.
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 93
SECTION 15 CAMPGROUNDS AND RECREATIONAL CAMPS
15.0 Intent: The purpose of this section is to promote and assure the health, safety, convenience and property values of the residents of the Town of East Haddam and persons who will utilize the facilities permitted under this section.
15.1. The Planning and Zoning Commission may permit, in the district designated “R” upon application by any owner of property in this district, the construction and/or operation of a Campground or Recreational Camp for camping or living as a seasonal use for the 200-day period extending from April 15th through October 31st.
15.2. Campgrounds and Recreational Camps shall not be approved until the Planning and Zoning Commission shall find that such proposed facilities:
15.2.1. Are consistent with the Plan of Conservation and Development of the Town of East Haddam.
15.2.2. Will cause no hazard to health, safety and property from fires, accident, sanitary and drainage conditions or excessive traffic, noise, odor or other nuisance. Campgrounds and Recreational Camps shall be responsible for complying with the Connecticut Public Health Code, the State Building Code, the Connecticut General Statutes for Family Campgrounds, and the Connecticut State Fire Safety Code as amended unless the Zoning Regulations are more restrictive.
15.2.3. Will not generate traffic volumes or traffic patterns which will create hazardous conditions within the Town of East Haddam or which will be detrimental to the character and value of adjacent properties.
15.3.3 Campgrounds and Recreational Camps are permitted in the Resort Zone after the issuance of a Special Exception by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
a. Accessory uses for Campgrounds and Recreational Camps:
1. Conferences: Conferences shall consist of events bringing individuals to the facility for individual programs lasting from one to no more than fourteen (14) days. Programs include but are not limited to indoor and outdoor meetings or gatherings for instructional or educational programming, retreats, workshops, and team-building purposes for individuals, families, community-oriented organizations, businesses, schools, colleges and universities. Conference use may be approved for anytime of the year as part of a Special Exception Review.
2. Special Events: Special Events such as Car Shows, Tag Sales, Fireworks Shows, Concerts, and other events may be approved for anytime of the year as part of a Special Exception Review.
15.4. Additional Requirements In addition to the customary Special Exception and Site Plan requirement as set forth in Section 14A and B of these regulations the following design and operating standards governing the location and construction of improvements, buildings and facilities shall apply.
15.4.1. A Special Exception for a Campground or Recreational Camp may be granted only on a tract of land containing twenty (20) acres or more.
15.4.2. A suitable buffer strip for purposes of visual and auditory screening shall be provided. The Commission shall require the implementation of buffers to protect the values of adjacent properties. Said buffers shall be two hundred feet (200) in width but may be reduced to no less than fifty feet (50) in width. It shall be the responsibility of the developer, subject to approval by the Commission, to provide an effective barrier that will reasonably buffer adjacent areas.
15.4.3. Camping units and related facilities and structures are prohibited in the area designated on the site plan as “buffer strip”, but the buffer may contain passive recreational uses if said areas are landscaped in such a way as to prevent adverse effects on adjacent properties unless the structure is existing.
15.4.4. The volume of noise from music and public address systems shall be controlled as to prevent objectionable and excessive noise emanating from the premises. Unless expressly approved by the Commission, the period of time
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 94
from 10 pm to 7 am Sunday thru Thursday and 11 pm to 7 am on Fridays, Saturdays and holiday and Sunday’s immediately preceding a holiday, the site shall remain quiet with no public address systems, sporting events, concerts, fireworks, or other activities which would produce sound exceeding decibel limits set by the State of Connecticut recommended guidelines at the property line.
15.4.5. Recreational camp or camp ground may be used during the 200 day period from April 15 to October 31 of each year. No persons who rent, use or enjoy a campsite may claim residency during their stay. Permanent occupancy of any campsite unit is prohibited. Campers must at all times retain a permanent, principal physical residence and domicile outside of the campground. The use of a recreational camp or camp ground for conference or special event purposes may be permitted through a Special Exception Review.
15.4.6 The owner and/or operator of any campground or recreational camp shall be responsible for the maintenance of an accurate register at such ground in which the following information shall be recorded: name of the family head or the responsible group member, his or her permanent address, dates of arrival and departure, and motor vehicle license plate number if applicable. Such register shall be available to the Planning and Zoning Enforcement Officer to assist in the enforcement of these regulations and to the police and health official in connection with the discharge of their duties.
15.4.7 Each campsite in the campground shall average three thousand (3000) square feet for each site and shall have a width or depth of not less than forty (40) feet.
15.4.8 The total number of rental sites in a campground shall not exceed 10 sites per gross acre of land as designated on the site plan and approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission as being part of the area to be utilized for recreational facilities and uses. The gross acreage shall include buffer areas, recreational facilities, rental sites, community areas and emergency overflow areas, support facilities, and land which is readily accessible and considered an integral part of the recreational facilities and uses complex.
15.4.9 The minimum one-way road width shall be 11 feet within the grounds of a campground or recreational camp. One-way streets in excess of 1,000 feet may be required by the Planning and Zoning Commission to provide turn-a-rounds. For two-way streets, 18 feet is required. These roadways shall be designed to accommodate fire fighting apparatus, ambulances, and other large vehicles such as trash and septic hauling trucks.
15.5 The Planning and Zoning Commission, in its discretion, may without public hearing grant an application made by any tax exempt, charitable, or educational organization for permission to park two or more camper coaches or travel trailers on premises owned by or rented to such organization for a period of not more than one week. The application shall set forth the tax exempt, charitable, or educational status of the applicant and the purpose of the event or events requiring the multiple parking of such vehicles.
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 95
SECTION 16 HISTORICAL PARKS
16. Intent: Historical park means an area of land controlled by an owner to be developed, for profit or non-profit making purposes, as a single entity on not less than 25 acres or more, the plan for which does no necessarily correspond in lot size, bulk, type of buildings, density and lot coverage to the Planning and Zoning regulations established from time to time hereunder for the district within which such area is located and which within its confines, recreates a single period of American history, which occurred at least 75 years prior to the date of application; and thereby serves the educational and cultural welfare of the public.
16.1. Informal Preliminary Considerations: The East Haddam Planning and Zoning Commission recommends that, prior to the submission of an official application for Historic Park approval, the applicant initiate a pre-application conference with the Commission and subsequently prepare and present a preliminary plan for informal consideration by the Commission. The preparation of the preliminary plan is recommended to facilitate the general consideration of factors and problems affecting the development of the land before the applicant proceeds with the official application and the preparation of final maps, plans and documents required for formal consideration by the Commission. The presentation of a preliminary plan will more readily and economically facilitate alterations and changes recommended by the Commission.
Neither the pre-application conference nor the formal consideration of the preliminary plan shall be deemed to constitute any portion of the official and formal procedure of applying for Development Plan Approval.
16.2. Permitted structures: A historical park shall be limited to:
16.2.1. Dwelling units in detached, semi-detached or multi-storied structures, or any combination thereof, which are authentic replicas of the dwelling units of the historical period to be represented, and any outbuildings which were auxiliary thereto in such period; and which are thematically linked to that location in the sense that uses of those same types, and in those same approximate proportions, existed on or in the immediate vicinity of the site during the period sought to be depicted.
16.2.3. Any non-residential use to the extent such non-residential use is designed to conform to the types of commercial and industrial enterprises which were in operation in such period, provided in no case shall any structure in Section 16.2.1 or 16.2.2 which is located on a public highway violate the setback requirements of the district except in the case of a non-conforming use which is valid on the date of the application for a license to operate a historical park. The provisions concerning lot size, bulk, type of building, density, lot coverage and setback of these Regulations as they apply to historical parks may be waived but only in accordance with an approved special exception review.
16.2.3. For both residential and non-residential uses, the design of all buildings, structures, and site improvements shall recreate a period in American history which occurred at least 75 years prior to the date of application. The Commission may allow limited contemporary site improvements where necessary to provide adequate lighting, vehicular circulation and parking, and other facilities not characteristic of the recreated period but required for public health, safety, and welfare in current times.
16.3. An application for a Special Exception approval as prescribed in Section 14B to maintain and operate a historical park shall be made to the Planning and Zoning Commission in writing, signed by the applicant and accompanied by an affidavit as to the truth of the statements contained therein. The application shall set forth the name and address of the applicant, if an individual, or the partners, if a partnership, or, if a corporation, the name of the corporation and the names and address of each stockholder owning more than ten percent of its issued stock and the chief place of business of the corporation and the jurisdiction of its incorporation. Such application shall be accompanied copies of the site plan showing the subject property, adjacent properties and structures within five hundred feet of the property lines of the subject property; a description of all proposed uses within the subject property, a statement of the historical period to be recreated with data, sufficient to support the authenticity of the structures and uses for which the subject property is to be used as being of the historical period to be recreated, and floor plans and plans for exterior alterations of all existing and proposed structures. The last may be separate from the site plan. Application for a Special Exceptions for Historical Park shall include a written report by a historical
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 96
consultant authorized to perform historic district studies by the Connecticut State Historic Commission. Such report shall include historical research which substantiates the thematic connection of the site to the historical period sought to be recreated, and shall certify that the buildings, structures, and site improvements proposed conform to that of the subject historical period, except where specifically noted. In addition to the criteria of Section 14B, the Commission shall evaluate any application under this Section in terms of the authenticity of the recreated historical period, the thematic connection of the proposal to the site, and the educational value of the Historical Park in reproducing a significant physical environment from American history.
16.4. Application form and fee: All applications for a Historic Park shall be submitted to the Commission on a form prescribed by it and accompanied by an Application fee in the amount of $100.00, plus the sum of $50.00 per bedroom requested and a sum of $100.00 per 10,000 square feet of commercial/industrial space proposed in the Application.
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 97
SECTION 17 FLOATING ZONES
17.0. Intent: The purpose of this Section is to provide for increased flexibility, balanced by increased control, in the development of land so as to facilitate the following objectives: a) the provision of housing for persons who, due to age or health, requires more compact residential patterns than are possible with conventional single-lot subdivisions; b) the preservation and constructive re-use of existing resort uses and land areas for cluster housing, multi-family housing, and similar flexible density residential development; and c) the preservation and constructive re-use of historical structures and sites, d) to allow recreation uses while preserving open space.)
17.1. Floating Zones: Any owner of property may apply to the Commission for a change of zone to one of the following Floating Zones, provided said application conforms in all respects with the requirements set forth in this Section for such zone change: Planned Recreation Development Resort PRD-R, Planned Recreational Development - Residential Districts PRD-RD or Planned Residential Unit Development (PRUD) or Planned Residential Unit Development and Live Theater Support Personnel Housing (PRUD/LTSP/EHVD). For each such zone change approved by the Commission, the provisions of Sections 7, 9 and 10 of these Regulations shall not apply to said floating zone, and, in their place, the plans, specifications, conditions, representations, and other components of the zone change application, as approved and/or modified and approved by the Commission shall control in said floating zone.
For the purpose of this Section, the term “underlying zone” shall be defined as the zone or district existing on the subject parcel prior to the filing of an application for a floating zone, and the zone to which said floating zone shall revert after approval if said floating zone is not developed within the time limit established by this Section.
17.2. Application Procedure for All Floating Zones:
17.2.1. Informal Preliminary Considerations: The East Haddam Planning and Zoning Commission recommends that, prior to the submission of an official application for floating zone approval, the applicant initiate a pre-application conference with the Commission and subsequently prepare and present a preliminary plan for informal consideration by the Commission. The preparation of the preliminary plan is recommended to facilitate the general consideration of factors and problems affecting the development of the land before the applicant proceeds with the official application and the preparation of final maps, plans and documents required for formal consideration by the Commission. The presentation of a preliminary plan will more readily and economically facilitate alterations and changes recommended by the Commission.
Neither the pre-application conference nor the formal consideration of the preliminary plan shall be deemed to constitute any portion of the official and formal procedure of applying for Development Plan Approval.
17.2.2. Formal Application: Applications for change of zone to any floating zone shall be submitted in writing to the Commission, and shall include the following
17.2.2.a. General Statement: A general statement shall be submitted describing the following:
1. The specific types of proposed uses on the site;
2. The methods by which site utilities will be provided;
3. The proposed timetable for development, including a description of phases, if any;
4. The open space resources of the site, and the amount of open space to be retained, and the method of preservation, if any;
5. The pattern/method of ownership and maintenance of any interior roadways, public facilities, the sewerage disposal systems(s), the water supply system(s), and other common elements; and
6. A schedule of bedrooms per dwelling unit, total numbers of units, square footage of units, and such other data as may be required to evaluate compliance with the standards and criteria of these Regulations.
17.2.2.b. Application form and fee: All applications for a floating zone shall be submitted to the Commission on a form prescribed by it and accompanied by an Application fee in the amount of $100.00, plus the sum of $50.00 per bedroom requested in the Application.
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 98
17.2.2.c. Site Plan: Any applicant for a floating zone shall provide the Commission with all information required under Sections 14A.2 of these Regulations, provided, however, that no information shall be waived, contrary to the provisions of Section 14.A.3.F. In addition, the site plan shall depict the boundaries for all soil types, and shall label said soil types.
17.2.2d. Additional Information: A change of zone application calls upon the Commission to exercise a legislative function, and to determine that the floating zone applied for will be superior to the underlying zone in achieving the purposes of these Regulations as set forth in Section 1 hereof. It is the obligation of the applicant to provide any additional information which the Commission may request or require in order to make such a determination. Such information may include, but is not limited to: information concerning surrounding land uses, building locations, driveways, streets, topography, water courses and wetlands, utilities, and the like; a traffic impact study prepared by a Connecticut Registered Professional Engineer qualified to prepare such studies; an environmental impact statement prepared by professionals qualified to prepare such studies; detailed architectural information, such as color samples, screening of roof-or ground-mounted heating and air conditioning equipment and ventilation ducts, building illumination, samples of construction materials, and the like; detailed landscaping plans, including the type, size, number and location of material to be planted, the location and construction material of any fences, walls, flag poles, street furniture, walkways, trash disposal areas, and the like; reports from its own consultants and staff, or from government agencies.
17.2.3. Public Hearing and Action: The Commission shall act in such manner, and in accordance with such time limits, as are designated for changes of zone in accordance with Section 14 B of these Regulations and in accordance with the applicable provisions of the General Statutes. In the event of conflict between the procedure set forth in these Regulations and the General Statutes, the latter shall prevail.
17.3. General Standards and Requirements for All Floating Zones:
17.3.1. Access:
a). Access will be provided to a through town road or state highway in such a manner as not to have an adverse effect on traffic flow or adjacent development.
b). Access and circulation ways shall be designed to permit fire fighting equipment, furniture moving vans, fuel trucks, refuse collection, deliveries and snow removal equipment to operate in a safe and efficient manner. Such access ways are not to serve as car storage areas.
c). The Commission may require the street system to connect to two or more existing through Town roads or State highways in order to provide for a safe and efficient circulation system within the Town, except where topography or other physical considerations do not permit such streets or where such street connections would adversely affect the neighborhood. The Floating Zone shall be served from, or have access to, at least one through improved Town road or State highway which provides adequate circulation and access to other sections of the Town. Ease of entrance to an exit from the Development with minimum impact on normal traffic flow must be assured.
d). The Commission may require temporary turnarounds and street connections to adjoining undeveloped land as necessary for its proper development, except where topography does not permit or where such street connections would adversely affect the neighborhood.
e). The street system shall be designated to permit connection to existing and proposed facilities where necessary for proper functioning of the utility systems.
f). Buildings, walls, fences, planting and other sight obstructions shall be so located and designed that a driver backing out of any garage, carport or parking space has an unobstructed view of approaching traffic.
17.3.2. Parking:
a. Residential Uses: Parking for all non-residential uses shall be in accordance with the requirements of Section 11.0 of these Regulations.
b. Non-residential Uses: Parking for all non-residential uses shall be in accordance with the requirements of Section 11.0 of these Regulations
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 99
c. Underground Utilities: All developments shall provide for underground installation of all utilities in both public ways and private extensions thereof. All developments shall provide proper design and construction of storm sewer facilities, including grading, gutters, piping and treatment of turf to handle storm water, prevent erosion and the formation of dust. Utilities and maintenance facilities shall be in accordance with the requirements and regulations of the appropriate authority having jurisdiction.
17.3.4. Pedestrian Circulation: The Commission may require such walkways within the development as shall serve pedestrian movements to community facilities within the development.
17.3.5. Streets: Refer to the current East Haddam Subdivision Regulations Section 5.
17.3.6. Waste Disposal: Adequate sight screening must be provided for all garbage collection areas.
17.3.7. Buildable Area/Minimum Parcel Size Calculation: For all purposes of this Section 17, including, but not limited to, calculation of the minimum size of the floating zone, density, building coverage, and the like, the area of the floating zone shall be the Buildable area, which is to be computed as follows: Gross area of the floating zone, less the unbuildable area shall equal the Buildable area. Unbuildable areas shall include:
a. Soil Types: Any soils listed in Section 4.3(1) a) of the East Haddam Subdivision Regulations shall be deemed unbuildable:
b. Flood Hazard Areas: Flood Hazard (100 year storm) areas and floodways as identified on the East Haddam Zoning Map and in the report entitled, “Flood Insurance Study”, Town of East Haddam, Middlesex County, Connecticut, November 1979” and the accompanying maps, as the same may be amended from time to time.
c. Steep Slopes: Lands with slopes in excess of 20%
17.3.8. Minimum Road Frontage: No property proposed for a floating zone shall have less than fifty (50’) feet of frontage on an accepted, improved Town road or State highway.
17.3.9. Setback Requirements, Building Proximity: No building or structure shall be less than fifty (50’) from any boundary of the proposed floating zone with the exception of applications in the East Haddam Village District. Where a floating zone adjoins a single family home development or approved residential subdivision, the Commission may require additional setbacks and/or natural screening, but not to exceed one hundred (100’) feet in depth, to insure privacy from adjoining residences. Setbacks between buildings and structures within the floating zone shall be such as to provide light and air, as well as acoustical and visual privacy for all dwellings, and access space for service, fire protection and maintenance equipment and operations.
17.3.10. Sewerage Disposal: Shall meet the current standards of Section 19-13-B103 of the Connecticut Department of Public Health, referred to as the Technical Standards.
17.3.11. Design: The design of any floating zone shall protect neighborhood property values, prevent future deterioration, promote good community living standards, provide for preservation of the historic character of the Town, provide for feasible management and control of the premises, and serve the purposes of this Section 17 and Section 1 of these Regulations. Site and architectural design shall take advantage of topographic features, provide visual and acoustical privacy between family units and/or other land uses, provide for landscaping and restoration of all areas disturbed by construction, and compliment any adjoining neighborhood. Consistency of scale and architectural design and detailing throughout the various structures within the floating zone shall be maintained.
17.3.12 Open Space
17.3.12.a Definition: All land not used for the construction of dwellings, recreational uses, supporting facilities, parking, vehicular circulation, or private yards shall be considered open space. It shall be so arranged and defined that its area, permanent use and control can be established with restrictions or covenants prohibiting or restricting construction upon it. No portion of any area reserved for residential use shall be considered common open space available to all residents of the development.
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 100
17.3.12.b. Method of Preservation: All common open space shown on the final site development plan must be preserved by one of the following methods:
1. Owned by a corporation composed of the owners of all lots or other ownership units. When ownership of common open space is held by such a corporation, membership in said corporation shall be mandatory for all unit or lot owners, and said corporation shall have powers of assessment and enforcement as set forth in Chapter 828 of the Connecticut General Statutes, the Connecticut Common Interest Ownership Act. In addition, any such common open space shall be subject to a Conservation Easement in favor of the Town of East Haddam in such form as the Commission shall specify. Such Conservation Easement may, in the Commission’s discretion, provide for public access in areas where such access appears appropriate upon consideration of the area and the recommendations of the adopted Plan of Development.
2. Owned by a private conservation trust, the State of Connecticut, the Town of East Haddam, or such other corporate or governmental entity as such assure the preservation and maintenance of such common open space in perpetuity. No application for a floating zone shall be deemed complete without written evidence from the proposed entity that it is willing to accept the ownership and maintenance of such common open space. If the proposed entity is other than the Town of East Haddam, any conveyance shall be subject to a Conservation Easement in favor of the Town of East Haddam, as described in the preceding paragraph.
3. Ownership by the developer or its successors: Ownership of common open space by the developer or its successors shall only be permitted in floating zones where no subdivision of the property is proposed, i.e. where the entire zone is owned and managed by a single commercial entity. The developer shall convey a Conservation Easement in favor of the Town of East Haddam, as described in the preceding paragraph.
4. General requirements for open space: Regardless of the method employed, the instrument of conveyance must include provisions suitable to the Planning and Zoning Commission for guaranteeing:
a). The continued use of such land for the intended purposes:
b). Continuity of proper maintenance for those portions of open space land requiring maintenance;
c). When appropriate, the availability of funds required for such maintenance;
d). Adequate insurance protection; and
e). Recovery for loss sustained by casualty condemnation or otherwise. In any event, the developer must file in the East Haddam Land Records at the time the approved Site Development Plan is filed, legal documents which will produce the aforesaid guarantees and, in particular, will provide a method for restricting the use of Common Open Spaces for the designated purposes.
17.3.13 Other Standards of These Regulations:
In order to further the Intent and purpose of the PRUD Zones under this Section, the Commission shall consider the criteria of Sections 14A.4, 14.B.4, and 14B.5 of these Regulations, and in addition, the following criteria:
a. The extent to which the application preserves or restores an existing building or buildings which reflect(s) and enhance the architectural and historic character of the Town of East Haddam;
b. The extent to which the application proposes new buildings(s) and site improvements which reflect(s) and enhance the architectural and historic character of the Town of East Haddam;
c. The extent to which the application preserves existing large trees, stone walls, topography, and other natural or man-made features which provide character to the site and the Town of East Haddam;
d. The extent to which the application proposes amenities, such as walkways, plazas, benches, ornamental lighting, and other improvements to both public and private spaces which reflect(s) and enhance the streetscape, architectural and historic character of the Town of East Haddam, and provide opportunities for pedestrian circulation, rest, and relaxation by persons living or working in and around the proposed site.
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 101
17.4 Special Standards for Planned Residential Unit Development (PRUD) Zones:
17.4.1 Permitted Uses: The following uses of land shall be permitted in PRUD Zones:
a. Assisted Living Assisted living shall be defined as a residential facility designed especially for elderly or disabled persons comprised of individual dwelling units and such common dining and living facilities necessary or desirable for the personal and medical care of the residents. Individual dwelling units may or may not have kitchens.
b. Adult Living Dwelling units designed especially for elderly or disabled persons, and restricted, in perpetuity, for the exclusive occupancy of such persons. In determining the validity of such restrictions, the Commission shall presume that elderly housing proposed by the Town of East Haddam shall be used as such in perpetuity.
c. Residency requirements: Limitations to the occupancy of Assisted Living or Adult Living housing units shall be as follows:
i). In accordance with the definition of “Housing for Older Persons,” as set forth in Connecticut General Statutes Sections 46a-64b. As of this writing, such definition is “housing: (A) provided under any state or federal program that the Secretary of the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development determines is specifically designed and operated to assist elderly persons as defined in the state or federal program; or (B) intended for, and solely occupied by, persons sixty-two years or older; or (C) intended or operated for occupancy by at least one person fifty-five years of age or older; per unit in accordance with the standards set forth in the Fair Housing Act [42 U.S.C. Section 3601, et. seq.] and regulations developed pursuant thereto by the Secretary of the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development.”
ii). a person not qualified for “Housing for Older Persons” under the preceding paragraph, but who has been certified by the Social Security Board as being disabled.
iii). A unit occupied by the surviving member of a household, regardless of age or disability, if the deceased member met the requirements of one of the preceding paragraphs.
d. Supporting Facilities: PRUD Zones may contain the following supporting services: recreational facilities, community service spaces, administrative offices and service buildings, health care facilities, automobile parking areas and garages, and such other uses as the Commission may approve which are for the primary use of residents of the PRUD, and which are accessory to the PRUD, as that term is defined in these Regulations. In no event shall any commercial activity be deemed as a supportive facility.
17.4.2. Permitted Underlying Zones: PRUD Zones shall be permitted only in the following underlying zones: R-1/2, R, R-1, and C/B/IG.
17.4.3. Minimum Parcel Size: The minimum gross parcel size and minimum buildable area of any PRUD shall depend upon the underlying zone, and shall be as follows:
Minimum Contiguous Minimum Contiguous Density
Underlying Zone Gross Area Buildable Area Bedrms/Buildable Acre
R-1/2 5 acres 2 acres 6
R 15 acres 5 acres 3
R-1 15 acres 5 acres 3
C/B/IG 5 acres 3 acres 6
17.4.4. Maximum Residential Density: The maximum density for any PRUD shall be no more than three (3) bedrooms per buildable acre. For all purposes of this Section 17.4, each and every residential dwelling unit shall be assumed to have at least one (1) bedroom.
17.4.5. Maximum Non-Residential Density: Non-residential support facilities, as set forth above, shall not exceed ten percent (10%) of the total square footage of all residential buildings.
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 102
17.4.6. Limitations on Residential Buildings:
1. There shall be no more than six (6) dwelling units in any single building.
2. No dwelling unit shall contain less than 600 square feet of gross floor area, plus 150 square feet of gross floor area for each additional bedroom after the first bedroom
3. No dwelling unit shall contain more than two (2) bedrooms.
4. Any room in a dwelling unit, other than one kitchen, one living room, any bathroom, or any open-air or screened porch shall be considered a bedroom for the purposes of this Section 17.4.6.
17.4.7 Limitations on All Buildings:
1. The maximum height of any building shall be thirty five (35’) feet. There shall be no third floor habitable areas without the review and approvals as required in Section 10.1.4 Building Height – Special Provisions. In addition, the Commission may require a lesser building height or the provision of special site or building improvements, after considering reports from the Zoning Enforcement Officer, the Building Official, and the Fire Department Chief concerning the adequacy of fire protection measures, emergency access, and the Town’s capacity to deal with anticipated public safety challenges in the development.
2. The maximum size of any accessory building shall be 6,000 square feet. Gross floor area.
3. All storage areas shall be enclosed by walls or fences.
17.4.8 Restrictions On Occupancy:
1. For Adult Living or Assisted Living developments, the documents shall describe in detail the services to be provided, the common elements, areas, or facilities for the use of all residents, and the formula for the allocation of the costs for such services and common elements, areas, or facilities.
2. For Adult Living or Assisted Living developments, the documents shall contain the occupancy requirements set forth in this Section 17.
3. For Adult Living or Assisted Living developments, the documents shall contain a provision prohibiting any substantive amendment to the provisions addressed in the preceding two (2) paragraphs without the prior approval of the Commission.
17.5 Special Requirements for Planned Recreation Development -Resort Zones PRD-R
17.5.1. Permitted Uses: The following uses of land shall be permitted in PRD-R Zones:
a. Dwellings: Seasonal or year round dwellings, including seasonal single-,two-, and multi-family dwellings. The applicant shall specify dwellings to be occupied seasonally and those to be occupied on a year round basis.
b. Supporting Facilities: PRD-R Zones may contain any resort activity, as defined by these Regulations, as supporting facilities.
17.5.2. Permitted Underlying Zones: PRD-R Zones shall be permitted only in the Resort ® underlying zone.
17.5.3. Minimum Parcel Size: The minimum parcel size for a PRD-R Zone shall be twenty (20) acres of contiguous gross area, of which no less than five (5) acres shall be contiguous buildable land.
17.5.4. Maximum Residential Density: The total number of dwelling units shall not exceed an average of one (1) unit per acre of buildable land, provided, however, that no more than eight (8) units shall be located upon any acre of buildable land;
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 103
17.5.5. Maximum Non-Residential Density: Non-residential supporting facilities, as set forth above, shall not exceed ten percent (10%) of the total square footage of all residential densities.
17.5.6. Limitations on Residential Structures:
1. There shall be no more than four (4) dwelling units in any one building.
2. Each dwelling unit shall have a minimum living area as follows:
Efficiency Unit 450 sq.ft.
1 Bedroom Unit 600 sq.ft.
2 Bedroom Unit 850 sq.ft.
3 Bedroom Unit 1,000 sq.ft.
There shall be no more than three (3) bedrooms in any dwelling unit.
3. Any room in a dwelling unit, other than one kitchen, one living room, any bathroom, or any open-air or screened porch shall be considered a bedroom for the purposes of this Section 17.5.
4. Every dwelling unit shall have access to a public street, walkway, or other area dedicated to common use as interpreted by the Commission.
17.5.7 Limitations on all Buildings:
a. The maximum size of any detached building shall be 6,000 square feet.
b. All storage areas shall be enclosed by walls or fences.
17.6. Special Standards for Planned Recreational Development Residential Districts R-2 and R-4
PRD-RD.
17.6.1 Permitted Uses: the following uses of land shall be permitted in PRD-RD zones.
a Dwellings: Seasonal or year round dwellings. The applicant shall specify dwellings to be occupied on a seasonal or year round basis, and there shall be no change in use from seasonal to year-round dwellings without an amendment pursuant to Section 17.8.
b. Supporting Facilities: PRD-RD may contain non-residential supporting facilities, as defined in these Regulations, accessory to the Planned Recreational Development. These facilities may include commercial entities. Final determination of the nature, size and intensity of such supporting facilities shall be at the discretion of the Planning and Zoning Commission after considering whether such facilities are, in fact, accessory to the Development and considering the criteria of Section 17.3 of these Regulations.
c. Recreational Uses: Recreational uses for which application may be made in the PRD-RD Zones are as follows; golf courses, equestrian complexes, and nature preserves and centers.
1. Golf Courses: Areas of land laid out for golf with a series of nine (9) or eighteen (18) holes each including tee, fairway, practice greens, driving ranges, and putting green and often one or more natural or artificial hazards.
Supporting Facilities shall be accessory as defined in these regulations. Supporting Facilities which may be considered accessory to a golf course are as follows: storage and equipment buildings, pro-shops, gift shops, club house, and restaurants or similar uses which the Commission deems to be accessory to a golf course.
2. Nature Preserves and Centers: Areas of land laid out with a commitment to preserve or protect the natural resources. These areas may be used for environmental education activities, trails open to the public, exhibit of local flora and fauna, and wildlife attraction areas.
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 104
Supporting Facilities shall be accessory as defined in these regulations. Supporting Facilities which may be considered accessory to a nature preserve and center are as follows: educational buildings, museums, libraries, gift shops, club house, book stores, storage and equipment buildings, and restaurants or similar uses which the Commission deems to be accessory to a nature preserve and center.
d. Infrastructure Improvements: Any change or alteration to the existing conditions of the site for the purpose of complying with these Regulations, or any approval granted hereunder, or rendering the site more suitable for development and/or habitation. As used in the this Section 17, Infrastructure Improvements include but are not limited to: Construction and installation of roadways, paved streets, curbs, gutters, utilities, street signs, monuments, shade trees, drainage facilities, erosion and sediment control measures, buildings, earth filling or removal, community septic systems or community water systems, seeding and grading.
3. Equestrian Complexes: Areas of land and buildings laid out to feature horseback riding as a private and/or public facility. Areas can be designated as paddock areas, pasture land, training grounds, competition grounds, and bridle trails.
Supporting Facilities shall be accessory as defined in these regulations. Supporting Facilities which may be considered accessory to an equestrian complex are as follows:
stables, - private and/or commercial, barns, equipment storage structures, indoor arenas, paddock areas, tack shops, gift shops, club house, and restaurants or similar uses which the Commission deems to be accessory to an equestrian complex.
17.6.2. Permitted Underlying Districts: PRD-RD Zones shall be permitted in the R-2 and R-4 Districts.
17.6.3. Minimum Parcel Size: The minimum parcel size for a PRD-RD shall be one hundred (100) contiguous acres.
17.6.4. Maximum Residential Density: To enhance the rural characteristic of the Town, yet allow recreational and commercial uses otherwise not allowed in the residential districts, the number of residential units shall be reduced by one half (1/2) of what would be permitted in a conventional subdivision in the underlying zone, as determined in accordance with this Section. The applicant shall be required to submit a conventional subdivision plan which will be reviewed and approved as to the number of residential units by the Commission and shall be subject to any applicable Federal, State, and local regulations for the purpose of determining the number of residential units permissible under the underlying zone. Such conventional subdivision plan shall include the entire parcel proposed for the PRD-RD Zone.
17.6.5. Maximum Non-residential Building Square Footage: The floor area of all non-residential supporting facilities, as set forth above, shall not exceed twenty percent (20%) of the total gross square footage of all residential buildings. A maximum of 3500 square feet of floor area per residential unit shall be used.
17.6.6. Limitations on Residential Structures
a. There shall be no more than four (4) dwelling units in any one structure.
b. Each dwelling unit shall have the minimum living area as follows;
1 Bedroom Unit 1000 sq. ft.
2 Bedroom Unit 1250 sq. ft.
3 Bedroom Unit 1500 sq. ft.
4 Bedroom Unit 1750 sq. ft.
c. There shall be no more than four bedrooms in any multi-family dwelling unit.
d. Every dwelling unit shall have access to a public street, walkway, or other area dedicated to common use as determined by the Commission.
17.6.7 Limitation of Lot Size Dedicated to Residential and Non -Residential Units
To balance the recreational uses desired and still dedicate portions to open space, the maximum lot size shall be as follows( see Section 17.3.7 );
a. Residential Units
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 105
Underlying District Maximum Lot Size
R-2 1 acre
R-4 1.25 acre
OR
b. the applicant may calculate the aggregate maximum lot area dedicated to residential development allowed by the preceding paragraph, and supply the Commission with site plans depicting development which does not exceed the total maximum aggregate lot area coverage allowed, assuming the maximum lot sizes stated in the preceding paragraph. For cluster development, the applicant shall provide enough area to support the common amenities associated with residential living. This will be at the final discretion of the Commission.
c. Non Residential Supporting Facilities Lot Size.
The aggregate maximum lot area dedicated for non residential supporting facilities, including accessory amenities such as parking, lawns, and sanitary facilities ( also referred to simply as “ Supporting Facilities “ in this Section 17 ) shall be an additional twenty (20%) percent of the aggregate maximum lot area dedicated to residential development.
17.6.8. Ratio of Property in Open Space to be used as Recreational Area and Natural Open Space.
The balance of property not used as aggregate maximum lot area (residential or Supporting Facilities, as defined in this paragraph, shall be deemed as the open space area, as defined in Section 17.3.12a of these Regulations. A maximum of one half (1/2) of the total area of such open space may be used as the Recreational Area, as defined in this paragraph, intended for the Floating Zone. The Recreational Area may have the residential and non-residential supporting facilities intertwined but these areas are to be calculated as separate areas. The balance of the property shall be dedicated to Natural Open Space as defined in this paragraph. The dedicated open space shall be contiguous and not fragmented. For purposes of this Section 17 any building, structures, accessory parking areas, lawns, sanitary facilities, and other improved land area(s) to be used for supporting facilities or recreational uses shall be defined as Supporting Facilities. Improved open space areas used for recreation uses, such as golf fairways, athletic fields, horse paddocks, including areas surrounding such facilities which are primarily in their natural state, such as wooded areas between golf course fairway, high intensity use recreational trails, or buffers shall be defined as “ Recreational Areas.” Areas primarily in their natural state, with only incidental recreational uses, such as low - intensity walking paths, shall be defined as “Natural Open Spaces.”
17.7. Special Standards for Planned Residential Unit Development and Live Theater Support Personnel Housing in the East Haddam Village District (PRUD/LTSP/EHVD)
17.7.1. Permitted Uses: All uses are to follow the application requirements of Section 9.5 - East Haddam Village District along with the following requirements. The following uses of land shall be permitted in PRUD/LTSP/EHVD:
a. Residential Development: Residential development containing two or more Dwellings and including Dwellings in structures that have Mixed Uses.
b. Live Theater Support Personnel (LTSP) Housing: Housing designed for congregate living arrangements to support the needs of a Live Theater. Units created for LTSP Housing can not be converted to residential units without approval from the East Haddam Planning and Zoning Commission and only if in compliance with this section pertaining to residential development.
c. Supporting Facilities: PRUD Zones may contain the following supporting services: recreational facilities, administrative offices, automobile parking areas and garages, and such other uses as the Commission may approve which are for the primary use of residents of the PRUD/ LTSP/EHVD, and which are accessory to the PRUD/LTSP/EHVD, as that term is defined in these Regulations. In no event shall any commercial activity be deemed as a supportive facility. Commercial activities have to be submitted as a separate application.
17.7.2. Permitted Underlying Zones: PRUD/LTSP/EHVD Zones shall be permitted only in the East Haddam Village District.
17.7.3. Minimum Parcel Size: The minimum gross parcel size is one (1) acre.
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 106
17.7.4. Maximum Residential Density: The maximum density for any application in the PRUD/LTSP/EHVD shall be a function of the applicants ability to demonstrate compliance with Section 9.5 - East Haddam Village District regulations, the public health code, and the building code.
17.7.5. Maximum Non-Residential Density: Non-residential support facilities, as set forth above, shall not exceed ten percent (10%) of the Gross Floor Area of all residential buildings.
17.7.6. Limitations on Residential Buildings:
1. The maximum building size and height for any application in the PRUD/LTSP/EHVD shall be a function of the applicant’s ability to demonstrate compliance with Section 9.5 - East Haddam Village District regulations, the public health code, and the building code.
2. No residential dwelling unit shall contain less than 1000 square feet of gross floor area, plus 250 square feet of gross floor area for each additional bedroom after the first bedroom
3. No LTSP Housing dwelling unit shall not contain less than 250 square feet of Floor Area per resident not including hallways and stairways.
17.7.7. PRUD/STSP/EHVD Not to Be Exclusive Procedure for Live Theater Support Personnel Housing.
The provisions of this Section 17.7 are intended to provide an option for Live Theater Support Housing in conjunction with other land uses, and on Premises which may or may not be adjacent to, or in close proximity to, Live Theaters. This Section shall not preclude Live Theater Support Housing as an Accessory Use for Live Theaters in accordance with the East Haddam Village District Regulations, Section 9.5.
17.8. Approval: Upon approval of a Floating Zone, the Commission shall provide notice to the applicant and the public, as provided in the General Statutes, and shall cause the approved Floating Zone to be noted on the official zoning map of the Town of East Haddam by outlining the boundaries of the land affected thereby and indicating the approval date.
The applicant shall, within ninety (90) days of approval of any Floating Zone, record notice thereof in the East Haddam Land Records under the name of the record owner of land affected thereby, giving a legal description of the land, and giving specific reference to the approved plan(s) and map(s) and, further, the applicant shall record in the East Haddam Land Records a copy of the approved plan(s) and map(s), endorsed by the signatures of the Commission’s Chairman or Secretary.
17.9. Conformance to Recorded Documents: Land described shall be used and developed only in accordance with the recorded documents, provided that if there is a subsequent subdivision approval for all or any portion of the property within the Floating Zone such future subdivision shall be depicted or indicated on the Floating Zone plans, and the approved subdivision plans, conditions, and other elements of approval shall be deemed to form a part of the Floating Zone approval, and be enforceable as such.
17.10. Amendment of Approved Floating Zones: An application to alter or extend an approved floating zone shall specify the nature of the planned alterations and/or extensions and shall be accompanied by a scale plan of the proposed alterations and extensions in the same detail as is required in an initial application for floating zone and shall be accompanied by a fee per the fee schedule. Such application shall be processed in the same manner as a new application under this section.
17.11. Previously approved Special Exceptions: Any Special Exception approved pursuant to the corresponding predecessor sections of these Regulations, being former Sections 16, 17, or 26, shall be commended and completed in accordance with the time limits set forth in section 17.10 of these Regulations, which time limits shall be deemed to commence upon the effective date of this Section 17. Any Special Exception not so commenced or completed shall be void, and notice thereof shall be filed in the office of the Town Clerk. Any such approved and completed Special Exception shall be deemed a legal non-conforming use, and governed by Section 8 of these Regulations.
Any amendment to, or extension of, any such approved Special Exception shall be processed an application under this Section 17.
17.12. Commencement and Completion of Certain Improvements:
Recreational Improvements. In PRD-RD Zones with permitted recreational uses approved as part of the Floating Zone, the construction of all recreational uses and Supporting Facilities indicated on the recorded documents shall be
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 107
completed within thirty-six (36) months of the date such documents are recorded, provided however that the commission in its discretion may extend such period for an additional twenty-four (24) months.
Infrastructure Improvements: For any Floating Zones, the construction of any improvement required by the commission, other than on land reserved for residential use, shall be completed within five (5) years of the effective date of such approval, provided that the commission may extend such time period for an additional (5) years without requiring an additional application.
17.13. Performance Bonds: As a condition of the approval of any Floating Zones approved pursuant to this Section 17, the Commission may require that the record owners of the subject property post a bond, in such form and with such sureties as the Zoning Enforcement Officer may prescribe, in an amount sufficient to cover the cost of construction of any Recreational Improvement, Infrastructure Improvements, and any other improvements required by the Commission in connection with such Floating Zone. Such requirement for bonding shall be determined on the basis of the importance of the completion of such improvements to compliance with the criteria of these Regulations, the extent and expense of such improvements, and the potential for occupancy of the site or building in the absence of such improvements. All such improvements shall be completed prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Zoning Compliance and/or Certificate of Occupancy, except as provided herein below.
In the event that certain improvements may not be installed at the time of occupancy of a site or building due to weather conditions or other factors beyond the control of the applicant, the Zoning Enforcement Officer may require a performance bond, is such amounts, form, and surety as he/she may deem necessary, to insure the completion of such improvements in not more than six (6) months following such occupancy.
In the event that the improvements described herein above shall not be completed within the time limits contained herein, the Zoning Enforcement Officer shall be authorized to utilize the performance bond to complete such improvements, and to compensate the Town for any administrative expenses incurred in connection with the completion of such improvements.
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 108
SECTION 18 SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA REGULATIONS
11/1/79r 3/22/93r, 8/26/08r, 8/26/08r
TABLE OF CONTENTS
18.1.0 Statutory Authorization and Purpose
18.1.1 Statutory Authorization
18.1.2 Finding of Fact
18.1.3 Statement of Purpose
18.1.4 Objectives
18.2.0 Definitions
18.3.0 General Provisions
18.3.1 Areas to Which This Regulation Applies
18.3.2 Basis for Establishing the Special Flood Hazard Areas (SFHA)
18.3.3 Structures Already in Compliance
18.3.4 Abrogation and Greater Restrictions
18.3.5 Interpretation
18.3.6 Warning and Disclaimer of Liability
18.3.7 Severability
18.4.0 Administration
18.4.1 Designation of the Local Administrator
18.4.2 Certification
18.4.3 Establishment of the Floodplain Development Zoning Permit
18.4.4 Permit Application Procedures
18.4.5 Application Stage
18.4.6 Construction Stage
18.4.7 Duties and Responsibilities of the Local Administrator
18.5.0 Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction
18.5.1 General Standards
18.5.2 Standards for Watercourses Without BFEs, Floodways and/or Flood Mapping
18.5.3 Specific Standards
18.5.4 Construction Standards in Special Flood Hazard Areas (SFHA), Zones A, A1-30, and AE
18.5.5 Manufactured (Mobile) Homes and Recreational Vehicles (RVs)
18.5.6 Floodways
18.5.7 Standards for Development in Areas of Shallow Flooding (AO and AH Zones)
18.6.0 Design Standards for Subdivision Proposals
18.7.0 Variance Procedures
18.7.1 Establishment of Variance Process
18.7.2 Specific Situation Variances
18.7.3 Considerations for Granting of Variances
18.7.4 Conditions for Variances
18.8.0 Enforcement
18.9.0 Penalties for Violation
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 109
18.1.0 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION AND PURPOSE
18.1.1 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION
The Legislature of the State of Connecticut has in Title 7, Chapter 98, Section 7-148(c)(7)(A) and in Title 8, Chapter 124, Section 8-2 of the General Statutes delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the Planning and Zoning Commission of the Town of East Haddam, Connecticut, does ordain as follows:
18.1.2 FINDING OF FACT
The flood hazard areas of the Town of East Haddam are subject to periodic flood inundation which results in the loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare.
These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in the floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy in flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods or hazards to other lands which are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damage. Uncontrolled development and use of the floodplains can adversely affect the community.
The Town of East Haddam has voluntarily participated in the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) since November of 1979. The NFIP is founded on a mutual agreement between the federal government and each participating community. Local, state and federal governments must share roles and responsibilities to meet the goals and objectives of the NFIP. The community’s role is of paramount importance. Property owners are able to receive federally-subsidized flood insurance only if the community enacts and enforces the minimum floodplain regulations required for participation in the NFIP.
18.1.3 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE
It is the purpose of this regulation is to regulate floodplain development, promote public health, safety, and general welfare, and minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
18.1.3.1 To protect human life and health, and prevent damage to property;
18.1.3.2 To minimize expenditure of public funds for costly flood control projects;
18.1.3.3 To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
18.1.3.4 To minimize prolonged business interruptions and other economic disruptions;
18.1.3.5 To minimize damage to public facilities, infrastructure and utilities, such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, and streets and bridges, located in the floodplain;
18.1.3.6 To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood
hazard areas in such a manner as to minimize flood damage and flood blight areas;
18.1.3.7 To insure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood hazard area;
18.1.3.8 To prevent increase in flood heights that could increase flood damage and result in conflicts between property owners;
18.1.3.9 To ensure that those who occupy the flood hazard areas assume responsibility for their
actions; and
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 110
18.1.3.10 To discourage development in a floodplain if there is any practicable alternative to locate the activity, use or structure outside of the floodplain.
18.1.4 OBJECTIVES
In order to accomplish its purposes, this regulation includes objectives, methods and provisions that:
18.1.4.1 Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to flood or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
18.1.4.2 Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities that serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction;
18.1.4.3 Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers that are involved in the accommodation of flood waters;
18.1.4.4 Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase erosion or flood damage; and
18.1.4.5 Prevent or regulate the construction of barriers or obstructions which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands.
18.2.0
Unless specifically defined below, words and phrases used in this regulation shall have the same meaning as they have in common usage and to give this regulation its most reasonable application.
Area of Shallow Flooding (for a community with AO or AH Zones only) - A designated AO, AH, AR/AO, AR/AH, or VO zone on a community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a one percent or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
Base Flood – The flood having a one (1) percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, also referred to as the one hundred (100) year flood, as published by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) as part of a Flood Insurance Study (FIS) and depicted on a Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM).
Base Flood Elevation (BFE) – The elevation of the crest of the base flood or 100-year flood. The height in relation to mean sea level expected to be reached by the waters of the base flood at pertinent points in the floodplains of coastal and riverine areas.
Basement – Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.
Building – see definition for “Structure”.
Cost – As related to substantial improvements, the cost of any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, alteration, repair or other improvement of a structure shall be established by a detailed written contractor’s estimate. The estimate shall include, but not be limited to: the cost of materials (interior finishing elements, structural elements, utility and service equipment); sales tax on materials, building equipment and fixtures, including heating and air conditioning and utility meters; labor; built-in appliances; demolition and site preparation; repairs made to damaged parts of the building worked on at the same time; contractor’s overhead; contractor’s profit; and grand total. Items to be excluded include: cost of plans and specifications, survey costs, permit fees, outside improvements such as septic systems, water supply wells, landscaping, sidewalks, fences, yard lights, irrigation systems, and detached structures such as garages, sheds, and gazebos.
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 111
Development – Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to the construction of buildings or structures; the construction of additions, alterations or substantial improvements to buildings or structures; the placement of buildings or structures; mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment; the storage, deposition, or extraction of materials; and the installation, repair or removal of public or private sewage disposal systems or water supply facilities.
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) - The federal agency that administers the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP).
Finished Living Space –Finished living space can include, but is not limited to, a space that is heated and/or cooled, contains finished floors (tile, linoleum, hardwood, etc.), has sheetrock walls that may or may not be painted or wallpapered, and other amenities such as furniture, appliances, bathrooms, fireplaces and other items that are easily damaged by floodwaters and expensive to clean, repair or replace. A fully enclosed area below the base flood elevation (BFE) cannot have finished living space and needs to be designed for exposure to flood forces. These spaces can only to be used for parking, building access or limited storage.
Flood or Flooding – A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from either the overflow of inland or tidal waters, or the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
Flood Boundary and Floodway Map (FBFM) – The official map of a community on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has delineated the limits of the regulatory floodway and 100-year floodplain.
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) – The official map of a community on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has delineated both the special flood hazard areas (100-year floodplain) and the insurance risk premium zones applicable to a community. FIRM published after January 1990 may also show the limits of the regulatory floodway.
Flood Insurance Study (FIS) – The official study of a community in which the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has conducted a technical engineering evaluation and determination of local flood hazards, flood profiles and water surface elevations. The Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM), which accompany the FIS, provide both flood insurance rate zones and base flood elevations, and may provide the regulatory floodway limits.
Floodway – The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one (1.0) foot. For the purposes of these regulations, the term “Regulatory Floodway” is synonymous in meaning with the term “Floodway”.
Functionally Dependent Use or Facility – A use or facility that cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities. The term does not include seafood processing facilities, long-term storage, manufacturing, sales or service facilities.
Highest Adjacent Grade (HAG) – The highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
Historic Structure – Any structure that is: (a) Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; (b) Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historic significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; (c) Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or (d) Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: (1) By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or (2) Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 112
Lowest Floor – The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building’s lowest floor, provided that such an area meets the design requirements specified in Section 5.3.1.3 of this regulation.
Manufactured Home – A structure, transportable in one (1) or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term also includes park trailers, travel trailers, recreational vehicles and other similar vehicles or transportable structures placed on a site for one hundred and eighty (180) consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property.
Market Value – Market value of the structure shall be determined by an independent appraisal by a professional appraiser; the property’s tax assessment, minus land value; the replacement cost minus depreciation of the structure; the structure’s Actual Cash Value.
Mean Sea Level (MSL) – The North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) are referenced.
New Construction – Structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after November 1, 1979, the effective date of the floodplain management regulations, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
Recreational Vehicle – A vehicle which is: (a) built on a single chassis; (b) four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; (c) designed to be self-propelled or permanently towed by a light duty truck; and (d) designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as a temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA) – The land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one (1) percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. SFHAs are determined utilizing the base flood elevations (BFE) provided on the flood profiles in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for a community. BFEs provided on Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) are only approximate (rounded up or down) and should be verified with the BFEs published in the FIS for a specific location. SFHAs include, but are not necessarily limited to, the land shown as Zones A, A1-30, AE, AO, AH, and the Coastal High Hazard Areas shown as Zones V, V1-30, and VE on a FIRM. The SFHA is also called the Area of Special Flood Hazard.
Start of Construction – For other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (P.L. 97-348), includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, substantial improvement or other improvement was within one hundred and eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does in include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erections of temporary forms; not does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
Structure – A walled and roofed building which is principally above ground, including a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank, or other man-made facilities or infrastructures.
Substantial Damage – Damage of any origin sustained by a structure, whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its pre-damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 113
Substantial Improvement – Any combination of repairs, reconstruction, rehabilitation, alterations, additions or other improvements to a structure, taking place during a ten (10) year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure as determined at the beginning of such ten (10) year period. This term includes structures that have incurred “substantial damage”, regardless of the actual repair work performed. For purposes of this definition, “substantial improvement” is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however, include either: (1) Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or (2) Any alteration of a “historic” structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a “historic structure”.
Variance - A grant of relief by a community from the terms of the floodplain management regulation that allows construction in a manner otherwise prohibited and where specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship.
Violation – Failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community’s floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without required permits, lowest floor elevation documentation, flood-proofing certificates or required floodway encroachment calculations is resumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
Water Surface Elevation – The height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NADD to) 1988 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas.
18.3.0 GENERAL PROVISIONS
18.3.1 AREAS TO WHICH THIS REGULATION APPLIES
This regulation shall apply to all Special Flood Hazard Areas (SFHA) within the Town of East Haddam.
18.3.2 BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING THE SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS (SFHA)
The Special Flood Hazard Areas (SFHA) identified by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency (FEMA) in its Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for the Town of East Haddam, dated August 28, 2008, and accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM) dated August 28, 2008, and other supporting data, and any subsequent revisions thereto, are adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this regulation. Since mapping is legally adopted by reference into this regulation it must take precedence when more restrictive until such time as a map amendment or map revision is obtained from FEMA.
The SFHA includes any area shown on the FIRM as Zones A, A1-30, AE, AO, and AH, including areas designated as a floodway on a FIRM or FBFM. SFHAs are determined utilizing the base flood elevations (BFE) provided on the flood profiles in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for a community. BFEs provided on Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) are only approximate (rounded up or down) and should be verified with the BFEs published in the FIS for a specific location. Also included are areas of potential, demonstrable or historical flooding, including any area contiguous with but outside the SFHA identified by FEMA, and where the land surface elevation is lower than the base flood elevation (BFE) as shown in the FIS, and the area is not protected from flooding by a natural or man-made feature. The FIRM, FBFM and FIS are on file in the Land Use Office in the Town of East Haddam.
18.3.3 STRUCTURES ALREADY IN COMPLIANCE
A structure or development already in compliance with this regulation shall not be made non-compliant by any alteration, modification, repair, reconstruction or improvement and must also comply with other applicable local, state, and federal regulations. No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted, modified or structurally altered without full compliance with the terms of this regulation and other applicable regulations.
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 114
18.3.4 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS
This regulation is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this regulation and another ordinance, regulation easement, covenant or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
18.3.5 INTERPRETATION
In the interpretation and application of this regulation, all provisions shall be:
1) considered as minimum requirements;
2) liberally construed in favor of the governing body, and;
3) deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under State statutes.
18.3.6 WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY
The degree of flood protection required by this regulation is considered the minimum reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering consideration and research. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This regulation does not imply or guarantee that land outside the Special Flood Hazard Area or uses permitted in such areas will be free from flooding and flood damages. This regulation shall not create liability on the part of the Town of East Haddam or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this regulation or any administrative decision lawfully made there under. The Town of East Haddam, its officers and employees shall assume no liability for another person’s reliance on any maps, data or information provided by the Town of East Haddam.
18.3.7 SEVERABILITY
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this regulation should be declared invalid for any reason whatsoever, such decision shall not affect the remaining portions of this regulation, which shall remain in full force and effect; and to this end the provisions of this regulation are hereby declared to be severable.
18.4.0 ADMINISTRATION
18.4.1 DESIGNATION OF THE LOCAL ADMINISTRATOR
The Zoning Enforcement Officer is hereby appointed to administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this regulation.
18.4.2 CERTIFICATION
Where required under this regulation, a Connecticut registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions of this regulation. Such certification must be provided to the Zoning Enforcement Officer.
18.4.3 ESTABLISHMENT OF THE FLOODPLAIN SPECIAL EXCEPTION REVIEW
The flood management section of the Special Exception Review (Section 14B of the East Haddam Zoning Regulations) must be completed in conformance with the provisions of the East Haddam Zoning Regulation prior to the commencement of any development activities. Approvals issued under this regulation shall expire if actual construction of a permitted structure does not commence within one hundred and eighty (180) days of the permit approval date.
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 115
18.4.4 SPECIAL EXCEPTION APPLICATION PROCEDURES
A Special Exception Review is hereby established for all construction and other development to be undertaken in Special Flood Hazard Areas in this community. Prior to any development activities, application for a Special Exception Review shall be made to the Planning and Zoning Office on forms provided and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing, at a minimum, the property lines and location of the parcel; the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in question; limit and extent of the 100-year floodplain and/or floodway boundary and base flood elevation(s); existing and proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities and the location of the foregoing. Specifically, the following information is required to be submitted to the East Haddam Planning and Zoning Office.
18.4.4.1 Application Stage
The applicant shall provide at least the following information, where applicable. Additional information may be required on the Special Exception application form.
18.4.4.1.1 Base flood elevation (BFE) for the site in question as determined in the FEMA
Flood Insurance Study (FIS) or Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). The FIS flood profiles provide more accurate BFE data than the FIRM. The extent of the 100- year floodplain and floodway must be depicted with a boundary line on any site plans and shown in relation to existing and proposed structures or development;
18.4.4.1.2 Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the proposed lowest floor, including basement, of all new construction, substantial improvements or repairs to structures that have sustained substantial damage;
18.4.4.1.3 Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any non-residential new construction, substantial improvements or repair to structures that have sustained substantial damage will be dry flood-proofed;
18.4.4.1.4 Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development. Computations by a licensed professional engineer must be submitted that demonstrate that the altered or relocated segment will provide equal or greater conveyance than the original stream segment. The applicant must submit any maps, computations or other materials required by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in order to officially amend or revise the Flood Insurance Rate Map. The applicant must pay any fees or other costs assessed by FEMA for this purpose. The applicant must also provide assurances that the conveyance capacity of the altered or relocated stream segment will be maintained;
18.4.4.1.5 A statement and supporting documentation (all costs of project, market value of structure, etc.) verifying that the proposed alterations to an existing structure meets or does not meet the criteria of the substantial improvement and/or substantial damage definition. If a development meets the definition of substantial improvement and/or substantial damage, the structure must be brought into compliance with all floodplain regulations as if it was new construction;
18.4.4.1.6 Where applicable the following certifications by a Connecticut registered engineer or architect are required, and must be provided to the East Haddam Planning and Zoning Office. The design and methods of construction must be certified to be in accordance with accepted standards of practice and with the provisions of Section 5.3.
(a) Non-residential flood-proofing must meet the provisions of Section 5.3.1.2;
(b) Fully enclosed areas below the base flood elevation (BFE) must meet the minimum design criteria in Section 18.5.3.1.3;
(c) No (0.00) increase in floodway water surface elevations are allowed. Any development in a floodway must meet the provisions of Section 5.3.4;
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 116
18.4.4.2 Construction Stage
Upon completion of the applicable portion of construction, the applicant shall provide verification to the Zoning Enforcement Officer of the following as is applicable:
18.4.4.2.1. Lowest floor elevation shall be verified for:
(a) A structure in Zones A, AE, A1-30, AO or AH is the top of the lowest floor (including basement); An elevation certificate prepared by a Connecticut licensed land surveyor must be provided.
(b) A non-residential structure which has been dry flood-proofed is the elevation to which the flood-proofing is effective (Note: For insurance purposes, a dry flood-proofed, non-residential structure is rated based on the elevation of its lowest floor unless it is floodproofed to one foot above the BFE.). A FEMA Floodproofing Certificate (FEMA Form 81-65) prepared by a Connecticut licensed engineer or architect must be provided.
18.4.4.2.2. Deficiencies detected by the review of the above listed shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being permitted to proceed. Failure to submit the survey or failure to make said corrections required hereby, shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project.
18.4.5 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE LOCAL ADMINISTRATOR AND THE PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
Duties of the Zoning Enforcement Officer and Planning and Zoning Commission shall include, but not be limited to:
18.4.5.1 Review all Special Exception applications for completeness, particularly with the requirements of Section 18.4.4.1. and Section 14B of the Planning and Zoning Regulations
18.4.5.2 Review all Special Exception applications to determine whether the proposed development and building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding.
18.4.5.3 Review all development permits to assure that the permit requirements of this regulation have been satisfied.
18.4.5.4 Review all permit applications to assure that all necessary federal or state permits have been received. Require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file with the permit application. Such permits include, but are not limited to, Stream Channel Encroachment Line (SCEL) Permit, Coastal Area Management (CAM) Permit, Water Diversion Permit, Dam Safety Permit, and Army Corps of Engineers 401 and 404 Permits.
18.4.5.5 Notify the regional planning agency and affected municipality at least thirty-five (35) days prior to a public hearing if any change of regulation or use of a flood zone will affect an area within five hundred (500) feet of another municipality.
18.4.5.6 Notify the adjacent communities and the Department of Environmental Protection (DEP), Inland Water Resources Division, prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
18.4.5.7 Assure that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood carrying capacity is not diminished.
18.4.5.8. Obtain, record and maintain the elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new construction, substantial improvements or repair to a structure that has sustained substantial
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 117
damage. The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall require and maintain Elevation Certificates provided by the applicant and prepared by a Connecticut licensed land surveyor, engineer or architect containing this information.
18. 4.5.9 Obtain, record and maintain the elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which the new construction, substantial improvement or repair to a structure that has sustained substantial damage has been flood-proofed. The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall require and maintain FEMA Floodproofing Certificates for Non-Residential Structures (FEMA Form 81-65). Floodproofing Certificates provided by the applicant and prepared by a Connecticut licensed engineer of architect containing this information.
18.4.5.10 When flood-proofing is utilized for a particular structure, the Zoning Enforcement Officer shall obtain certification from a registered professional engineer or architect, in accordance with Section 18.5.3.1.2.
18.4.5.11 Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the area of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the Zoning Enforcement Officer shall make necessary interpretation. The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this regulation.
18.4.5.12 Require the applicant to provide base flood elevation data for all proposed development, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions.
18.4.5.12 When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with Section 18.3.2 and Section 18.4.4, the Zoning Enforcement Officer shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source in order to administer the provisions of Section 18.5.0. All records pertaining to the provisions of this regulation shall be obtained and maintained in the Planning and Zoning Office.
18.4.5.13 Upon completion of the permitted development and prior to issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy (CO), necessary as-built surveys (prepared by a Connecticut Licensed Professional as per Connecticut State Statutes) and engineering and architectural certifications shall be provided to the Zoning Enforcement Officer demonstrating compliance with the approved plans and standards set forth in Section 18.4.4.
18.5.0 PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION
18.5.1 GENERAL STANDARDS
In all Special Flood Hazard Areas (SFHAs) the following provisions are required:
18.5.1.1 New construction, substantial improvements, and structures that have sustained substantial
damage shall be constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
18.5.1.2 New construction, substantial improvements, and structures that have sustained substantial
damage shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.
18.5.1.3 New construction, substantial improvements, and repairs to structures that have sustained substantial damage shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.
18.5.1.4 New construction, substantial improvements and repair to structures that have sustained substantial damage cannot be constructed or located entirely or partially over water.
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 118
18.5.1.5 Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning equipment, HVAC ductwork, and other service facilities, or any machinery or utility equipment or connections servicing a structure shall be elevated to or above the base flood elevation (BFE) to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. This includes, but is not limited to, furnaces, oil or propane tanks, air conditioners, heat pumps, hot water heaters, ventilation ductwork, washer and dryer hook-ups, electrical junction boxes, and circuit breaker boxes.
18.5.1.6 New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system.
18.5.1.7 New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharges from the system into flood waters.
18.5.1.8 On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
18.5.1.9 Above-ground storage tanks (oil, propane, etc.) which are located outside or inside of the structure must either be elevated above the base flood elevation (BFE) on a concrete pad, or be securely anchored with tie-down straps to prevent flotation or lateral movement, have the top of the fill pipe extended above the BFE, and have a screw fill cap that does not allow for the infiltration of flood water.
18.5.1.10 In any portion of a watercourse that is altered or relocated, the flood carrying capacity must be maintained. Notify adjacent communities and the Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection (DEP), Inland Water Resources Division prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse.
18.5.1.11 If any portion of a structure lies within the Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA), the entire structure is considered to be in the SFHA. The entire structure must meet the construction requirements of the flood zone. The structure includes any attached additions, garages, decks, sunrooms, or any other structure attached to the main structure. Decks or porches that extend into a more restrictive flood zone will require the entire structure to meet the standards of the more restrictive zone.
18.5.1.12 If a structure lies within two or more flood zones, the construction standards of the most restrictive zone apply to the entire structure (i.e., V zone is more restrictive than A zone; structure must be built to the highest BFE). The structure includes any attached additions, garages, decks, sunrooms, or any other structure attached to the main structure. (Decks or porches that extend into a more restrictive zone will require the entire structure to meet the requirements of the more restrictive zone.)
18.5.1.13 Compensatory Storage. The water holding capacity of the floodplain, except those areas that are tidally influenced, shall not be reduced. Any reduction caused by filling, new construction or substantial improvements involving an increase in footprint to the structure, shall be compensated for by deepening and/or widening of the floodplain. Storage shall be provided on-site, unless easements have been gained from adjacent property owners; it shall be provided within the same hydraulic reach and a volume not previously used for flood storage; it shall be hydraulically comparable and incrementally equal to the theoretical volume of flood water at each elevation, up to and including the 100-year flood elevation, which would be displaced by the proposed project. Such compensatory volume shall have an unrestricted hydraulic connection to the same waterway or water body. Compensatory storage can be provided off-site if approved by the municipality.
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 119
18.5.1.14 Equal Conveyance. Within the floodplain, except those areas which are tidally influenced, as designated on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for the community, encroachments resulting from filling, new construction or substantial improvements involving an increase in footprint of the structure, are prohibited unless the applicant provides certification by a registered professional engineer demonstrating, with supporting hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice, that such encroachments shall not result in any (0.00 feet) increase in flood levels (base flood elevation). Work within the floodplain and the land adjacent to the floodplain, including work to provide compensatory storage shall not be constructed in such a way so as to cause an increase in flood stage or flood velocity.
18.5.1.15 Dry Land Access. Each new residential or non-residential development in the Special Flood Hazard Area (Zones A, A1-30, AE, AO, AH) shall have direct access to a walkway, driveway, or roadway whose surface elevation is not less than the base flood elevation (BFE) and such escape route shall lead directly out of the floodplain area.
18.5.2 STANDARDS FOR WATERCOURSES WITHOUT ESTABLISHED BASE FLOOD ELEVATIONS (UN-NUMBERED A ZONE), ADOPTED FLOODWAYS AND/OR FLOOD MAPPING
18.5.2.1 The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall require base flood elevation (BFE) data be provide with any application for new construction, substantial improvement, repair to structures which have sustained substantial damage or other development in Zone A without a FEMA-published BFE (un-numbered A Zone). The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any BFE and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, including data developed for subdivision proposals, as criteria for requiring that new construction, substantial improvements, repair to structures which have sustained substantial damage or other development in un-numbered A Zones on the community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) meet the standards in Section 18.4.4 and Section 18.5.3. If no BFE can be determined, the lowest floor, including basement, must be elevated to two (2) feet above the highest adjacent grade next to the structure.
18.5.2.2 When BFEs have been determined within Zones A1-30 and AE on the community’s FIRM but a regulatory floodway has not been designated, the Zoning Enforcement Officer must require that no new construction, substantial improvements, repair to structures which have sustained substantial damage or other development, including fill, shall be permitted which will increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than 0.1 foot at any point within the community when all existing and anticipated development is considered cumulatively with the proposed development.
18.5.2.3 The Zoning Enforcement Officer may request floodway data of an applicant for watercourses without FEMA-published floodways. When such data is provided by an applicant or whenever such data is available from any other source (in response to the municipality’s request or not), the community shall adopt a regulatory floodway based on the principle that the floodway must be able to convey the waters of the base flood without increasing the water surface elevation more than 0.1 foot at any point within the community.
18.5.2.4 The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any BFE and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, as criteria for requiring that new construction, substantial improvements, repair to structures which have sustained substantial damage or other development in any area of potential, demonstrable or historical flooding within the community meet the standards in Section 18.4.4 and Section 18.5.3.
18.5.2.5 Under the provisions of 44 CFR Chapter 1, Section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations, a community may approve certain development in Zones A1-30, AE, AH, on the community’s FIRM which increases the water surface elevation of the base flood by more than one (1.0) foot, provided that the community first completes all of the provisions required by Section 65.12.
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 120
18.5.3 SPECIFIC STANDARDS
18.5.3.1 Construction Standards in Special Flood Hazard Areas (SFHA), Zones A, A1-30, AE.
18.5.3.1.1 Residential Construction.
All new construction, substantial improvements, and repair to structures that have sustained substantial damage which are residential structures shall have the bottom of the lowest floor, including basement, elevated one foot above the base flood elevation (BFE). Electrical, plumbing, machinery or other utility equipment that service the structure must be elevated to or above the BFE.
18.5.3.1.2 Non-Residential Construction.
All new construction, substantial improvements, and repair to structures that have sustained substantial damage which are commercial, industrial or non-residential structures shall:
(a) Have the bottom of the lowest floor, including basement, elevated one foot above the base flood elevation (BFE); or
(b) In lieu of being elevated, non-residential structures may be dry flood-proofed to one (1) foot above the BFE provided that together with all attendant utilities and sanitary facilities the areas of the structure below the required elevation are watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and provided that such structures are composed of structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy. A Connecticut registered professional engineer or architect shall review and/or develop structural design specifications and plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with acceptable standards of practice for meeting the provisions of this section. Such certification shall be provided to the Zoning Enforcement Officer on the FEMA Floodproofing Certificate, Form 81-65.
(c) Electrical, plumbing, machinery or other utility equipment that service the structure must be elevated to one foot above the BFE.
18.5.3.1.3 Fully Enclosed Areas Below The Base Flood Elevation Of Elevated Buildings.
All new construction, substantial improvements, or repair of substantial damage to residential or non-residential structures that include fully enclosed areas formed by a foundation and other exterior walls below the base flood elevation (BFE) of an elevated building, shall be designed to preclude finished living space and be designed allow for the entry and exit of flood waters to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls (wet flood-proofing). Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a Connecticut registered professional engineer or architect, or meet the following minimum criteria listed in sections (a)-(g) below: (a) Provide a minimum of two (2) openings (hydraulic flood vents) having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every one square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding. These hydraulic openings must be located on at least two different walls. Only the area (square footage) that lies below the BFE can be used in the calculation of net area of vents required. If the structure has more than one enclosed area, openings must be installed in the exterior walls of each enclosed area so that flood waters can enter directly from the outside;
(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot above grade. At least one side of the structure’s fully enclosed area must be at or above grade. Fill placed around the foundation walls must be graded so that the elevation inside the enclosed area is equal to or higher than the adjacent outside elevation on at least one side of the building. The finished floor of the enclosed area shall be no lower bottom of the foundation openings. The foundation slab of a residential structure, including the slab of a crawlspace, must be set equal to the outside finished grade on at least one side of the building;
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 121
(c) The openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic entry and exit of flood waters in both directions without any external influence or control such as human intervention, including the use of electrical and other non-automatic mechanical means. Other coverings may be designed and certified by an engineer or approved by the Zoning Enforcement Officer;
(d) The area cannot be used as finished living space. Use of the enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary and shall only be used for the parking of vehicles, building access or limited storage. Access to the enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to allow for the parking of vehicles (garage door) or limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises (standard exterior door) entry to the living area (stairway or elevator). The enclosed area shall not be used for human habitation or partitioned into separate rooms;
(e) All interior walls, floor, and ceiling materials located below the BFE shall be unfinished and resistant to flood damage.
(f) Electrical, plumbing, HVAC ductwork, machinery or other utility equipment and connections that service the structure (including, but not limited to, furnaces, oil or propane tanks, air conditioners, heat pumps, hot water heaters, ventilation, washers, dryers, electrical junction boxes, circuit breaker boxes and food freezers) are prohibited in the fully enclosed area below the BFE. Utilities or service equipment located in this enclosed area, even if elevated above the BFE in the space, will subject the structure to increased flood insurance rates.
(g) A residential building with a structurally attached garage having the floor slab below the BFE is considered an enclosed area below the BFE and must meet the standards of Sections 18.5.3.1.3 (a)-(f). A garage attached to a residential structure, constructed with the garage floor slab below the BFE, must be designed to allow for the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters in both directions. Flood openings or vents are required in the exterior walls of the garage or in the garage doors. The human intervention necessary to open garage doors when flooding occurs is not an acceptable means of meeting the openings requirements. In addition to the automatic entry of floodwaters, the areas of the garage below BFE must be constructed with flood resistant materials. Garages attached to non-residential structures must also meet the aforementioned requirements or be dry floodproofed as per the requirements of Section 18.5.3.1.2.
18.5.3 Manufactured (Mobile) Homes and Recreational Vehicles (RVs).
18.5.3.1…..In all Special Flood Hazard Areas (SFHA), any manufactured homes, as noted in Section 8-2 of the Connecticut General Statutes, are to be newly placed, undergoing a substantial improvement or repaired as a result of substantial damage, shall be elevated so that the bottom of the lowest floor is at or above the base flood elevation (BFE). The manufactured home must also meet all the construction standards per Section 5.3.1.
18.5.3.2.2 All manufactured homes within a SFHA shall be placed on a permanent foundation which itself is securely anchored and to which the structure is securely anchored so that it will resist flotation, lateral movement and hydrostatic pressures. Anchoring may include, but not be limited to, the use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors.
18.5.3.2.3 All manufactured homes within a SFHA shall be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood damage. Adequate access and drainage should be provided. Elevation construction standards include piling foundations placed no more than ten (10) feet apart, and reinforcement is provided for piers more than six (6) feet above ground level.
18.5.3.2.4 Recreational vehicles placed on sites within a SFHA shall either (i) be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days, and (ii) be fully licensed and ready for highway use, OR (iii) meet all the general standard of Section 18.5.1 and the elevation and anchoring requirement of Section 18.5.3.2.1, 18.5.3.2.2, and 18.5.3.2.3. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions. See Section 15 for further restrictions on recreational vehicles.
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 122
18.5.3.3 Floodways
Located within Special Flood Hazard Areas (SFHA) are areas designated as floodways on the community’s Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM) or Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps (FBFM). Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of flood waters which carry debris, potential projectiles and has erosion potential, no encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, repairs to substantially damaged structures and other developments shall be permitted unless certification, with supporting technical data, by a Connecticut licensed professional engineer is provided demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any (0.00 feet) increase in flood levels during occurrence of the base flood discharge. Fences in the floodway must be aligned with the flow and be of an open design. A permit may be given which allows encroachments resulting in increases in base flood elevations provided the community first obtains a conditional floodway revision by meeting the requirements of C.F.R. 44, Chapter 1, Subsection 65.12.
18.5.3.4 Standards for Development in Areas of Shallow Flooding (Zones AO and AH)
Located within the Special Flood Hazard Areas (SFHA) are areas designated as shallow flooding areas (AO and AH Zones). These areas have flood hazards associated with base flood depths of one (1) to three (3) feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist and where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate. In AO and AH zones, the following provisions apply:
18.5.3.4.1 For residential structures, all new construction, substantial improvements and repair to structures that have sustained substantial damage shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to one foot above the depth number specified on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), in feet, above the highest adjacent grade. If no depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated, at least three (3) feet above the highest adjacent grade.
18.5.3.4.2 For non-residential structures, all new construction, substantial improvements and repair to structures that have sustained substantial damage shall:
(a) Have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to one foot above the depth number specified on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), in feet, above the highest adjacent grade. If no depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three (3) feet above the highest adjacent grade; or
(b) Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be completely flood-proofed to or above the depth number, in feet, specified on the FIRM above the highest adjacent grade, or if no depth number is specified at least three (3) feet above the highest adjacent grade, so that any space below that level is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. Designs for complying with this requirement must be certified by either a Connecticut licensed professional engineer or architect.
18.5.3.5.3 On-site drainage for all proposed structures in AO and AH Zones located on slopes shall provide adequate drainage paths to guide flood waters around and away from such structures.
18.6 SUBDIVISION PROPOSALS Section 10.4 of the Zoning Regulations requires a minimum square that excludes wetlands and upland review areas. Most floodplains are wetland soils and in East Haddam's case the delineations of floodplains and wetlands soils are in close proximity. Since the minimum square includes the 100 foot upland review area, any proposed subdivision in or next to a floodplain would not meet the requirement of the subdivision regulations.
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 123
18.7.0 A SPECIAL EXCEPTION APPROVAL IN THE SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA MAY BE CONDITIONED IN SPECIFIC SITUATIONS
a. Buildings on a Historic Register - Conditional approval may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places, the State Inventory of Historic Places, or any locally-adopted historic district without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this section and provided the proposed reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration will not result in the structure losing its historical designation.
b. Functionally Dependent Use or Facility - Conditional approval may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements and other development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use or facility provided the structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage, creates no additional threat to public safety and meet all the requirements of Section 8.4.
c. Floodway Prohibition - Conditional approvals shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
18.7.1 CONSIDERATIONS FOR GRANTING A CONDITIONAL APPROVAL
In passing upon such applications, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all standards specified in other sections of this regulation and the items listed below as 18.7.3.1 – 18.7.3.11. Upon consideration of these factors and the purposes of this regulation, the Planning and Zoning Commission may attach such conditions to the granting such approval as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this regulation.
a. The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;
b. The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
c. The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
d. The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community;
e. The necessity of the facility to waterfront location, in the case of a functionally dependent facility;
f. The availability of alternative locations not subject to flooding or erosion damage for the proposed use;
g. The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;
h. The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area;
i. The safety access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;
j. The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the flood waters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and
k. The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, and streets and bridges.
18.8.0 ENFORCEMENT "See Section 2.2 - Enforcement and Penalties"
18.9.0 PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION "See Section 2.2 - Enforcement and Penalties"
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 124
SECTION 19 REGULATION OF EARTH MATERIAL OPERATIONS
19.1. The purpose of this Section is to provide the regulations for the preservation of a cover crop on the land to prevent erosion, and to control any earth material operations that may create a safety or health hazard to the public or the adjacent property owners, or be detrimental to the immediate neighborhood or the Town of East Haddam. The covering of earth material operations may be done with the top four (4) inches of topsoil removed therefrom, or by furnishing new topsoil or loam from off the premises. Excavations which uncover ledge or rock outcrops need not be covered or seeded.
19.2. The filling, removal, or excavation of sand, gravel, clay, peat, loam, or topsoil (herein referred to as “Earth Material Operations”) is permitted in all zones, with the exception of the land designated as the “Conservation Zone”, after issuance of a special exception by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
19.3. The following filling, removal or excavation activities are permitted in all zones, including the Conservation Zone, without a special exception provided no permanent damage is done to the landscape:
19.3.1. Operations involving earth material removal legally in existence at the time of passage of these regulations, may continue provided there is no additional operations or processes added. Application for a special exception shall be made prior to any extension of such use.
19.3.2. Foundation, trench and related site excavation performed after the issuance of a building permit; and
19.3.3. Filling, removal, or excavation in connection with the landscaping and grading of land for a purpose for which a building permit is not required, provided that such filling, removal, or excavation shall not exceed 500 cubic yards.
19.3.4 Proposed pond excavations have to have the approval of the East Haddam Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Commission prior to applying to the Planning and Zoning Commission.
19.4. In addition to the customary special exception and site plan requirements as set forth in Section 14A of these regulations, a site plan shall be submitted showing the following:
19.4.1. Location of the premises, names of abutting owners, and an estimate of the amount of material to be excavated or removed.
19.4.2. Grading plan showing existing contours in the area to be excavated and proposed contours for the area after operations. Such plans shall include the area to be excavated as well as the surrounding area within 50 feet of the excavation and shall be drawn at a convenient scale with contours shown at intervals of not less than five (5) feet.
19.4.3. Existing and proposed drainage of the site and details of plans to control erosion during excavation.
19.4.4. Proposed truck access to the excavation and work roadways within the site.
19.4.5. The location and type of any buildings or fixed machinery to be erected.
19.4.6. Details of the final grading and planting of the site to prevent erosion of the site at the conclusion of operations.
19.4.7. An estimate of the number and types of trucks and other machinery to be used on the site.
19.4.8. The estimated starting and completion dates and the estimated hours and days of the week proposed for operations at the site.
19.4.9. The plan shall provide for a fence or embankment for the protection and safety of vehicular and pedestrian traffic and a reasonable means of screening the excavation from the view of highway traffic.
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 125
19.4.10. The map requirement may be waived by the Commission when its opinion is such that a map is unnecessary because of the small size of the operation, or other valid reason whereby the health, safety, and public welfare will not be adversely affected.
19.5. The following conditions must be met for earth material operations:
19.5.1. Failure to comply with the plans as approved and any deviation from the plans shall be cause for the Planning and Zoning Commission to revoke the permit.
19.5.2. The applicant shall post a performance bond with the Town Treasurer in an amount approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission as sufficient to guarantee conformity with the provisions of the permit issued hereunder. To encourage the completion of sections of the operation and to prevent erosion, and in order to promote the rapid return of the land to its natural state, the Commission may reduce the bond requirements as portions of the work are completed in accordance with the foregoing provisions.
19.5.3. No fixed machinery shall be erected within 100 feet of any property or street line.
19.5.4. No earth material operation shall take place within 100 feet of any property owner’s line except by written consent of abutting property owner or within 100 feet of a street line.
19.5.5. No building except a field office or temporary shelter for machinery shall be erected on the premises except as may be permitted in the Zoning Regulations.
19.5.6. At all stages of operations, proper drainage shall be provided to prevent the stagnation of water and to prevent harmful effects upon surrounding properties.
19.5.7. During the period of filling, removal, or excavation barricades or fences shall be erected as are deemed necessary by the Planning and Zoning Commission for the protection of pedestrians and vehicles. At no time shall an overhang be permitted.
19.5.8. Truck access to earth material operations shall be so arranged as to minimize danger to traffic and nuisance to surrounding properties. That portion of access road within the area of operation shall be treated to minimize dust.
19.5.9. Proper measures shall be taken to minimize the nuisance of noise and flying dust or rock. Such measures may include limitations upon the stock-piling of excavated materials on the site.
19.5.10. Quarrying of bedrock shall be prohibited.
19.5.11. Screening, sifting, washing, and crushing may be conducted upon the premises provided such operations are located at least 100 feet from any property or street line. Only portable crushers may be used.
19.5.12. Overburden shall be stockpiled in rows or concentrated piles and stabilized in an acceptable manner so that it does not become a source of dust beyond the applicant’s property.
19.5.13 There shall be no excavation and/or removal between 5 P.M. and 7 A.M. nor on Saturdays, Sundays or legal holidays, except with the approval of the Commission.
19.5.14. At no time may the disturbed area of filling, removal or excavation operations exceed five (5) acres in extent. The applicant may ask for a greater disturbed area if it is believed the operation will perform better in stockpile maintenance and machine use. The Commission in granting the larger area will have to discuss the impact od the operation to the surrounding area.
19.5.15. When earth material operations are completed, or work has progressed to where reclamation is practicable, the disturbed area shall be graded so that slopes shall be no steeper than 1:3 (vertical to horizontal). A layer of
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 126
topsoil shall be spread over the disturbed area, except exposed rock surfaces, to a minimum depth of four (4) inches in accordance with the approved final grading plan. The area shall then be seeded with suitable cover-crop.
19.7. Application and Fee: Application for a special exception to conduct an earth material operation shall be
made to the Planning and Zoning Commission by the property owner or his authorized agent on forms available at the office of the Commission. Such application shall be accompanied by a fee payable to the Town of East Haddam that is equal to the cost of the Town for engineering review, administrative cost, and public hearing cost.
19.8. All approved Earth Removal Operations shall be inspected at least once a year by the Zoning Enforcement
Officer to ensure compliance with Zoning Regulations and the specific conditions for the site. The owner or operator shall schedule the annual inspection with the Zoning Enforcement Officer and shall be present to answer any questions that may arise. The final inspection report shall become part of the zoning file.
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 127
SECTION 20 COMMERCIAL CUTTING OF TIMBER
20. Introduction: Harvesting of forest tree species is an integral part of forest management by which wood for human use is obtained and by which forests are established and tended. It is recognized that during harvesting operations, there will be temporary change in the forest environment. It is the purpose of these guidelines to establish harvesting standards which will maintain the productivity of land for continuous forest crops, improve wild life habitat, and minimize negative environmental impact.
20.2. Special Exception Requirement: Within the Conservation Zone (Gateway) commercial cutting of timber, as defined in Section 5, may not be undertaken without a special exception from the Planning and Zoning Commission, except as follows:
20.2.1. Land used for agricultural purposes and cultivation of crops other than forest products;
20.2.2. Land used or being developed for residential, recreational or other non-woodland commercial purposes;
20.2.3. Thinning and clearing in connection with public improvements:
20.2.4. Land used for access to abutting land; and
20.2.5. Cultured Christmas tree area.
20.3. Special Exception Applications: The application for a special exception shall include the following requirements in addition to the customary special exception requirements contained in Section 14:
20.3.1. A site plan showing the applicant’s property and the abutting property owners.
20.3.2. A cutting plan indicating the nature of the operations.
20.3.3. A certification of the cutting plan by a public or consulting forester indicating the plan’s conformance with the minimum standards set forth herein.
20.3.4. Any other information, as set forth in Section 14 of these regulations, as the Commission may require.
20.3.5. A fee of $75.00 payable to the Town of East Haddam.
20.4. Water Course Protection:
20.4.1. During harvest operation water courses shall be protected from siltation. Partial cuttings, designed to create uneven aged stands, will be used within 100 feet of these watercourses. No more than 50% of the merchantable volume will be removed, taking care in selection of leave trees to minimize water temperature increases and visual impact.
20.4.2. Trees shall not be felled into or across streams. Logging debris accidentally dropped into streams and ponds shall be promptly removed.
20.4.3. Harvesting equipment will not be allowed in a stream, and the channel is not to be altered. All stream crossings shall be at a right angle.
20.4.4. After the completion of a harvest operations, banks at stream crossings will be graded and restored to their original condition. Re-seeding with an appropriate grass mixture may be required.
20.5. Logging Roads and Trails: 6/1/95r
The location of all main haul or skid roads, including alternative routes, shall be approved by the Commission or the Land Use Administrator prior to the commencement of harvesting operations.
20.5.1. All roads shall be located so as to minimize construction or use impact on the land.
20.5.2. Grades shall not exceed 10% nor be less than 1%.
20.5.3. Adequate drainage control systems and stabilization systems shall be provided and maintained to control water flow.
20.5.4. Unless otherwise stipulated, all roads, main skid trails, landings and - sites will be stabilized. Temporary culverts will be removed, water bars installed where necessary, ruts filled or graded out and gutters cleaned.
20.5.5. Where required for erosion control or where required for wildlife protection, major skid roads, landings and/or sawmill sites will be limed, fertilized, seeded with an appropriate mixture or grass and legumes.
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 128
20.6 Aesthetic Considerations:
20.6.1. Border Strips:
20.6.1.1. Within 100 feet of any automobile road, recreation trail or other recreation area, or boundary line, harvesting of trees will be partial cuttings. Not more than 50% of the merchantable volume may be removed. In high visibility areas, uneven age stands will be required to provide change and variety in scenery.
20.6.1.2. Unique tree specimens, flowering shrubs and trees, or those species that have value as food producers or den sites for birds and wildlife will be preserved as directed by the Commission.
20.6.2. Brush Control:
20.6.2.1. Undesirable sprout growth or brush must be controlled using appropriate herbicide treatments. Chemicals used in performing this practice must carry a Federal registration and be applied strictly in accordance with authorized uses, label directions, and Federal and State regulations.
20.6.2.2. Special consideration shall be given to those border strips in the following situations: 1) screen clearcuts, sheltered cutting or other heavy cuts that would be and 2) screen yarding and loading areas. All debris shall be removed.
20.6.3. Slash:
20.6.3.1. No slash will be left within 50 feet of any automobile road, established recreation trail, pond, lake or stream.
20.6.3.2. Within the remaining width of a border strip, all slash will be chipped or lopped and scattered so that it does not exceed four feet in height.
20.6.3.3. On all other harvest areas, slash, severely bent or broken trees shall be dropped and/or lopped to a height not to exceed six feet.
20.7. Harvest Methods: Because of the wide variation in forest types, stand size classes, stocking levels and timber volumes which exist in Connecticut woodlands there are a variety of methods that can be used, either singly or in a combination in harvesting and reforestation to meet the stated purpose. These methods include: Clear-cutting with natural reproduction; Direct seeding or planting; Seed-tree cutting; Selection cutting including diameter limit harvesting, shelterwood cutting, and such other methods as shall be consistent with good forestry practice.
Although even-age management is an accepted silvicultural practice, particularly with hardwood species, its use should be practiced judiciously. A clear-cut area presents a severe visual impact to those unfamiliar with this harvest method; therefore, clear-cutting will have the following restrictions:
20.7.1. Maximum of five (5) acres in size.
20.7.2. Irregular in shape - avoid linear cutting bounds.
20.7.3. Soften edges by partial cutting within 50 to 100 feet of clear-cut boundaries.
20.7.4. Screen clear-cut areas with border strips along roads, trails, or other areas of heavy public use.
20.7.5. Leave ridge tops uncut - these areas are the most visible.
20.7.6. In most cases, even-aged management may be accomplished through shelterwood cuttings rather than clear-cutting.
20.8. Fire Control Considerations: Access roads and fire lanes will be left clear of slash when a cutting job is completed. Designated roads will be graded so as to be passable by fire equipment. Where access road construction is included in a harvest operation construction of loading docks and fire water holes at locations deemed strategic by the Commission will be required.
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 129
SECTION 21 OUTDOOR WOOD- BURNING FURNACES
Outdoor wood-burning furnaces (OWFs) install after the effective date of this regulation are subject to the following conditions:
(a) The installation of the outdoor wood-burning furnace shall not be not less than 200 feet from the nearest property line and not less than 500 feet from any school, church, health-care facility, or municipal recreational facility.
(b) The installation of the chimney of the outdoor wood-burning furnace is to be at a height that is two feet more than the height of the roof peaks of the residences that are located within 500 feet of the outdoor wood-burning furnace provided the chimney height is not more than 55 feet. Chimney height must be a minimum of four feet above the outdoor wood burning furnace owner's home roofline, and the chimney must have a spark arrestor.
(c) A site plan shall be submitted documenting the location of the outdoor wood-burning furnace, horizontal and vertical control distances to all residences within the five-hundred-foot radius, and comparative heights of the chimney stack and residential rooflines. The zoning enforcement officer may request this location and height determination be submitted by a licensed surveyor.
(d) No materials may be burned in the outdoor wood-burning furnace other than wood that has no paint, stains, or other types of coatings, and has not been treated with, including, but not limited to, copper chromium arsenate, creosote, or pentachlorophenol or any other chemical or material that would constitute a violation of the State of Connecticut Public Act for OWFs.
(e) Installation and operation of the outdoor wood-burning furnace is in accordance with the manufacturer's written instructions, provided such instructions do not conflict with the provisions of this subsection.
(f) The outdoor wood-burning furnace shall meet the provisions of § 22a-174k, as amended, of the Connecticut General Statutes and qualify under the Environmental Protection Agency Phase I voluntary program.
(i) Operation is permitted only between September 15 and May 15.
(j) Permits are required from the Zoning Office and the Building Department.
(k) This subsection shall apply to all districts in the Town of East Haddam.
(l) The provisions of this subsection shall be enforced by the Commissioner of Environmental Protection and the Town of East Haddam.
(m) Any person who operates an outdoor wood-burning furnace in violation of this subsection shall be deemed to have committed an infraction and shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable as provided in Chapter 124 of the Connecticut General Statutes. Furthermore, the Commission may, at its sole discretion, direct the Town counsel to commence criminal or civil action in State or Federal Court for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of these Regulations.
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 130
SECTION 22 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES
22.1. Intent Recent advances in wireless communications technology have resulted in a new generation of telecommunication services. These new services transmit electromagnetic waves of such a frequency and power that will likely require numerous antenna locations. These antennas may be located on buildings, water towers and other similar structures, but will also frequently be located on new or enlarged towers. This requires that the Town of East Haddam regulate these wireless communication system facilities in a different manner than conventional television and radio transmission towers which are able to transmit their signals for much greater distances.
A number of providers of wireless communication services have recently been licensed by the Federal Communications Commission and additional providers are expected to be licensed in the near future. These firms are expected to pursue antenna sites within the Town of East Haddam and these efforts are expected to include requests to construct new communication towers.
The intent of this proposed regulation is to provide for the establishment and/or expansion of wireless telecommunication services within the Town of East Haddam while protecting neighborhoods and minimizing the adverse visual and operational effects of wireless telecommunications facilities through careful design, siting and screening. More specifically this regulation has been developed in order to:
(1). Update the Town of East Haddam’s Zoning Regulations to comply with the Telecommunications Act of 1996 and provide for the establishment and expansion of wireless telecommunications services;
(2). Minimize the number and height of towers and encourage the use of existing and the joint use of new towers for the placement of telecommunication antennas.
(3). Provide for the needs of the Town of East Haddam for:
(a). public health and safety;
(b). telecommunication facilities for the Town of East Haddam’s citizens and East Haddam’s business and industrial sector;
(c). protection of sensitive areas from adverse aesthetic and environmental impacts from telecommunication facilities.
(4). Maximize use of existing and approved towers and other structures to accommodate new antennas and transmitters in order to reduce the number of communication towers needed to serve the community;
(5). Encourage providers to co-locate their facilities on a single tower;
(6). Site facilities below visually prominent ridge lines;
(7). Minimize the location of towers and antennas in visually sensitive areas;
(8). Encourage creative design measures to camouflage facilities;
(9). Protect historic and residential areas from potential adverse impacts of such towers;
(10). Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower failure through engineering and careful siting of tower structures.
22.2 Definitions
For the purposes of this Section 22, the following terms shall have the stated definitions;
ABANDONED means a Wireless Telecommunications Facility for which there exist no current license to transmit issued by the Federal Communication Commission, or the discontinuance of operation on the site.
ANTENNA means a device used to receive or transmit electromagnetic waves. Examples include, but are not limited to whip antennas, panel antennas and dish antennas.
APPLICANT shall be the licensed carrier, provider and land owner, acting jointly.
BASE means location where a tower is attached to its foundation.
BASE EQUIPMENT means a structure or building at the base of the mount or a box located inside such a structure or building within which are housed service, electrical and back-up power equipment.
BASE HEIGHT means the maximum building height in the subject zone plus 10 feet.
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 131
CO-LOCATION, or CO-LOCATED, means the use of a single mount or site by more than one licensed carrier. Co-location also means locating a wireless telecommunication facility on an existing structure (e.g. water tower) or building provided that the facility does not extend beyond 10 feet above the mount or, for electric transmission tower mounts, that the facility does not extend beyond 15 feet above the mount.
COMMISSION means the Planning and Zoning Commission of the Town of East Haddam.
HEIGHT OF TOWER means the vertical distance measured in feet from the lowest existing ground elevation of such tower base to the topmost point of the tower including any antenna or other appurtenances. The “existing ground elevation” shall mean the actual elevations of the property at the time of the adoption of this Section, or the elevation approved by the Commission in connection with any application filed hereunder.
HIGH VISUAL IMPACT means that the base, base equipment and lower 50% of a tower is visible as viewed by an observer from any sensitive area.
LICENSED CARRIER (or PROVIDER) means a company authorized by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) to build and operate the proposed wireless telecommunication facility.
LOW VISUAL IMPACT means that the base, base equipment and lower 50% of a tower is behind a building of at least one story in height or a stand of trees (the average height of which is not lower than 40 feet and which in the Winter screens at least 80% of the base, base equipment and lower part of a tower), as viewed by an observer from any sensitive area.
MOUNT means the structure or surface upon which antennas are mounted. There are four types of mounts;
(1). Within the existing building,
(2). Roof-mounted is mounted on the roof of a building;
(3). Side-mounted is mounted on the side or facade of a building;
(4). Ground-mounted is mounted on the ground, including mounting on a tower.
NON SENSITIVE means all areas not categorized as sensitive (see SENSITIVE below.)
OTHER DESIGNATED AREAS Can be designated particularly sensitive areas by reference to the Plan of Development, Flood Zones lines along major rivers, Environmental Reports, etc.
RESIDENTIALLY DEVELOPED AREAS Residential subdivisions approved in accordance with the East Haddam Subdivision Regulations, or residential neighborhoods which predate the adoption of such Regulations; or within 250 feet of such subdivision or neighborhoods.
SENSITIVE AREAS
(1). Historic Districts or Properties, existing or future, designated or adopted in accordance with the Connecticut General Statutes Chapter 97a, or within a distance of 250 feet from the boundary of such Historic District, or the lot upon which such Historic Property is located.
(2). Buildings, structures, or places listed on the National Register of Historic Places, or within 250 feet from the lot upon which such Historic building, structure, or place is located.
(3). Lake and Riverfront District (LR District)
(4). The Conservation Zone created pursuant to Conn. Gen. Stats. Chapter 477a.
(5). Areas of Special Concern as identified by Natural Resources Map prepared by the Department of Environmental Protection and on file in the Office of the Town Clerk and the Land Use Office.
(6). Scenic Roads designated in accordance with Conn. Gen. Stats. 13b-31b, et. Seq. (for State Highways) or Conn. Gen. Stats. 7-149a, et. Seq. (for municipal roads and highways).
(7). Residentially Developed Areas, as defined herein,
(8). Open Spaces and Parks belonging to the State of Connecticut; the Town of East Haddam; a non-profit land trust or other conservation entity, or non-profit homeowners associations or common interest communities.
(9). Scenic views and vistas as designated by the Conservation Commission in the 1977 Report and as amended.
(10). Other Designated Areas, as defined herein.
Note that any antennae within a Historic District may require separate approval from the East Haddam Historic District Commission in accordance with its Regulations and the Connecticut General Statutes.
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 132
SETBACK means the distance equaling the height of the tower from any property line of the proposed site except in those instances where the antenna is co-located on an existing structure.
TOWER means a mount structure that is intended solely to support equipment used to receive and/or transmit electromagnetic waves. Design examples of towers include (a) self-supporting lattice, (b) guyed and (c) monopole.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY (FACILITIES) means the mount including any antennas or other appurtenances for the provision of wireless telecommunications services, including but not limited to those services defined in the Telecommunications Act of 1996.
VIEWSHED ANALYSIS A map or other depiction, which illustrates those areas of the Town from which any portion of the wireless telecommunications facility will be visible by direct line of sight at ground level during the winter months when deciduous trees do not have leaves.
22.3. General Requirements
(1). Co-Location Encouraged: Co-location is encouraged and preferred to the construction of a new mount or tower. The applicant shall commit to allow co-location in accordance with this Section. Applicants shall provide a description of existing telecommunication towers or other suitable mounts in the service area and documentation indicating why their telecommunication antennas cannot be mounted on these towers. Such documentation shall include demonstration that the shared use is not technically, legally, or environmentally feasible; or, for towers constructed prior to the effective date of this section, that shared use is not economically feasible or that the owner of such facility/facilities has/have refused permission for the shared use. The owner of any tower approved under this Section shall be required to make space available for additional antennas to the maximum feasible number of other uses, including competitors. Such availability shall be made under commercially reasonable terms and conditions. Failure of an owner to share use of a tower approved hereunder shall constitute a violation of any permit issued to such owner, and shall be grounds for the Commission, upon public hearing and notice to the owner, to revoke such permit.
In the event co-location is found to be unfeasible by the applicant, the Commission may retain a technical expert to verify if co-location at the site is feasible or is not feasible. The cost for such a technical expert will be at the expense of the applicant, and such cost shall be reimbursed prior to the decision on any pending application. Failure to reimburse the Commission for such costs shall be grounds for denial of the application without prejudice.
(2). Alternative Sites; The Commission may require the investigation of alternative sites by the applicant and demonstration of a good faith effort to co-locate with other carriers. Such good faith effort includes contact with all other licensed carriers licensed to operate a wireless telecommunications facility in East Haddam and in adjoining towns where existing or proposed towers could serve as alternative sites.
In the event the applicant finds the alternate site to be unfeasible, the Commission may retain a technical expert to verify if the alternate site is feasible or not. The cost for such a technical expert will be at the expense of the applicant, and such cost shall be reimbursed prior to the decision on any pending application. Failure to reimburse the Commission for such costs shall be grounds for denial of the application without prejudice.
(3). Principal or Accessory Uses; Antennas and towers may be considered either principal or accessory uses. An existing telecommunication facility or other use on the site shall not necessarily preclude the location of a new facility on the site, if the new facility meets the intent, standards and requirements of these requirements of these regulations.
(4). Compliance with Other Laws; The applicant shall present evidence that the proposal meets the minimum standards and requirements of the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and FCC or any other applicable Town, State or Federal codes, standards or requirements.
(5). No Negative Impacts: If any proposed facility is found by the Commission to result in significant negative impacts on the public health, safety, or welfare, it shall not be approved. Such significant negative impacts shall not include the health or environmental effects or radio frequency emissions to the extent that such emissions comply with standards adopted by the Federal Communications Commissions.
(6). Abandonment/Discontinuation: At such time that a licensed carrier plans to abandon or discontinue operation of a wireless telecommunications facility, such carrier will notify the Commission by certified U.S. mail of the proposed date of abandonment or discontinuation of operations. Such notice shall be given no less than 30 days prior to abandonment or discontinuation of operations.
In the event that a licensed carrier fails to give such notice, the wireless telecommunications facility shall be considered abandoned upon such discontinuation of operations.
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 133
Upon abandonment or discontinuation of use, the carrier shall physically remove the wireless telecommunications facility within 90 days from the date of abandonment or discontinuation of use. “Physically remove” shall include, but not be limited to removal of antennas, mount, base equipment, and security barriers from the subject property and restoring the location of the wireless telecommunications facility to its natural condition, except that any landscaping and grading shall remain in the after-condition. The Commission shall secure the removal of the wireless telecommunications facility by means of a bond, the amount of such bond shall be determined in accordance with Section 22.5.(14).
If a carrier fails to remove a wireless telecommunications facility in accordance with this section of this ordinance, the Town of East Haddam shall have the authority to enter the subject property and physically remove the facility. The carrier/owner shall first have an opportunity through a public hearing to demonstrate why such structure shall not be removed. Costs for the removal of the wireless telecommunications facility shall be charged to the carrier in the event the Town of East Haddam must remove the facility, and the cost thereof may be deducted from any bond posted by the carrier.
(7). Expansion/Alteration of Existing Facility; Where a previously approved facility is proposed to be extended or substantially altered in a manner that in any way changes the character or intensity of the use, such proposed extension or substantial change or alteration will be treated as a new application under this section.
(8). Term of Permit: Approvals for wireless telecommunication facilities are limited to a 10 year time period. Upon expiration of the time period, the applicant may seek renewal. If renewal is sought, the Commission may deny the renewal only if it finds that the requirements of this Section have not been met, or that the facility has a significant impact on the quality of life in the community which was not disclosed or reasonably discoverable at the time of the original application, or that due to developments in communication technologies the facility is outmoded. If renewal is not sought, or renewal is sought but denied, the facility shall constitute a zoning violation and the procedures under the abandonment provisions of this Section shall be imposed.
(9). Maintenance Required: The applicant shall maintain the wireless telecommunications facility. Such maintenance shall include, but shall not be limited to, painting, structural integrity and landscaping. In the event the applicant fails to maintain the facility the Town of East Haddam may undertake the maintenance at the expense of the applicant.
(10). Submission of Radio Frequency Emissions: After a wireless telecommunications facility is operational, the applicant shall submit, within 90 days of beginning operations, actually existing and maximum future projected measurements of radio frequency (RF) radiation from a wireless telecommunications facility. Should the applicant be required to submit additional information to the FCC regarding RF radiation after beginning operations, the applicant shall also submit such additional information to the Commission. Should a new wireless telecommunication tower require co-locators, to the degree possible, the maximum future projected measurements of RF radiation shall be submitted to the Commission. Violation of any standard for RF radiation adopted by the Federal government shall constitute a violation of any permit issued hereunder, and shall be grounds for revocation of such permit as provided herein.
(11). Facility on Town Property: In the event that a facility is constructed on Town property, the Town shall be held harmless from any responsibility due to structural or other failures of the facility. Such hold harmless shall be set forth in a written document satisfactory to the Town Attorney.
(12). Economic Development: In order to promote economic development, the Commission may consider the adequacy of service in commercial and industrial areas when evaluating any application.
(13). Licensed Carrier and Owner as Applicant: Application for any wireless telecommunication facility shall be made by a licensed carrier only acting jointly with all record owners of the subject property, and referred to in this Section as the applicant. The applicant shall provide written notice to the Commission, within 90 days, of any change in the composition of the parties constituting the applicant of a wireless telecommunications facility.
(14). Making Facilities Available for Use by Municipal Agencies: Each applicant may be required to accommodate antennas, base equipment, and other space and access rights as necessary in order to permit the facility to be used by municipal agencies of the Town of East Haddam, including its fire, police, ambulance, and other emergency services. This requirement shall be a continuing obligation, such that municipal equipment can be added, altered, or expanded at any time during the term of the permit. The Commission may waive this requirement where it finds that municipal equipment will create interference with the applicant’s transmissions, where the tower lacks the structural ability to accept municipal antennas, or where other physical constraints reasonably prevent the applicant from complying with this section.
22.4. Specific Standards
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 134
(1). Location Standards:
(a). Facilities Clustering - If the Commission finds that a particular area or site, structure or building is well-suited to the location of one or more facilities, it may require the clustering of mounts in or on said area site, structure or building provided that all facilities meet the requirements of this Section.
(b). Locations in order of preference for facilities (i) being the most preferred, (vi) being the least;
i. on existing or approved towers;
ii. within existing structures (e.g. steeple, spires, etc.);
iii. on existing structures (e.g. buildings, water towers and utility poles);
iv. in non sensitive areas;
v. in sensitive areas with low visual impacts;
vi. in sensitive areas with high visual impacts with mitigation.
(c). the applicant shall show the Commission the applicant’s plan or model for the coverage of all areas in the Town of East Haddam and the locations of all existing and proposed towers that would provide that coverage.
(d). the applicant shall show all facilities within the Town of East Haddam and within one mile of the Town’s boundary with adjacent communities.
(2) Site Standards
(a). To the extent possible, all utilities serving the facility shall be underground. The Commission may allow overhead utilities where excessive conditions such as ledge or wetlands exist.
(b). Unless base equipment is located in underground vaults or in an existing structure and no security fence is required, the base area of a facility shall be large enough to accommodate;
i. the required base equipment access drive and parking for all carrier vehicles anticipated;
ii. screening and landscaping area at least 20 feet wide around the outside of the security fence perimeter or the area around the smallest rectangle that can be drawn about all base equipment if no fencing is required. This area shall be planted to screen the base equipment or security fence from view. The Commission may also require walls to achieve the screening function especially where the tower is close to a building located on the site and the wall can be made to seem as an extension of the building.
(c). A tower proposed as a ground mounted facility shall have the following setback distances:
i. In non sensitive areas, the setback shall be no less than one and one half the height of the tower.
ii. In sensitive areas deemed to have low visual impacts, the setback shall be no less than two times the height of the tower.
iii. In sensitive areas deemed to have high visual impacts, the setback shall be three times the height of the tower.
iv. In non sensitive areas, where it can be demonstrated by the applicant and approved by the Commission, that it is unlikely that any building will be constructed on adjacent property within the tower fall zone and the that the property is not or could not be used for residential purposes, the distance maybe reduced to one half the tower height.
(d). Base equipment structures, cabinets and fencing of ground-mounted facilities shall not be located within any required yard.
(3). Structural Standards
(a). After review of the application, the viewshed analysis, co-location potential of the site, coverage requirements, and other information received, the Commission may approve or require the use of a tower design other than the type submitted where the Commission finds that the visual impacts will be thereby reduced, or countervailing benefits derived, or other objectives of these Regulations met.
(b). Unless required by the FAA, the color of towers and other visible facility equipment shall be a non-contrasting blue or gray or other neutral color.
(c). Unless required by the FAA, no lights shall be permitted on any facility higher than 14 feet above the surrounding grade. No strobe lights shall be permitted on any facility deemed to have a high visual impact, and shall be strenuously avoided for any facility deemed to have low visual impact.
(d). No signs other than for safety or security directly involving the operation of the facility shall be permitted.
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 135
(e). To minimize tower proliferation, towers shall be designed structurally to adequately carry the weight, load/stress and height to permit at least three (3) additional co-locators including municipal antennas, unless specifically waived by the Commission. To achieve this, the tower may be designed for incremental height expansion. The applicant shall have a professional engineer certify the proposed structure shall be capable of supporting the specific load bearing including co-location of additional facilities, ice and wind loading, and maintenance issues. The plans shall bear the seal of a Registered Professional Structural Engineer licensed to do business in the State of Connecticut, certifying structural load capacity for antennas and wind load recommended by the EIA (Electronic Industry Association).
(f). The maximum size of dish antennas shall be 4.5 feet in diameter. The maximum size of a panel antenna shall be 2 feet by 6 feet.
(g). Except as provided below, roof-mounted facilities shall not extend more than 10 feet above the maximum height of the building and shall be located away from the roof perimeter to minimize visibility from the ground.
(h). Roof mounts on existing buildings may extend higher than 10 feet above the surface of any roof on buildings in industrial or commercial areas provided that;
i. no base equipment, cabinets, fences or screens are visible from streets or surrounding properties;
ii. the Commission finds that the proposal does not significantly and negatively impact the area;
iii. the Commission finds that there does not exist a significant number of locations from which the top of the roof is visible;
iv. the proposed structure is not to be within any sensitive area.
(i). Antennas mounted on the facade of buildings shall be of a design, color, and material which blends with the materials of the existing building to the greatest extent possible and shall be located to create the least conflict in compatibility with the appearance of the building.
(j). The Height of the Tower shall not exceed the height requirement of the Town and district unless the applicant can demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Commission that such service can only be provided at the location and at the height requested, but in no event shall the total height exceed 199 feet. The Commission shall require the submission of the results of propagation modeling to facilitate its review of proposed tower height. The applicant shall submit a propagation study for the lowest and highest antennae height on the tower to ensure adequate coverage of East Haddam while minimizing visual impacts. The Commission may request propagation modeling for higher or lower heights. Further, any proposed tower shall be designed in all respects to accommodate both the applicant’s antennas and comparable antennas for at least three additional users if the tower is over 150 feet, two additional users if the tower is over 100 feet but less than 150 feet, or for at least one additional user if the tower is over 50 feet but less than 100 feet in height. The Commission may require the tower to be of such design as to allow for future rearrangement of antennas upon the tower and to accommodate antennas mounted at varying heights. See the requirements for co-location herein above.
(k). Any facility to be located within Special Flood Hazard Areas shall comply with all application provisions of these Regulations. See Section 18 of these Regulations.
(5). Temporary Mobile Facility: The temporary use of a mobile wireless telecommunication facility sometimes known as Cell on Wheels (COW) based on such factors as its size, the size of the site, its placement on the site, potential safety impacts and the degree to which the COW does not compromise the character of the surrounding area and generally meets the intent of this regulations, may be approved as follows:
(a). By a Zoning Permit issued by the Zoning Enforcement Officer allowed for an initial period of up to three (3) months if they find that the COW has not created nuisances, hazards or excessively compromised the character of the area.
(b). The Commission, may, by Site Plan Review, grant approval for up to an additional three (3) months beyond any approval period granted by the Zoning Enforcement Officer, it confirms the findings in (a) above.
(c). The Commission may, by Special Exception, grant approval for up to an additional three (3) months beyond any approval period granted by the Commission through Site Plan Review approval in (b) above, if the applicant can show a need to extend such time of temporary facility operation, and an application for one or more permanent location(s) are in active preparation or have been submitted for consideration. The Commission may grant approval for the time during which the construction of any permanent facility approved by the Town is being delayed by a pending administrative appeal or other legal proceeding, provided such extension shall be for no more than the period of pendency of such legal proceeding, plus the time required to construct the facility upon the conclusion of such proceeding.
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 136
22.5. Submission requirements
Except for Cell on Wheels (see above), all wireless telecommunications facilities shall require a Special Exception in accordance with Section 14B of these Regulations. Any application for a wireless telecommunications facility, whether by Zoning Permit, Site Plan Review (for Cell on Wheels), or by Special Exception or variance, shall contain all that information required in accordance with the applicable provisions of these Regulations, and, in addition, the following:
1. A plan showing where and how the proposed antenna will be affixed to a particular building or structure.
2. Details of all proposed antenna and mounting equipment including size and color.
3. Elevations of all proposed shielding and details of materials including color.
4. An elevation of all proposed equipment building or boxes. Details of all proposed fencing including color.
5. A design drawing including cross section and elevation of all proposed towers. A description of the tower’s capacity including the number and type of antennas it can accommodate as well as the proposed location of all mounting positions for co-located antennas and the minimum separation distances between antennas. Where a tower is proposed the design shall illustrate how the tower will collapse upon itself or on the property without encroaching upon any adjoining property line. In order to facilitate the evaluation of the site in relation to the proposed use, the Commission may require sections of the site and environs, balloon tests, photographic superimpositions and other studies in connection with any application.
6. A report from a licensed engineer indicating that the proposed wireless telecommunication site will comply with the emission standards found in Subsection 22.3.(10) of this section, modeled at the full, ultimate capacity of the facility, and measured at the perimeter of any fenced enclosure surrounding the tower. Such report shall also certify that the installation of such site will not interfere with public safety communications, and shall provide supporting data and calculation as will permit an independent engineer to confirm the conclusions of said report.
7. An analysis of the fall zone for the proposed tower prepared by a licensed engineer.
8. Proof that either the applicant or a co-applicant holds a bona fide license from the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) to provide the telecommunication services that the proposed tower is designed to support.
9. A report or letter from the Federal Aviation Administration that the proposed tower complies with all airport safety requirements for any airports in the vicinity of the site.
10. A map depicting the extent of the provider’s planned coverage within the Town of East Haddam and the service area of the proposed wireless telecommunication site, and a master plan depicting how coverage within the Town is to be provided, including future tower sites.
11. A map indicating the service radius for the proposed wireless telecommunication site.
12. Upon request of the Commission the applicant shall provide a simulation of the proposed wireless telecommunication site in order to help the Commission ascertain the visual impacts associated with such proposal.
13. The applicant shall provide a view shed analysis for all areas from which the tower would be visible.
14. A plan for the removal of the wireless telecommunications facility upon its abandonment or obsolescence, including detailed procedures and methods to be employed, and accompanied by an estimate of the cost of such removal. Such estimate shall include the cost of any engineering or other supervisory services.
15. Alternate sites where the proposed wireless telecommunications facility could be located if the proposed site is found to be unacceptable. Allegations by the applicant that there are no alternative sites will require detailed, written reports by the qualified engineers to support such allegations, there being a presumption that cases where there is only one feasible site are very rare.
16. The location of any designated Scenic Roads, Historic District or buildings on State or Federal registers of Historic Structures, Gateway and Conservation Zones, Lake (L), East Haddam Village District, Areas of Special Concern as identified by the Natural Resources Map, State Forest or State Parks, Designated Open Space, Town Parks, all other areas included within the definition of “Sensitive Areas” in section 22.2 of this Section, and schools within a two mile radius of the proposed facility.
17. For a wireless telecommunication facility requiring a Special Exception application, the notification area set forth in Section14B.C.3 of these Regulations shall be within 250 feet (rather than 100 feet) from any property line of the proposed site.
18. In addition to Section 22.3, General Requirements, and to the criteria of Section 14.B, Special Exception Review, in evaluating a wireless telecommunication facility requiring a Special Exception or variance application, the Commission shall also consider the potential for co-location, alternative site locations, feasible alternative technologies and cooperation by the applicant regarding the use of the wireless telecommunication facility for Town emergency communication services, except that consideration of renewals shall be evaluated by Subsection 22.3(8) only. The applicant shall provide such information as will permit the Commission or the Board to conduct such evaluations.
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 137
SECTION 22.6 FEES
1. For telecommunication facilities which are up to the base height, co-locating and not otherwise permitted by right or renewals under Subsection 22.3.(8), the basic application fee shall be $200.00.
2. For a mobile wireless telecommunication facility sometimes known as Cell on Wheels (COW), the fee is $250.00,
3. For telecommunications facility over the base height but less than 100 feet, the application fee is $2000.00.
4. For telecommunication towers over 100 feet but less than 150 feet, the application fee is $2500.00.
5. For telecommunication towers over 150 feet, the application fee is $3000.00. ]
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 138
SECTION 23 CONSERVATION SUBDIVISION
23.1. Findings: The Commission finds that in some cases the strict adherence to traditional land development and subdivision techniques within the Town of East Haddam has resulted in:
(i). The consumption of areas containing valuable recreational, agricultural, forest and other unique natural resources:
(ii). The construction of extensive roads and other improvements requiring maintenance by the Town of East Haddam;
(iii). The development of sites without specific consideration of the limitations of, or opportunities offered by, the existing topographical and soil conditions; and
(iv). The destruction of significant historic sites, geological features, severe slopes, scenic vistas, significant stands of trees, water courses, wetlands, wildlife habitat or other areas of environmental value, natural beauty or historic interest.
23.2. Purpose. It is the purpose of this Section 23 to respond to the foregoing findings by providing an opportunity for the preservation and protection of the Town of East Haddam’s natural resources by permitting a transfer of density by way of reduction in the minimum lot size normally required in specified zones for residential development in return for the dedication of designated areas as Open Space; provided, however, that the total number of lots in such subdivision does not exceed the number otherwise permitted under these Regulations and the East Haddam Subdivision Regulations.
23.3. Definitions. For other definitions – See Section 5 of the Zoning Regulations
AGGREGATE MAXIMUM LOT AVERAGE The total acres to be sold as building lots divided by the number of such lots.
BUFFERS/BUFFER STRIPS: Open spaces, landscaped areas, fences, walls, berms, or any combination thereof used to physically separate or screen one use or property from another so as to visually shield or block noise, lights, or other nuisances or serve as a filter to protect natural resources from potential adverse impact of adjacent land uses.
CONSERVATION AREA Environmentally sensitive areas with characteristics such as wetlands, floodplains, unprotected elements of the natural landscape such as steep slopes, mature or productive forestland, contiguous open space or connective green belts, prime farmland, land that protects critical or threatened natural communities and species as identified by the Department of Environmental Protection, areas that have recreation value as recommended in the Recreation and/or Open Space Plan component of the Plan of Conservation and Development, wildlife habitats, and cultural features such as historic and archeological sites, and scenic views.
CONSERVATION DEVELOPMENT A form of development that permits a reduction in lot area and bulk requirements as required in the Zoning District, provided there is no increase in the number of lots permitted as would be in a Conventional Subdivision, and the remaining land is devoted to open space, active recreation, preservation of environmentally sensitive areas, or agriculture.
CONSERVATION EASEMENT Conservation Easement shall mean the grant of a property right transferred to a non-profit or government entity where the landowner retains the legal title and all rights associated with the land except where the land shall remain in its natural state and preclude future development as set forth in the standard “Conservation Easement” approved by the Town of East Haddam, including easements permitting agricultural and forestry uses.
CONVENTIONAL DEVELOPMENT A form of development that permits the division of land in the standard form provided by the Subdivision Regulation of the Town for the District in which it is located, other than Planned Residential Development and Conservation Developments.
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 139
Development Restriction. A restriction which perpetually prohibits further development or use inconsistent with or inimical to the enhancement, preservation and protection of a defined area for the benefit of fish, wildlife, plants, or other similar ecosystems or preserves such areas predominantly in their natural scenic or open condition; but which may, at the sole discretion of the Commission, permit recreational and/or agricultural uses which do not involve any significant alteration or development of the restricted area in a manner which is inconsistent or inimical to the preservation and protection of the restricted area.
Normal Lot Size. The lot size, expressed in acres, normally applicable to the zoning district in which the proposed Conservation Subdivision is located.
Open Space Land or water areas which include but are not limited to: areas left in their existing state; agricultural land for which development rights have been assigned or otherwise alienated in perpetuity; areas and facilities for non-commercial, non-profit recreation, areas for wildlife habitat, passive and active recreation, groundwater recharge, scenic preservation, and other lands accomplishing the purpose set forth in Section 4.9 of these regulations.
23.4. General Requirements. A Conservation Subdivision:
(i). Shall only be permitted in the R-2 or R-4 zones.
(ii). Shall consist of a parcel(s) of land containing 20 or more acres, or where a subdivision of 5 or more lots is proposed. The acreage may be less, as approved by the Commission, if the Application abuts adjoining land for which a Conservation Subdivision, formerly known as an “Open Space Subdivision”, has been approved or includes areas identified as existing or potential Conservation Areas.
(iii). Compared to a legally approvable Conventional Subdivision, the Conservation Subdivision proposal must not be substantially harmful of the property values of surrounding landowners and in keeping with the general character of the surrounding area.
(iv). Must, except as provided in this Section 23, comply with all applicable sections of these Regulations and the East Haddam Subdivision Regulations and applicable provisions of Federal, state and local law.
(v). Must provide beneficial utilization of suitable soil and topographic conditions and protection of soils and topographic conditions not suitable for development.
(vii). Shall be used only for detached single family dwellings and permitted accessory uses. All other uses shall require the Normal Lot Size and be subject to approval of the Commission in accordance with the applicable sections of these Regulations. Any other use which is proposed, after the approval of the Conservation Subdivision, shall require an amendment to the Special Exception granted under this Section 23 in accordance with the applicable sections of the Regulations.
(viii). Must be consistent with the intent of planning and zoning to promote the public health, safety and welfare of the Town of East Haddam and the East Haddam Plan of Development, the Natural Resources Inventory and the Town Open Space Plan.
23.5.. Application Procedure
a. Pre-Application Conference. The Commission recommends that prior to submission of an application for approval of a Conservation Subdivision, the applicant initiate a pre-application conference with the Commission and its staff to discuss conceptual aspects of the proposed Conservation Subdivision compared to a proposed Conventional Subdivision and prepare and present a preliminary plan for informal consideration by the Commission. The pre-application conference is recommended to permit the general consideration of factors and problems affecting the development of the subject site before the applicant proceeds with the application and the preparation of final maps, plans and documents required to accompany such application.
Following the pre-application conference, the Commission may provide informal, non-binding suggestions to the applicant as to whether to proceed with an application under this Section 23 or to adhere to the Conventional Subdivision requirements of the applicable sections of the East Haddam Subdivision Regulations.
Neither the pre-application conference, the informal consideration of preliminary plans nor the Commission’s suggestions shall be deemed to constitute any portion of the application for approval of an Conservation Subdivision.
b. Application. An application for the approval of a Conservation Subdivision shall:
(i) Require approval of the Commission (one) as a Special Exception and (two) as a subdivision in accordance with the applicable sections of these Regulations and the East Haddam Subdivision Regulations.
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 140
(ii) The applicant shall use a four step process to create a Conservation Subdivision. This process shall be demonstrated with a site plan and detailed narrative. The design process shall identify historical, cultural and natural resources, potential open space corridors, views, sensitive wildlife areas, and other areas that should not be adversely impacted by development. This process is outlined in Section 3.02c of the East Haddam Subdivision Regulations
(iii) Be submitted with a proper and complete special exception form and subdivision application form; a check made payable to the Town of East Haddam in the amount specified in the Fee Schedule and all required supporting information;
(iv) In order to determine the maximum number of lots allowable within the proposed Open Space Subdivision, the applicant shall submit a proposed Conventional Subdivision plan using the Normal Lot Size and a proposed Conservation Subdivision plan which will be reviewed by the Commission, its staff and any applicable Federal, state and local agencies or authorities without the application of this Section 23.
(v) Said application shall be accompanied by ten (10) copies of the proposed plans setting forth the information required by this Section 23 and the applicable sections of these Regulations as well as such additional information as the Commission may require for a review of the proposed Conservation Subdivision under the applicable sections of these Regulations or in order to reach a determination of the impact of the Conservation Subdivision on the surrounding area. Such additional information may include, but is not limited to, the following: information concerning surrounding land uses, building locations, driveways, streets, topography, water courses and wetlands, utilities and other information of a similar nature and purpose; a traffic impact study prepared by a Connecticut registered professional engineer qualified to prepare such studies; an environmental impact statement prepared by professionals qualified to prepare such studies; and any reports prepared by the applicant’s staff or consultants; and
(vi) Be accompanied by copies of the proposed certificate of incorporation, if any, bylaws, rules and regulations of any association or corporation of the lot owners within the proposed Conservation Subdivision; copies of the proposed covenants and restrictions to be placed in the deeds of conveyance to the lot owners, and copies of any proposed deeds, agreements, conveyances and restrictions necessary for the creation of Open Space, including, a precise statement of the proposed Development Restriction.
c. Public Hearing. The public hearings on the special exception and subdivision application shall be held concurrently.
23.6. Standards and Controls.
a. Minimum Area, Yard and Coverage Requirement
R-4 R-2
Minimum Lot Area 1 acre .75 acre
Maximum Lot Area 1.5 acres 1.25 acres
Aggregate Maximum
Lot Average 1.25 acres 1 acre
Minimum Lot Width 150 ft 150 ft.
Minimum Front Yard 30ft 25ft
Minimum Side and
Rear Yards 30 ft. 25 ft.
Maximum Building
Coverage 10% 10%
Lot Impervious Surface
Coverage 15% 15%
b. Minimum Buildable Land Requirements Proposed Conservation Subdivision Lots shall contain a configuration as prescribed in the conditions set forth under Section 4.06. of the Subdivision Regulation with the exception that the minimum lot area is at least 21,780 square feet (1/2 acre) with the shortest side no less than 0ne hundred (100) feet.
c. Conformance. Any lot with reduced area approved under the provisions of this Section 23 shall be deemed to be a conforming lot notwithstanding the Normal Lot Size; provided, however, that such lot meets the requirements of
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 141
other applicable sections of the Regulations and the East Haddam Subdivision Regulations. Any such lot shall be designated on the approved Conservation Subdivision Plan which is presented for recording.
23.7. Open Space and Development Restriction.
a. Calculation of Required Open Space. In compensation for the reduction in the Normal Lot Size, the proposed Conservation Subdivision shall require the dedication as Open Space. The balance of the land that is not designated as proposed building lots or public improvements (streets and rights of way) shall be the Open Space Area.
b. Dedication of Open Space. Open Space shall be dedicated, by conveyance, in fee simple, to one of the following:
(i). The Town of East Haddam;
(ii). The State of Connecticut;
(iii). A private not-for-profit conservation trust which assures the preservation and maintenance of the Open Space in perpetuity; or
(iv). Such other private or governmental entity which assures the preservation and maintenance of the Open Space in perpetuity and is acceptable to the Commission.
(v). An association or corporation composed of the owners of all lots within the Conservation Subdivision;
The Applicant shall designate in its Application which of the foregoing entities are proposed to own the Open Space, but, as part of the approval of such application, the Commission may modify such designation to require ownership by an entity set forth in subsection (i) - (v) above. The Commission may not require ownership by an entity described in subsections (iii) - (v),, which shall be approved only when proposed by the Applicant. Furthermore, the Commission may modify any Application so as to designate Open Space in locations other than those proposed. In determining whether the proposed entity is appropriate to own the proposed Open Space, or whether to require Open Space in locations different from those proposed, the Commission shall consider the following factors: the ownership of any existing open space on adjacent properties, or the proximity to non-adjacent open space which might reasonably interconnect with the proposed Open Space in the future; the proposed use of the Open Space for active or passive uses, and the extent of maintenance, supervision, or management required; the potential benefits which the Open Space might provide to residents of the Town or the State, if it were accessible to them; the size, shape, topography, and character of the Open Space; the recommendations of the East Haddam Plan of Development; the reports or recommendations of any State or Town agencies, including, but not limited to, the Board of Selectmen, the Inland/Wetlands and Watercourses Commission, the Recreation Commission, the Conservation Commission, the Middlesex Regional Planning Agency, and the Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection.
c. Alteration of Open Space. Any excavation, filling, regarding or alteration of Open Space; any construction or expansion of any building, structure or other improvements thereon, or any paving or surfacing of Open Space subsequent to the date of approval of the Conservation Subdivision shall require an amendment to the special exception granted under this Section 23 in accordance with the applicable sections of these Regulations.
d. Evidence of Acceptance. If Open Space is to be owned by a private not-for-profit conservation trust or corporation, the State of Connecticut, the Town of East Haddam or another entity, the application shall contain written evidence from the proposed entity satisfactory to the Commission, stating that it is willing to accept ownership of and responsibility for the preservation and maintenance of the Open Space.
e. Required Provisions. Regardless of the manner of ownership of the Open Space, the instrument of conveyance must include provisions satisfactory in form and substance to the Commission to ensure:
(i). The continued use of such land for the intended purposes;
(ii). The continuity of proper maintenance for those portions of the Open Space requiring maintenance;
(iii). When appropriate, the availability of funds required for such maintenance;
(iv). Adequate insurance protection; and
(v). Recovery for loss sustained by casualty, condemnation or otherwise.
f. Boundary Lines. The boundary lines of all Open Space shall be set in the field and marked by permanent, readily-visible markers supplied by the applicant at a six foot height and with iron pins on the ground where such lines intersect any lot line, road or perimeter line within the proposed Conservation Subdivision and at such other points as may be required by the Commission to insure identification in the field.
g. Recording. At the time the approved Conservation Subdivision Plan is filed, the applicant shall record on the East Haddam Land Records all legal documents required to ensure the aforesaid guarantees.
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 142
h. Right to Enforce. A right to enforce the Development Restriction shall be conveyed to (i) the Town of East Haddam, the State of Connecticut or a private, not-for-profit conservation trust or corporation dedicated to conservation or preservation purposes in cases where the Open Space is dedicated to an association or corporation of lot owners in cases where Open Space is dedicated to the Town of East Haddam, the State of Connecticut or a private not-for-profit conservation trust or corporation. Any deed of conveyance shall contain language providing the holder of the Development Restriction with the right to obtain reimbursement for all costs it reasonably incurs, including attorneys fees, in any action to enforce the Development Restriction, in which it is the prevailing party.
i. Association Requirements. If the Open Space is to be dedicated to an association or corporation of lot owners then the Commission may set additional requirements, including, but not limited to the following:
(i)Creation of the association or corporation prior to the sale of any lot;
(ii). Mandatory membership in the association or corporation by all original lot owners and any subsequent owner; and
(iii). The association or corporation shall have the power to assess and collect from each lot owner a specified share of, and where necessary provide reserves the costs associated with maintenance, repair, upkeep and insurance of the Open Space.
23.8. Protection of Surrounding Areas. In reviewing the proposed Conservation Subdivisions, the Commission shall additionally utilize and implement the following criteria:
a. The recommendations of the East Haddam Plan of Development, as amended, relative to open space and recreation.
b. The suitability of areas within the proposed Conservation Subdivision for Open Space purposes in light of the topography, size, shape, and character of the land to be subdivided, and its relationship to other existing or proposed areas of open space.
c. The maintenance, insurance, and other burdens placed on upon the residents of the Conservation Subdivision, and/or the Town of East Haddam.
d. The increase in the burden imposed by the proposed Conservation Subdivision on existing and proposed areas of open space.
e. The recommendations of the Board of Selectmen, the Board of Finance, the Inland/Wetlands and Watercourses Commission, the Conservation Commission, the Recreation Commission, and any other public or private agencies or authorities providing comment to the Commission.
f. The level of access to the areas of Open Space afforded to members of the general public.
e. The Commission shall require the implementation of Buffers between existing roadways, existing developments, working farmland, environmentally sensitive areas, views and vistas.
23.9. Effective Date. This Section 23 shall be effective as of June 1, 1990. Revised Sept. 13, 2003
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 143
SECTION 24 CONVERSION SEASONAL/YEAR-ROUND OCCUPANCY
(APPROVED: 7/13/81) (EFFECTIVE: 8/1/81) 3/15/01r
24.0. Intent: The purpose of this section is to promote and assure the health, safety and welfare of the Town of East Haddam for the Town and persons who wish to convert existing seasonal dwellings into year-round dwellings.
24.1. The Planning & Zoning Commission may permit in all zoning districts, upon application by the owner, conversion of existing property used as seasonal to year-round occupancy.
24.1.1. The lot must contain a minimum of 21,780 square feet of area 8/1/82r
24.1.2. Living space: Any dwelling in existence and used seasonally and containing no less than 600 sq. ft. of living space, with a maximum of 15% building coverage when these Regulations take effect may apply. 8/1/82r
24.2. Site Plan: Site plans shall contain the information required under Section 14A of these Regulations.
24.3. Criteria For Decision
In reviewing the site plan 24.2 for conversion, the Commission shall consider the following criteria. All decisions must be made relative to these criteria.
1. Compatibility with the Plan of Development of the Town of East Haddam.
2. Compliance with Zoning Regulations of the Town of East Haddam.
3. Adequate access for fire and emergency vehicles and police protection.
4. Sanitary waste disposal plans shall conform to the State of Connecticut Public Health Code. No requirements shall be waived.
5. The submission of insufficient information shall be considered to be grounds for modification or denial.
6. No sewage disposal system shall be located within 75 feet of a lake, pond, river, perennial stream or other body of water.
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 144
Section 25 Collection and Storage of Junk Material, Abandoned Vehicles, and Debris
25a. Purpose
The purpose of this regulation is to define, prohibit and abate blights and nuisances to protect, preserve, and promote public health, safety and welfare; and to preserve and protect property values.
25b. General
Any other provision in the Regulations to the contrary notwithstanding, no person, firm, or corporation shall collect or store, upon the landscape of any zoning district in the Town, junk appliances, metal materials, machinery, or other debris or more than two unregistered motor vehicles. See Section 25d for exceptions. This Regulation shall apply uniformly to the maintenance of all residential, nonresidential, and undeveloped premises now in existence or hereafter constructed, maintained, or modified but shall exclude: agricultural lands as defined in Section 22-3(b) of the Connecticut General Statutes.
25c. Definitions
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this Regulation.
Debris: Material which is incapable of performing the function for which it was designed including, but not limited to: abandoned, discarded, or unused objects; junk comprised of equipment such as automobiles, boats, and recreation vehicles which are unregistered and missing parts, not complete in appearance and in an obvious state of disrepair; parts of automobiles, furniture, appliances, cans, boxes, scrap metal, scrap wood and building materials, tires, batteries, containers, and garbage which are in the public view.
Decay: A wasting or wearing away; a gradual decline in strength, soundness or quality; to become decomposed or rotten.
Dilapidated: Decayed or rotten beyond repair.
Junk: Discarded material, such as glass, rags, paper, or metal; articles worn out or fit to be discarded.
Person: Any man, woman, corporation, or other legal entity capable of owning real property.
Premises: A platted lot or part thereof or un-platted lot or parcel of land or plot of land, either occupied or unoccupied by any dwelling or non-dwelling structure and includes any such building, accessory structure or other structure thereon, or any part thereof. The term “premises,” where the context requires, shall be deemed to include any buildings, dwellings, parcels of land or structures contained within the scope of this article.
Public view: Visible from any public right-of-way or neighboring property.
Structure: Any building, dwelling, fence, swimming pool, or similarly constructed object.
25d. Public Nuisance
It is hereby declared a public nuisance for any person owning, leasing, occupying or having charge or possession of any premises in the Town of East Haddam to maintain such premises or any public right-of-way abutting said premises in such manner that any of the following conditions exist thereon:
a). Any structure which is in a state of dilapidation; or decay; or is open to the elements; or unable to provide shelter, or serve the purpose for which it was constructed due to damage, dilapidation, or decay;
b). More than two unregistered motor vehicles, pursuant to Section 14-150a of the Connecticut General Statutes;
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 145
c). Residential, commercially, or industrial zoned property that has premises containing accumulated debris and junk materials.
d). However, the collection and storage of materials, equipment, and vehicles reasonably associated with a business which is permitted under Zoning Regulations as long as they poses no public health or safety concerns does not constitute a violation..
25e. Minimum Standards
a). The provisions in this Regulation shall not be construed to prevent the enforcement of other statutes, codes, ordinances or regulations.
b). In any case where a provision of this Regulation is found to be in conflict with a provision of any zoning, building, fire, safety or health ordinance, regulation or other code of the Town or State, the provision which establishes the higher standard for the promotion and protection of the health and safety, and property values of the people shall prevail.
c). Nothing herein shall be construed to require any town official to hold a sale or public auction of motor vehicles. Any licensed wrecker service or garage shall comply with the Conn. Gen. Stat. §14-150, as revised, in such matters as, including but not limited to, owner notification, towing of motor vehicles, storage, and payment of service.
d). If a property is in violation of any regulation, code or ordinance on the effective date of this regulation, it remains in violation of that regulation, code or ordinance. It is not the intent of this regulation to approve any activity otherwise in violation of the regulations. If, on the effective date of this regulation, a property is in violation of any other regulation, code or ordinance, it is still subject to whatever fines, injunctions or other penalties that other violation would incur.
25f. Responsibility for Compliance
The owner, lessee, or occupant of premises subject to this regulation, including the agents thereof, shall be jointly and severally obligated to comply with the provisions of this ordinance. Whenever the person, as herein defined, is a corporation or other legal entity, the officers thereof shall be jointly and severally responsible with that corporation or other legal entity.
25g. Enforcement and Penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation found in violation of this Regulation shall be given a thirty calendar day notice by the Zoning Enforcement Officer to remove cited junk items or materials at no cost to the Town. These Regulations shall be enforced by the Zoning Enforcement Officer(s), or his/her/their designee, who shall be empowered to cause any building, structure, place or premises to be inspected and examined and to order, in writing, the remedying of any conditions found to exist therein or thereat in violation of any provision of these Regulations, or any permit or approval issue hereunder. The owner or agent of a building, structure, or property where such violation shall have been committed or shall exist, or the lessee or tenant of an entire lot where such violation shall have been committed or shall exist, or the agent, architect, builder, contractor or any other person who shall commit, take part or assist in such violation or who shall maintain any building or premises in which such violations exist shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable as provided in Chapter 124 of the Connecticut General Statutes. Furthermore, the Commission may, at its sole discretion, direct the Town counsel to commence criminal or civil action in State or Federal Court for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of these Regulations. This could lead to the Town's removal of cited violating items and materials at the violating party(ies) expense.
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 146
SECTION 26 MOBILE FOOD UNIT REGULATIONS
Intent: The purpose of this regulation is to provide standards relative to the accessibility, appearance, and safety in regards to mobile food unit vending.
26.1 Definition:
Mobile Food Unit: An itinerant Vender which serves food or drink from an approved conveyance (e.g. “food truck”, “food cart”, “food trailer”) without a fixed location and without connection to a water supply or sewage disposal system.
26.2 General Requirements for Mobile Food Unit Vending:
26.2.1 Mobile food units may be permitted by Special Exception in the following Districts after Special Exception review and approval: the C/B/IG District, the IG District (excluding the IG-5 and IG-10 Districts), the E.H. Village Highest Use and Moderate Use District, and L District provided they meet the following:
a. An application shall be filed under the criteria of Section 14 B – Special Exception review. The Commission must find that the proposed operation complies with all applicable provisions of this section and Section 14 B. A letter of permission and/or copy of an official lease agreement from the property owner to vend on the subject parcel shall be submitted as part of the application.
b. The application will be in compliance with the Public Health Code as required by the Chatham Health District and any Building Code or Fire Code requirements.
c. The Mobile Food Unit meets a twenty (20’) front setback and the side and rear setback requirements of its underlying zoning district unless otherwise specified after special exception review.
d. Only one Mobile Food Unit or vehicle may be permitted per parcel unless otherwise permitted by the Commission by Special Exception Review.
e. A minimum of four (4) parking spaces must be provided and maintained in addition to the minimum parking required for the uses on the property.
f. Mobile food unit vendors and associated seating, if any, may not occupy parking spaces that are needed for other businesses and uses to fulfill their minimum parking requirements. Mobile food units may not occupy any handicap accessible parking spaces.
g. Ingress, egress, and internal circulation of vehicular traffic shall not create a hazard for traffic on an adjacent street, on the subject parcel, or an adjacent parcels. Parking and circulation plans shall be reviewed by the Commission.
i. The Mobile Food Unit is not within twenty-five (25) feet of an entranceway to any business open to the public.
j. Hours of operation are limited to the hours between 7:00 am and 8:00 pm.
k. Permitted merchandise shall be limited to food items approved the Chatham Health District.
l. The Mobile Food Unit vendor is responsible for the proper disposal of waste and trash associated with the permitted operation. At a minimum, vendors must remove all waste and trash from their approved location at the end of each day. Vendors must keep all areas within five (5) feet of the Mobile Food Unit and any associated seating areas clean of grease, trash, paper, cups, or cans associated with the vending operation.
m. The Mobile Food Unit vendor shall not utilize any device which produces loud noise or use and operation of any loudspeaker, public address system, radio, sound amplifier, or similar noise creating device to attract the attention of the public.
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 147
26.2.3 Exemptions
a. The provisions of this section shall not apply to existing temporary special events, festivals, community projects or public events which occur on a periodic basis. Those special events, festivals, community projects or public events will still need a Temporary Food Vending permit from the Chatham Health District.
26.2.4 Signage
a. No advertising shall be permitted on any cart except to identify the name of the product or the name of the vendor and the posting of the prices.
b. Electronic or illuminated signs shall not be utilized by vendors.
c. Temporary or permanent off-site signs for the mobile food unit shall be prohibited.
26.3 Violations
a. The vendor, property owner/lessee and assigns shall be responsible for any violation of this section or any other section of the East Haddam Zoning Regulations, Town Ordinances, Building and Fire Codes and/or the Connecticut Health Code. Such violations may result in the revocation or denial of a Certificate of Zoning Compliance and vending permit.
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 148
SECTION 27 HOME OCCUPATION
27.0. Intent and Purpose. The Town of East Haddam recognizes the need for some of its citizens to use their place of residence for limited non-residential activities. It is the intent and purpose of this Section 27 to permit limited non-residential activity within the Town’s residential districts through the home occupation approval process set forth in this Section 27, while at the same time protecting the integrity of the underlying residential district.
27.1. Permitted Home Occupations. Home occupations shall be limited to the following:
a. Offices for practitioners of recognized professions, the practice of which requires a license or certification from the State of Connecticut, such as medicine, law, dentistry, engineering, architecture, accounting, land surveying, interior design and the like, and commercial activities which require a license or certification from the State of Connecticut such as real estate, insurance and the like.
b. Building and other trade occupations such as carpentry, plumbing, electric, masonry, painting and the like.
c. Commercial salesrooms and shops such as antiques, gun shops, art galleries, tack shops and the like.
d. Home industries whose products as produced through handcrafting, personal skill and artistry such as catering, furniture repair and the like.
e. Instructional classes and lessons customarily associated with home occupations such as music, arts and crafts and the like.
27.2. Standards.
27.2.1. The home occupation shall be carried on by the residents of the dwelling and with no more than two (2) non-resident employees.
27.2.2. There shall be no external evidence of the operation of the home occupation so as to change the residential character of the dwelling or adversely affect the residential character of the surrounding neighborhood as to property value or health, safety and welfare, except that one sign which conforms with the applicable requirements of Section 12 of these Regulations shall be permitted.
27.2.3. The home occupation shall be contained wholly within the dwelling or a permitted accessory building. The total floor area used for the home occupation, whether conducted in the dwelling or a permitted accessory building, shall not exceed 25% of the total living area of the dwelling of 750 square feet, whichever is less.
27.2.4. The storage of goods, materials or products connected with a home occupation are prohibited outside of the dwelling or a permitted accessory building.
27.2.5. The home occupation shall not create offensive odors, noise, vibrations, light, electrical interference or other objectionable conditions which might adversely affect the residential character of the surrounding neighborhood as to property value or health, safety and welfare. There shall be no discharges of a hazardous or toxic substance to the air, surface water, groundwater or ground.
27.2.6. The home occupation shall not generate traffic which is substantially greater in volume than the traffic which would normally be expected in a residential neighborhood, and any need for parking generated by the conduct of the home occupation shall be met by off the street parking which does not encroach upon a required front yard and otherwise conforms to the applicable requirements of Section 11 of these Regulations. The Commission may require buffering or screening or designate the location of parking spaces associated with the home occupation. In no event shall a home occupation be approved if the traffic generated therewith or the parking required therefore shall adversely affect the residential character of the surrounding neighborhood as to property value or health, safety or welfare.
27.3. Application.
27.3.1. The application shall be submitted on a form provided by the Town with signature of the property owner and the applicant, who shall be a resident of the dwelling in which the home occupation is proposed to be conducted.
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 149
27.3.2. The application shall be accompanied by the applicable fee for the home occupation approval and, if required, by the applicable fee for the Special Exception approval.
27.3.3. The application shall be accompanied by:
a. a detailed description of the proposed home occupation, including any required machinery, equipment, materials, etc.
b. a floor plan of the dwelling or accessory building in which the proposed home occupation will be conducted indicating the area to be occupied by the proposed home occupation.
c. a description of the frequency and type of commercial vehicles and customer vehicles which will be associated with the home occupation.
d. return receipts from letters sent via certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, notifying abutting property owners of the application and the nature of the proposed home occupation.
e. such other information as may be reasonably required by the Planning and Zoning Commission to assist in the review of the application.
27.4. Approval Procedure. The home occupation shall require the approval of the Planning and Zoning Commission as a Special Exception in accordance with Section 14B of these Regulations; provided, however, that applications which meet the following criteria and otherwise comply with the requirements of this Section 27 may be approved by the Zoning Enforcement Officer upon the issuance of a Certificate of Zoning Compliance in accordance with Section 2.3 of these Regulations.
a. No business activity other than the use of a home office, business phone and mailing address is conducted on the premises.
b. The home occupation is conducted solely by residents of the dwelling.
c. There will be no increase in traffic beyond that normally and customarily expected from a single family residence.
d. The dwelling has existing parking sufficient to meet the requirements of Section 11 of these Regulations.
e. The proposed home occupation will not require any building, inland wetland, health or other land use permits, approvals or licenses of any federal, state or local governmental body.
27.5. Filing and Transfer. Any home occupation for which a Special Exception or Certificate of Zoning Compliance has been issued pursuant to this Section 27 shall not commence operation until a copy thereof, with all conditions, time of expiration, plans, and materials describing the nature and scope of the home occupation, have been filed in the Land Records of the Town of East Haddam. Any purchaser of such property shall be bound by the home occupation as previously approved, regardless of whether any particular restriction or description shall be on file in the Land Records, it being the duty of the purchaser to research the files of the Commission and the Zoning Enforcement Officer relative to the home occupation being purchased. It is also required by the purchaser to refile with the Land Use Office the intent to continue said approved home occupation prior to commencing such activity.
27.6. Expansion or Alteration. Any expansion or alteration of an approved home occupation shall require a new application for the approval of the expanded or altered home occupation in accordance with the requirements of this Section 27; provided, however, that the Planning and Zoning Commission may waive the requirement for a new application if it can be shown that the proposed expansion or alteration is in keeping with the original application and will not adversely affect the residential character of the surrounding neighborhood as to property value or health, safety and welfare. Any expansion or alteration approved under this subsection shall not become effective until such approval is filed in the Land Records of the Town of East Haddam in accordance with Section 27.5.
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 150
SECTION 28 - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
No subdivision of land or proposed land use shall alter natural watercourses, natural drainage and runoff areas or existing drainage and runoff areas unless suitable plans meeting the other requirements of these Regulations, certified by a professional engineer licensed in the State of Connecticut, are provided and approved by the Commission.
All cross culverts, detention basins, channels and ditches, driveway culverts and street drainage shall be designed in conformance with the Connecticut Department of Transportation Drainage Manual dated October 2000, as amended and the Connecticut Stormwater Quality Manual (CTDEEP) as amended. This requirement may be varied by the Commission according to conditions of the land and drainage requirements.
All necessary drainage easements shall be provided and shall extend a minimum of 10 feet around the drainage facility, except that easements for pipes shall be 20 feet wide and centered on the pipe.
28.1 Waivers for Providing Stormwater Management
The minimum requirements for stormwater management may be waived in whole or in part upon written request of the Applicant, provided that the Applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Commission that the immediately downstream watercourses will not be subject to:
a. Deterioration of existing culverts, bridges, dams, and other structures.
b. Deterioration of biological functions or habitat.
c. Accelerated streambank or streambed erosion or siltation.
d. Increased threat of flood damage to public health, life and property.
28.2 General Performance Criteria for Stormwater Management
Unless judged to be exempt or granted a waiver by the Commission, the following performance criteria shall be addressed for stormwater management at all sites:
a. All site designs shall establish stormwater management practices to control the peak flow rates of stormwater discharge associated with specified design storms and reduce the generation of stormwater. These practices should seek to utilize pervious areas for stormwater treatment and to infiltrate stormwater runoff from driveways, sidewalks, rooftops, parking lots, and landscaped areas to the maximum extent practical to provide treatment for both water quality and quantity. Infiltration of stormwater shall be accommodated to the extent possible though limitation of land disturbance and grade changes, retention of existing natural drainage area and wetlands, and use or creation of vegetated islands, vegetated medians, and vegetated perimeter buffer strips.
b. All stormwater runoff generated from new impervious surfaces or changed habitats in the development shall not discharge stormwater directly into an inland wetland or watercourse without adequate treatment. Drainage shall be designed such that all surface runoff (both piped and overland flow) is conveyed through a vegetated swale, vegetated filter strip, created wetlands, rain gardens, detention basins with bio-filtration prior, or acceptable engineered solutions to discharge into existing wetlands, streams, ponds, or other waterbodies.
c. Structural Best Management Practices (BMPs) shall be designed to remove 80 percent of the average annual post development total suspended solids load. It is presumed that a BMP complies with this performance standard if it is:
d. Sized to capture the prescribed water quality volume (WQV).
e. Designed according to the specific performance criteria outlined in the Connecticut Stormwater Quality Manual (CTDEEP).
f. Constructed properly.
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 151
28.3 Minimum Control Requirements
a. All stormwater management practices will be designed so that the specific storm frequency storage volumes (e.g., recharge, water quality, channel protection, 2, 10, 25, 100 year) as identified in the current Connecticut Stormwater Quality Manual (CTDEEP) are met, unless the Commission grants the applicant a waiver or the applicant is exempt from such requirements. Note especially the specific criteria related to channel protection and the use of multiple storm return frequencies, both cited in the Connecticut Stormwater Quality Manual (CTDEEP). The Connecticut Stormwater Quality Manuel Worksheet is attached in Appendix C of these regulations and shall be part of the subdivision or site plan submittal.
b. All stormwater management practices shall be designed to capture and treat stormwater runoff according to the specifications outlined in the Connecticut Stormwater Quality Manual (CTDEEP). These specifications will designate the water quantity and quality treatment criteria that apply to an approved stormwater management practice.
c. In addition, if hydrologic or topographic conditions warrant greater control than that provided by the minimum control requirements, the Commission reserves the right to impose any and all additional requirements deemed necessary to control runoff volume, timing, rate and treatment.
d. Applicants shall consult the Connecticut Stormwater Quality Manual (CTDEEP) for guidance on the factors that determine site design feasibility when selecting a stormwater management practice.
e. The Connecticut Stormwater Quality Manual (CTDEEP) shall be consulted for detailed guidance on the requirements for conveyance for each of the approved stormwater practices.
f. All stormwater management practices shall be designed to convey stormwater to allow for the maximum removal of pollutants and reduction in flow velocities. This shall include, but not be limited to:
i. Maximizing length of flow paths from inflow points to outflow points of basins, pools and ponds.
ii. Protection of inlet and outfall structures.
iii. Elimination of erosive flow velocities.
iv. Provision of underdrain systems, where applicable.
g. All stormwater management practices must have a landscaping plan detailing the vegetation to be planted. The use of native grasses and small diameter wood-stemmed shrubs is encouraged as plantings for all vegetated swales, vegetated filter strips, created wetlands, rain gardens, or detention basins with bio-filtration. From Section 11- Parking
h. The use of non-structural best management practices is encouraged in order to minimize the reliance on structural practices. Credit in the form of reductions in the amount of stormwater that must be managed can be earned through the use of non-structural practices that reduce the generation of stormwater from the site. These non-structural practices are explained in detail in the Connecticut Stormwater Quality Manual (CTDEEP) and applicants wishing to obtain credit for use of non-structural practices must ensure that these practices are documented and can reasonably be expected to remain maintenance-free and remain unaltered by subsequent property owners.
28.4 Stormwater Management Plan Requirements
The stormwater management plan shall include:
a. Calculations: Hydrologic and hydraulic design calculations for the pre-development and post-development conditions for the design storms specified in the Connecticut Stormwater Quality Manual (CTDEEP) (i.e., 2, 10, 25 & 100-yr storm). Such calculations shall include, at a minimum:
i. Description of the design storm frequency, intensity and duration,
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 152
ii. Time of concentration and travel time.
iii. Soil Curve Numbers or runoff coefficients.
iv. Peak runoff rates and total runoff volumes for each watershed area.
v. Infiltration rates, where applicable, as determined by field testing of hydraulic conductivity.
vi. Culvert capacities.
vii. Flow velocities.
viii. Data on the increase in rate and volume of runoff for the design storms referenced in the Connecticut Stormwater Quality Manual (CTDEEP).
ix. Water surface elevations showing methodologies used and supporting calculations.
xx. Stage-discharge curves, outlet rating curves and inflow and outflow hydrographs for storage facilities (e.g., stormwater ponds and wetlands).
xxi). Hydrologic and hydraulic analysis for all structural components of stormwater system (e.g., storm drains, open channels, swales, management practices, etc.) for applicable design storms including final analysis of potential downstream effects of project, where necessary.
xxii). Documentation of sources for all computation methods and field test results.
b. Soils Information: If a stormwater management control measure depends on the hydrologic properties of soils (e.g., infiltration basins), then a soils report must be submitted. The soils report must be based upon on-site boring logs or soil pit profiles. The number and location of required soil borings or soil sites must be determined based on what is needed to determine the suitability and distribution of soil types present at the location of the control measure. If infiltration is to be part of the stormwater management plan, then field testing of hydraulic conductivity is required may be required if determined necessary by the Commission’s engineer to evaluate the proposal.
c. Maintenance and Repair Plan: The design and planning of all stormwater management facilities shall include detailed maintenance and repair procedures to ensure their continued function. These plans will identify the parts or components of a stormwater management facility that need to be maintained and the equipment and skills or training necessary. All stormwater BMPs shall be designed in a manner to minimize the need for maintenance and reduce the chances of failure. Design and maintenance guidelines to be followed shall be in accordance with the most recent version of the Connecticut Stormwater Quality Manual (CTDEEP). From Section 11-Parking
The applicant shall demonstrate the failure pattern for any proposed BMP and shall ensure that such failure does not adversely impact adjacent structures or wetland systems. Surficial detention structures which include a construction embankment greater than one (1) foot in height shall be design to include emergency spillways and appropriate downstream erosion protection.
d. Landscaping plan: The applicant must present a detailed plan for planting of vegetation at the site after construction is finished.
e. Maps and plans: The applicant must depict the stormwater management on the supplemental plans (scale of 1" = 40' or greater detail). Such plans must illustrate, in addition to the mapping requirements cited in Section 3, at a minimum:
i. Perennial and intermittent streams.
ii. Location and boundaries of resource protection areas such as wetlands, lakes, ponds, and other setbacks (e.g., stream buffers, drinking water well setbacks, septic setbacks)
iii. Location of existing and proposed conveyance systems such as grass channels, swales, and storm drains.
iv. Flow paths.
v. Location of floodplain and floodway limits.
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 153
vi. Location and dimensions of proposed channel modifications, such as bridge or culvert crossings.
vii. Location, size, maintenance access, and limits of disturbance of proposed structural stormwater management practices.
viii. Representative cross-section and profile drawings and details of structural stormwater management practices and conveyances (i.e., storm drains, open channels, swales, etc.) which include existing and proposed structural elevations (e.g., invert of pipes, manholes, etc.) and design water surface elevations.
ix. Structural details of outlet structures, embankments, spillways, stilling basins, grade control structures, conveyance channels, etc.
x. Downstream structures within two-hundred (200) feet of proposed BMP. The Commission shall have the right to increase the separation distance from the downstream structure if the proposed BMP structure, in the opinion of the Town’s engineer, poses a significant risk.
28.5 Assumptions Made
All Stormwater Management plans shall disclose all assumptions made in regard to future land clearing and regrading, creation of impervious surfaces, and other development activities that influence the rate, quality and volume of runoff. These include, but are not necessarily limited to, clearing limits, size and locations of driveways, houses, tennis courts, barns, pools, etc. The Commission may require the establishment of restrictions on one or more lots in situations where limits to such characteristics of lot development cannot be accurately predicted and enforced in advance; provided, however, that the Commission has no obligation to accept land use restrictions as mitigation to potential drainage issues. Restrictions should be used only in unique situations and in areas where such restrictions are clearly enforceable.
28.6 Maintenance plan:
The applicant must submit a maintenance plan for all Stormwater BMPs. The plan must include:
a. Description of maintenance tasks with recommended implementation schedule.
b. Description of access and safety issues.
c. For those small individual stormwater management facilities that are to be maintained by future property owners, the mylars, as-builts, and deeds must include this notice that a declaration of responsibilities and obligations will be filed on the land records as part of the subdivision approval. See Appendix D for the declaration language.
* This note is to be part of the mylar for the subdivision plans, Site Plans, and Special Exception plans, as-builts for each structure prior to Certificate of Zoning Compliance, and on each deed associated with the transfer of the property.
*The stormwater management structure maintenance is the responsibility of the property owner. A Stormwater Treatment Facility Maintenance Declaration has to be filed on the East Haddam Land Records as part of the approval. The individual lots of this subdivision have engineered stormwater facilities that are to be installed prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Zoning Compliance. The stormwater facilities are designed to manage quantity and quality of stormwater before the water leaves the property. It is the responsibility of the property owner to maintain these facilities to insure they function properly. At a minimum they are to be maintained every five years and at the time of resale. Maintenance guidelines as to how to maintain the stormwater facility are included as part of the subdivision or site plan, can be found in the Connecticut Stormwater Quality Manual (CTDEEP) as amended, or the Land Use Office can be asked for guidance.
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 154
APPENDIX I
AMENDMENTS - Contact East Haddam Planning and Zoning Office for updated Amendment Sheet.
Revision Dates
June 8, 1992
March 22, 1993
June 1, 1995
November 15, 1995
January 6, 1996
January 23, 1996
April 1, 1997
July 8, 1997
August 1, 1997
January 13, 1998
March 10, 1998
April 2, 1998
January 26, 1999
October 1, 1999
Merger - Section 8, Moodus Village B/C/IG November 23, 1999
Section 22 -Tower Regulations February 8, 2000
Section 17.4 Special Standards for Planned Residential Unit Dev. January 15, 2001
Zoning Regulations - Approved changes April 15, 2001
Industrial General (IG) Approved changes October 1, 2002
Section 5 Definitions October 1, 2002
Section 7 General Requirements October 1, 2002
Section 10 Schedule of Lots and Buildings October 1, 2002
Section 5 Definitions September 13, 2003
Section 10 Minimum Buildable Land Requirements September 13, 2003
Section 10 Removal of interior lots September 13, 2003
Section 23 Conservation Subdivision September 13, 2003
Section 5 & 10 Building Height April 27, 2004
Section 5 Definitions February 1, 2005
Section 9 East Haddam Village District February 1, 2005
Section 11 Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements February 1, 2005
Section 17 Floating Zones add Section 17.7 February 1, 2005
Appendix VI February 1, 2005
Revised Map – East Haddam Village District February 1, 2005
Revised Map – East Haddam IG-5 February 22, 2005
Section 2.3, 2.6, 14.B.1 - Uses and changes of Special exception approvals, November 1, 2006
Section 5 Definitions - additions and revisions of definitions November 1, 2006
Section 6 Separate sections for Lake and River to Lake - November 1, 2006
Section 9.4 Separated sections for Lake and River L & R November 1, 2006
Section 9.5 East Haddam Village District November 1, 2006
Section 9.5.3, Section 9.5.4, Section 9.5.6, & Section 9.5.7, November 1, 2006
Section 9.5 East Haddam Village District - replace the word "delegates" November 1, 2006
Section 9.7.3.9 Include the following to the sub-zone; November 1, 2006
Retail of Crafts and Products Associated with East Haddam’s Traditional Agricultural Heritage Arts
and Crafts Galleries November 1, 2006
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 155
Section 9 Conservation Zone per the Gateway Standards - November 1, 2006
Section 10.1.4.1 Separated sections for Lake and River - L & R – November 1, 2006
Building height, removal of the River Zone November 1, 2006
Section 10.1 included 100 foot setback per the Gateway Standards November 1, 2006
Section 10.1.3 include 100 foot setback from larger streams and 50 feet from November 1, 2006
smaller headwater streams in the Eightmile River Watershed.
Section 10.2.3.2.a Clarify language that twice the acreage for interior lots. November 1, 2006
Section 11.2 Handicap parking - define the size of a parking area. November 1, 2006
Section 12 Signs changes November 1, 2006
Section 14A - Require Class A-2/T-2 maps for site plans. November 1, 2006
Section 14B - Require tree caliper be measured at the base November 1, 2006
Section 18 - Special Flood Hazard Regulations August 26, 2008
Section 25 - Collection and Storage of Junk Material, Abandoned Vehicles, June 23, 2009
and Debris
Section 10.1.h Interior lots –– creation of interior lots to allow flexibility in site design. April 1, 2011
Section 14A.3.G. Requirement for filling of test pits. April 1, 2011
Section 9 Permitted Uses Special Exception Review for 2, 3, and 4 family dwellings April 1, 2011
Section 10.2 Accessory Units Redefine accessory units April 1, 2011
Section 5 Definitions, Section 7 Seasonal Use Language and extension of time April 1, 2011
Section 8.1.5 Merger of lots separated by street April 1, 2011
Section 21 for the Regulation of Outdoor wood burning furnaces. April 1, 2011
Section 15 Campgrounds and Recreational Camps – Section 5, Section 7 April 1, 2011
Section 12 Signs September 2011
Section 10.4.2 Alternative Soil Based Lot Review November 12, 2013
Section 5 Definitions and Section 9 – Agricultural definitions & uses April 2016
Section 9.7, 9.10, 14B.1 – Exception for roof mounted solar panels May 12, 2015
Section 29 Mobile Food Unit Regulation May 12, 2015
Section 5 Definitions & 9.5 EHVD – add Hotels August 9, 2016
Section 28 Stormwater Management August 9, 2016
Section 14A & 14B Stormwater Management changes August 9, 2016
Section 11 Parking – Stormwater Management Changes August 9, 2016
Section 9.7 & Section 10 IG Districts reduced September 13, 2016
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 156
APPENDIX II. LAND WITH LIMITATIONS FOR DEVELOPMENT
Soils referenced in the subdivision regulations, references are made in the Planning and Zoning regulations in these sections: 14A.2B.2, 17.3.10a, and 17.3.10b.
1). No land shall be subdivided for building purposes which consists of soil types designated as very poorly drained, which have very significant limitations, significant limitations of steep slopes for on-site absorption sewerage disposal facilities, said soils designated by the U.S. Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service and the National Resources Center, as may be amended from time to time and listed in (a) and (b) below.
a. Soil not suitable for the installation of septic tank absorption fields.
The soils that are categorized as being not suitable for the installation of septic tank absorption fields have been so, primarily because they are either inland wetlands or have a shallow depth to bedrock. Other limiting factors include year round and seasonal high water tables, frequent flooding and ponding, very slow permeability to substratum, steep slopes, rock outcrops, and in some cases the possible pollution of ground water.
Aa Adrian muck
BcA Berlin silt loam, 0 to 5 percent slopes
Ce Carlisle muck
HSE Hollis-Rock outcrop complex, 15 to 40 percent slopes
HyC Holyoke-Rock outcrop complex, 3 to 15 percent slopes
HZE Holyoke-Rock outcrop complex, 15 to 40 percent slopes
LG Leicester, Ridgebury and Whitman extremely stone fine sandy loam
Ps Poduck fine sandy loam
Rb Raypol silt loam
Ru Rumney fine sandy loam
Rv Rumney Variant silt loam
Sb Saco silt loam
Sc Scarboro mucky loamy fine sand
St Suncook loamy sand
Wd Walpole sandy loam
We Westbrook mucky peat
Wh Westbrook mucky peat, low salt
Wr Wilbraham silt loam
Wt Wilbraham extremely stony silt loam
b. Soils with significant limitations for the installation of septic tank absorption fields.
The soils that are categorized as having significant limitations for the installation of septic tank absorption fields are limited by steep slopes (15-45%), seasonal high water table, stoniness, shallow depth to bedrock and slow to very slow permeability to substratum. Within each major soil grouping, there may be found, upon field investigation “pockets” of soils with sight to moderate limitations. Due to the varied range of slope in each unit (15-45%), there may be areas where the slope is acceptable. With careful testing, design and installation, a septic system can be successfully constructed subject to the provisions of the State Health Code.
CdD Canton and Charlton extremely stony fine sandy loam, 15 to 35 percent slopes
EfA Ellington fine sandy loam, 0 to 5 percent slopes
HrC Hinckley gravely sandy loam, 3 to 5 percent slopes
HME Hickley and Manchester soils, 15 to 45 percent slopes
HuD Holyoke-Cheshire very stony silt loams, 15 to 35 percent slopes
LpA Ludlow silt loam, 0 to 3 percent slopes
LpB Ludlow silt loam, 3 to 8 percent slopes
LuB Ludlow very stony silt loam, 3 to 8 percent slopes
LvC Ludlow extremely stony silt loam, 3 to 15 percent slopes
NnA Ninigret fine sandy loam, 0 to 5 percent slopes
PeD paxton and montauk extremely stony fine sandy loams, 15 to 35 percent slopes
SgA Sudbury sandy loam, 0 to 5 percent slopes
WkD Wethersfield loam 15 to 35 percent slopes
WXA Woodbridge fine sandy loam, 0 to 3 percent slopes
WxB Woodbridge fine sandy loam, 3 to 8 percent slopes
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 157
WyA Woodbridge very stony fine sandy loam, 0 to 3 percent slopes
WyB Woodbridge very stony fine sandy loam, 3 to 8 percent slopes
WzA Woodbridge extremely stony fine sandy loam, 0 to 3 percent slopes
WzC Woodbridge extremely stony fine sandy loam, 3 to 15 percent slopes
YaB Yalesville fine sandy loam, 3 to 8 percent slopes
YaC Yalesville fine sandy loam, 3 to 8 percent slopes
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 158
Appendix III Invasive Plant Lists
Invasive Plants in Connecticut, listed as of 2004 by the Connecticut Invasive Plants Council (as authorized by CT Public Act 03-136). Nothing listed below as invasive or potentially invasive should be planted in the Watershed Overlay District. This list is also available from the Invasive Plant Atlas of New England, University of Connecticut, at http://invasives.eeb.uconn.edu/ipane/ctcouncil/CT_Invasive_Plant_List.htm
or the USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service at http://www.ct.nrcs.usda.gov/plants.html.
AQUATIC & WETLAND PLANTS
Species
Common name
Invasive
Potentially Invasive
Butomus umbellatus L.
Flowering rush
X
Cabomba caroliniana A. Gray
Fanwort
X
Callitriche stagnalis Scop.
Pond water-starwort
X
Egeria densa Planchon
Brazilian water-weed
X
†Eichhornia crassipes (Mart.) Solms
Common water-hyacinth
X
Hydrilla verticillata (L.f.) Royle
Hydrilla
X
Iris pseudacorus L.
Yellow Iris
X
Lythrum salicaria L.
Purple loosestrife
X
Marsilea quadrifolia L.
European waterclover
X
Myosotis scorpioides L.
Forget-me-not
X
Myriophyllum aquaticum (Vell.) Verdc.
Parrotfeather
X
Myriophyllum heterophyllum Michx.
Variable-leaf watermilfoil
X
Myriophyllum spicatum L.
Eurasian watermilfoil
X
Najas minor All.
Brittle water-nymph
X
Nelumbo lutea (Willd.) Pers.
American water lotus
X
†Nymphoides peltata (Gmel.) Kuntze
Yellow floating heart
X
†Pistia stratiotes L.
Water lettuce
X
Potamogeton crispus L.
Crispy-leaved pondweed
X
Rorippa microphylla (Boenn. ex Reichenb.) Hyl. ex A. & D. Löve
Onerow yellowcress
X
Rorippa nasturtium-aquaticum (L.) Hayek
Watercress
X
†Salvinia molesta Mitchell complex
Giant salvinia
X
Trapa natans L.
Water chestnut
X
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 159
TREES
Species
Common name
Invasive
Potentially Invasive
Acer ginnala L.
Amur maple
X
*Acer platanoides L.
Norway maple
X
Acer pseudoplatanus L.
Sycamore maple
X
Ailanthus altissima (Mill.) Swingle
Tree of heaven
X
Paulownia tomentosa (Thunb.) Steudel
Princess tree
X
Populus alba L.
White poplar
X
*Robinia pseudo-acacia L.
Black locust
X
SHRUBS
Species
Common name
Invasive
Potentially Invasive
Amorpha fruticosa L.
False indigo
X
*Berberis thunbergii DC.
Japanese barberry
X
Berberis vulgaris L.
Common barberry
X
Elaeagnus angustifolia L.
Russian olive
X
Elaeagnus umbellata Thunb.
Autumn olive
X
*Euonymus alatus (Thunb.) Sieb.
Winged euonymus
X
Frangula alnus Mill.
Glossy buckthorn
X
Ligustrum obtusifolium Sieb. & Zucc.
Border privet
X
Ligustrum ovalifolium Hassk.
California privet
X
Ligustrum vulgare L.
European privet
X
Lonicera ×bella Zabel
Bell's honeysuckle
X
Lonicera maackii (Rupr.) Maxim.
Amur honeysuckle
X
Lonicera morrowii A. Gray
Morrow's honeysuckle
X
Lonicera tatarica L.
Tatarian honeysuckle
X
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 160
†Lonicera xylosteum L.
Dwarf honeysuckle
X
Rhamnus cathartica L.
Common buckthorn
X
Rosa multiflora Thunb.
Multiflora rose
X
*Rosa rugosa Thunb.
Rugosa rose
X
Rubus phoenicolasius Maxim.
Wineberry
X
WOODY VINES
Species
Common name
Invasive
Potentially Invasive
*Ampelopsis brevipedunculata (Maxim.) Trautv.
Porcelainberry
X
Celastrus orbiculatus Thunb.
Oriental bittersweet
X
*Lonicera japonica Thunb.
Japanese honeysuckle
X
Pueraria montana (Lour.) Merr.
Kudzu
X
HERBACEOUS PLANTS
Species
Common name
Invasive
Potentially Invasive
Aegopodium podagraria L.
Goutweed
X
Alliaria petiolata (Bieb.) Cavara & Grande
Garlic mustard
X
Cardamine impatiens L.
Narrowleaf bittercress
X
Centaurea biebersteinii DC.
Spotted knapweed
X
Cirsium arvense (L.) Scop.
Canada thistle
X
Cynanchum louiseae Kartesz & Gandhi
Black swallow-wort
X
Cynanchum rossicum (Kleo.) Borhidi
Pale swallow-wort
X
Datura stramonium L.
Jimsonweed
X
Elsholtzia ciliata (Thunb.) Hylander
Crested late-summer mint
X
Euphorbia cyparissias L.
Cypress spurge
X
Euphorbia esula L.
Leafy spurge
X
Froelichia gracilis (Hook.) Moq.
Slender snake cotton
X
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 161
Glechoma hederacea L.
Ground ivy
X
Heracleum mantegazzianum Sommier & Lavier
Giant hogweed
X
Hesperis matronalis L.
Dame's rocket
X
Humulus japonicus Sieb. & Zucc.
Japanese hops
X
†Impatiens glandulifera Royle
Ornamental jewelweed
X
Kochia scoparia (L.) Schrader
Common kochia
X
Lepidium latifolium L.
Perennial pepperweed
X
Lychnis flos-cuculi L.
Ragged robin
X
*Lysimachia nummularia L.
Moneywort
X
*Lysimachia vulgaris L.
Garden loosestrife
X
Onopordum acanthium L.
Scotch thistle
X
Ornithogalum umbellatum L.
Star-of-Bethlehem
X
Polygonum caespitosum Blume
Bristled knotweed
X
Polygonum cuspidatum Sieb. & Zucc.
Japanese knotweed
X
Polygonum perfoliatum L.
Mile-a-minute vine
X
Polygonum sachalinense F. Schmidt ex Maxim.
Giant knotweed
X
Ranunculus ficaria L.
Fig buttercup
X
Rumex acetosella L.
Sheep sorrel
X
†Senecio jacobaea L.
Tansy ragwort
X
Silphium perfoliatum L.
Cup plant
X
Solanum dulcamara L.
Bittersweet nightshade
X
Tussilago farfara L.
Coltsfoot
X
Valeriana officinalis L.
Garden heliotrope
X
GRASSES AND GRASS-LIKE PLANTS
Species
Common name
Invasive
Potentially Invasive
Arthraxon hispidus (Thunb.) Makino
Hairy jointgrass
X
Bromus tectorum L.
Drooping brome-grass
X
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 162
†Carex kobomugi Owhi
Japanese sedge
X
Glyceria maxima (Hartman) Holmburg
Reed mannagrass
X
Microstegium vimineum (Trin.) A. Camus
Japanese stilt grass
X
*Miscanthus sinensis Anderss.
Eulalia
X
Phalaris arundinacea L.
Reed canary grass
X
Phragmites australis (Cav.) Trin.
Common reed
X
Poa compressa L.
Canada bluegrass
X
? An asterisk (*) denotes that the species, although shown by scientific evaluation to be invasive, has cultivars that have not been evaluated for invasive characteristics. Further research may determine whether or not individual cultivars are potentially invasive. Cultivars are commercially available selections of a plant species that have been bred or selected for predictable, desirable attributes of horticultural value such as form (dwarf or weeping forms), foliage (variegated or colorful leaves), or flowering attributes (enhanced flower color or size).
† A dagger (†) indicates species that are not currently known to be naturalized in Connecticut but would likely become invasive here if they are found to persist in the state without cultivation.
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 163
Appendix IV Recommended native plants for Connecticut
[The following list is an example of what could be listed in this section. It comes from the more detailed 2004 Connecticut Stormwater Quality Manual – Appendix A, and is meant as a general guidance for trees that are appropriate to be planted in the riparian fringe. It is available online at http://dep.state.ct.us/wtr/stormwater/manual/Apx_A_Plant_List.pdf ]
Trees and Shrubs
Scientific Name
Common Name
Acer rubrum
Red Maple
Alnus rugosa
Speckled Alder
Alnus serrulata
Smooth Alder
Amelanchier canadensis
Serviceberry
Betula nigra
River Birch
Cepahlanthus occidentalis
Buttonbush
Cornus amomum
Silky Dogwood
Fraxinus nigra
Black ash
Fraxinus pennsylvania
Green Ash
Hamamelis virginiana
Witch Hazel
Ilex verticillata
Winterberry
Juniperus viginiana
Eastern Red Cedar
Latrix latricina
Larch, Tamarack
Lindera benzoin
Common Spice Bush
Liriodendron tulipfera
Tulip Poplar
Myrica pensulvatica
Bayberry
Nyssa sylvatica
Blackgum
Platanus occidentalis
Sycamore
Populus deltoides
Eastern Cottonwood
Quercus bicolor
Swamp White Oak
Quercus palustris
Pin Oak
Rosa palustrus
Swamp Rose
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 164
Salix nigra
Black Willow
Sambucus canadensis
Elderberry
Ulmus americana
American Elm
Ulnus rubra
Slippery Elm
Viburnum dentatum
Arrowwood Viburnum
Herbaceous Plants
Scientific Name
Common Name
Andropogon gerardi
Big Bluestem
Lotus corniculatrus
Birdfoot deervetch
Verbena hastata
Blue Vervain
Eupatorium perfoliatum
Boneset
Calamagrotis canadensis
Blue Joint
Lobelia cardinalis
Cardinal flower
Cyperus esculentus
Chufa
Poa palustris
Fowl Bluegrass
Glyceria striata
Fowl mannagrass
Scirpus atrovirens
Green Bulrush
Agrostis alba
Redtop
Carex spp.
Sedges
Polygonum spp.
Smartweed
Juncus effusus
Soft rush
Eupatorium maculatum
Spotted Joe-pye weed
Aster puniceus
Swamp Aster
Panicum virgatum
Switchgrass
Alisma plantago-aquatica
Water plantain
Elymus spp.
Wild-rye
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 165
Appendix V
5.04 FUNCTIONAL ROAD CLASSIFICATION: FOR EXISTING AND PROPOSED ROADS:
1. ARTERIAL: Route 82 –Norwich Road, Town Street, Norwich-Salem Road, Route 149 – Main Street, Moodus - East Haddam Road, Falls Road, Sipples Hill Road -, Route 151 -Moodus – Leesville Road, Plains Road, Town Street, [Route 148], Route 156 – Hamburg Road, Route 434- Mt Parnassus Road, Millington Road, Hopyard Road, Route 431 - River Road, and Route 609 – Leesville Road.
2. COLLECTOR: East Haddam-Colchester Turnpike, Tater Hill Road, Clark Hill Road, Smith Road, Falls Bashan Road, North Moodus Road, (junction of Sillmanville Road to Route 149), Landing Hill Road, and Haywardville Road.
3. RESIDENTIAL: Overlook Road, O'Connell Road, O’Connell Road Extension, Palmer Martin Road, A.P. Gates Road, Ackley Cemetery Road, Ackley Road, Alexander Road, Alger Road, Algonquin Trail, Andrews Road, Apple Lane, Babcock Road, Baker Lane, Baker Road, Ballahack Road, Banner Road, Banning Road, Barberry Lane, Beebe Road, Boardman Road, Bogel Road, Bogue Lane, Bone Mill Road, Bonfoey Road, Briarcliffe Road, Brooke Hill Road, Broom Road, Cantrall Road, Casner Road, Cedar Meadow Road, Cherry Swamp Road, Clark Hill Road, Cold Spring Road, Commerce Drive, Cove Road, Cragmere Road, Creamery Road, Creek Row, Cross Road, Daniel Peck Road, Daniels Road, Davison Road, Day Hill Road, Deer Run, Desmond Road, Dock Rock, Dolbia Hill Road, Early Road, East Lane, East Shore Drive, Echo Farm Road, Ed Williams, Road, Eli Chapman Road, Essex Turnpike, Fay Drive, Florida Road, Forest Way, Foxtown Cemetery Road, Geoffrey Road, Great Hillwood Road, Gristmill Road, Hall Kilbourne Road, Hedlund Road, Helon Cone Road, Hem Street, Hemlock Valley Road, Heritage Brooke Road, Highland Avenue, Hillside Road, Hilltop Road, Honey Hill Road, Hungerford Road, Joe Williams Road, Johnsonville Road, Jones Hill Road, Juda Lane, Lake Shore Drive, Lakeside Drive, Landing Hill Road, Launching Area Road, Laurel Lane, Long Pasture Lane, Longwood Drive, Lookout Drive, Lori lane, Lumberyard Road, Maple Avenue, Matthews Drive, Mill Road, Millington Road, Mitchell Road, Mott Lane, Neptune Avenue, Newberry Loop, Newberry Road, Nichols Road, Old East Haddam Road, Old Kentwood Road, Old Millington Road, Old Mt Parnassus Road, Old Orchard Road, Old Town Street, Olde Field Drive, Olmsted Road, Oriole Road, Parker Road, Petticoat Lane, Phelps Road, Porges Road, Powerhouse Road, Ray Hill Road, Ray Palmer Road, Red Mill Lane, Ridge Road, Ridgebury, Ridgewood Road, Ridgewood Road Extension, Robbie Road, Salem Road, Schulman Veselak, School Road, Scoville Landing, Shanaghan Road, Sheepskin Hollow, Silas Holmes, Sillmanville Road, Sims Lane Sims Road, Southwinds Road, Starr Road, Stockburger Road, Stocking Lot Road, Stony Brook Drive, Sunset Road, Tater Hill Road, Three Bridges Road, Town Farm Road, Town Road, Trowbridge Road, Valley Brook Road, Warner Road, West Cove Road, West Road, Westwood Road, Whip-O-Whill Terrace, Whitewood Road, Wickham Road, Wigwam Road, Wildwood Road, William F. Palmer Road, Wocl Road, Woodmont Circle.
4. LAKE: Bashan Lake: Abbe Lane, Bailey Road, Fieldstone Drive, Lakeside Drive (Sunset Acres), Laurel Cove Road, Laurel Cove Beach Road, Overlook Road, Wildwood Association (off Smith Road). Lake Hayward: Briarcliff Road, Cragmere Road, East Lane, East Shore Drive, Forest Way, Glimmer Glen, Hayfield Road, Hillside Road, Hungerford Road East, Lake Shore Drive, Laurel Lane, Longwood Drive, Lookout Drive, Ridgewood Road, Ridgewood Road Extension, Sunset Road, Wildwood Road. Moodus Reservoir, Moodus Lake Shore, Inc. (off of East Haddam Colchester Turnpike): Beach Road, Berry Road, Birch Road, Britain Road, Emily Road, Geronimo Road, Grama Road, Hilltop Road, Mabel Road, Oak Road, Pine Road, Paula Road, Rock Road, Shady Road, Short Road, Steven Road, Swamp Road, Tom Road, Ward Road. Moodus Reservoir, Shore Acres (off East Haddam Colchester Turnpike): Beech Tree Avenue, Dorothy Street, Launching Area Road, Oak Tree Avenue, Shore Road, Stanley Avenue. Moodus Reservoir, Moodus Estates (Sipples Estates): Clearview Road, Dock Road, Dogwood Road, Knoll Road, Lakeview Road, Old Acres Road, Park Road, Short Road, Triangle Road. Moodus Reservoir, Moodus Estates (off Falls Bashan Road): Blue Heron Lane, Briarwood Road, Goose Lane, Grandview Road, Lakeview Road, Laurel Road, Park Drive, Pine Tree Road, Sands Road, Sunny Heights Road, White Sands Road, Woodland Road.
u/z/p&z/Regs/2016 166
4. PRIVATE: All streets not listed above.
5. SCENIC: An Arterial, Collector, Residential or Unclassified road which has also been designated as a scenic road by applicable Connecticut State Statute and Town Ordinance.
6. UNCLASSIFIED: Any existing streets which are not listed above shall be classified by the Commission as Arterial, Collector, Residential or Private, or, if not a road, as a driveway or common driveway, based on a review of the Plan of Development and consultation with the Board of Selectmen. The Commission may, in its discretion, hold a public hearing to solicit such information, or may defer any classification until the completion of pending or potential adjudication by a court of competent jurisdiction. Classification of proposed streets shall be in accordance with the criteria of Section 5.05 of these

1
EAST HADDAM SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
TABLE OF CONTENTS PAGE
SECTION 1 - INTENT 3
1.01 Authority 3
1.02 Purpose 3
1.03 Effective Date 3
1.04 Amendments 3
1.05 Validity, Enacting Clause, Short Title, and Repeal 3
1.06 Conformity to Zoning Regulation 4
1.07 Enforcement 4
1.08 Indemnification of Town and Commission 4
1.09 Penalties 4
1.10 Adoption of a Temporary Moratorium 5
SECTION 2 – DEFINITIONS 6
SECTION 3 - SUBDIVISION PROCEDURES AND APPLICATION 12
3.01 Requirement of Approval of Subdivision Plan 12
3.02 General Principles of Land Subdivision 12
3.03 Preliminary Layouts - Conventional and Conservation Subdivisions 14
3.04 Final Subdivision Application 15
3.05 Plan for Record Subdivision - Map Criteria 18
SECTION 4 - GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 22
4.01 Soil and Erosion Control Plan for Land Development 22
4.02 Stormwater Management 25
4.03 Land with Limitations 28
4.04 Certification by a Sanitarian 29
4.05 Reserve Parcels 30
4.06 Minimum Buildable Land Requirements 30
4.07 Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Commission 32
4.08 Passive Solar Energy Techniques 32
4.09 Open Spaces and Recreation Areas 32
4.10 Streambelt Reservation 35
4.11 Groundwater Management Plan 35
4.12 Field Review by Commission 35
4.13 Affordable Housing Requirements 35
4.14 Trees, Soil, Removal and Roads 35
4.15 Pedestrian Walkways, Bikeways, and Trails 36
4.16 Sites of Archaeological Significance 36
4.17 Stone Walls and Foundations 37
4.18 Rural, Residential, & Agriculture Buffer Areas 37
4.19 Fire Protection 38
4.20 Notice Requirements 39
SECTION 5 - SUBDIVISION ROAD STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS 40
5.01 Purpose and Authority 40
5.02 Description 40
5.03 Road Design and Construction Process 40
5.04 Functional Road Classification; For Existing and Proposed Roads 41
5.05 Classification Factors 42
5.06 Development Situation – Improvement to Existing Roads 43
5.07 Development Situation – Construction of New Public Roads 45
5.08 Development Situation – Construction of New Private Roads 46
2
TABLE OF CONTENTS PAGE
5.09 Inspection 47
5.10 New Street Specifications 48
5.11 Driveway Design Criteria 51
SECTION 6 - INSURANCE, BOND REQUIREMENTS, 54
CERTIFICATE OF USE, BOND RELEASE, AND STANDARD
AGREEMENT FOR INSTALLATION OF IMPROVEMENTS
6.01 Insurance 54
6.02 Performance Bond 54
6.03 Building Permit / Certificate of Occupancy 55
6.04 Bond Release 55
6.05 Agreement for Installation of Improvements 56
6.06 Definition of Improvements 56
SECTION 7 – WAIVER 56
SECTION 8 - AMENDED SUBDIVISION 56
APPENDIX A REVISIONS 57
APPENDIX B EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL CHECKLIST 58
APPENDIX C CONNECTICUT STORMWATER QUALITY MANUEL WORKSHEET 61
APPENDIX D STORMWATER MAINTAINANCE DECLARATION 74
APPENDIX E SOILS CLASSIFICATION 76
APPENDIX F ROAD, DRIVEWAY, AND SIDEWALK DETAILS - PLATES 1- 9 82
3
SECTION 1 - INTENT
SECTION 1.01 AUTHORITY
These regulations are adopted pursuant to the authority conferred by Chapter 126 of the General Statutes of Connecticut as amended, to the provisions of the State Health Code, as amended, to the provisions of the subdivision regulations, as amended, and to the zoning regulations of the Town of East Haddam, as amended.
SECTION 1.02 - PURPOSE
a) These Regulations are adopted pursuant to the authority granted in Chapter 126, Section 13a-71 of Chapter 238, and Section 7-120 of Chapter 97, of the General Statutes of the State of Connecticut, as amended. It is declared to be the policy of the Commission to consider land subdivision as part of a plan for the orderly, efficient and economical development of the Town so as to further the general welfare and prosperity of its people. Accordingly, it is the purpose of these Regulations to insure that: Land to be subdivided shall be of such character that it can be used for building purposes without danger to health or the public safety; proper provision shall be made for water supply, surface drainage and sanitary sewerage, and in areas contiguous to brooks, rivers or other bodies of water subject to flooding, proper provision shall be made for protective flood control measures; proposed roads shall be in harmony with existing or proposed principal thoroughfares shown in the Plan of Development as the same may be amended from time to time, especially with regard to safe intersections with such thoroughfares, and proposed roads shall be so arranged and of such width as to provide an adequate and convenient system for present and prospective traffic needs, and roads and driveways shall provide adequate access to properties for fire-fighting apparatus and other emergency services; when and in places deemed proper by the Commission open spaces for parks and playgrounds shall be shown on the subdivision plan; proper provision shall be made for soil erosion and sediment control pursuant to Section 22a-329 of the General Statutes of the State of Connecticut; provisions shall be made for energy-efficient patterns of development and land use, the use of solar and other renewable forms of energy, and energy conservation.
b) These Regulations are not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other ordinance, regulation, or other provision of law, or any easement, covenant, or other private agreement or legal relationship. With regard to any easement, covenant, or other private agreement or legal relationship, however, it is not the purpose of these Regulations to interfere with, resolve, or arbitrate any private civil dispute. When these Regulations impose restrictions different from those imposed by any other statute, ordinance, or other requirement imposed by any level of government, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher standards, shall control.
SECTION 1.03 EFFECTIVE DATE
Subdivision regulations for the Town of East Haddam were first adopted in September, 1960. The current regulations are effective September 13, 2003.
SECTION 1.04 AMENDMENTS
These regulations may be amended by the Commission at a meeting called for that purpose. However, no such amendment shall become effective until after a public hearing has been held in accordance with the General Statutes of Connecticut, as amended. No subdivision or resubdivision plan that has been approved by the Commission prior to the effective date of an amendment to these regulations, and that has been filed or recorded with the Town Clerk shall be required to conform to such amendment until a period of five years from the effective date of such amendment has elapsed.
SECTION 1.05 VALIDITY ENACTING CLAUSE, SHORT TITLE AND REPEAL
The East Haddam Planning and Zoning Commission acting under authority of the General Statutes of the State of Connecticut, hereby adopts and enacts these Regulations as the "Subdivision Regulations of the Town of East Haddam”. The provisions of the Subdivision Regulations heretofore in force and any amendments thereof, so far as they are the same as in these Regulations, are to be deemed continued and not as new enactments. Any and all provisions of said Regulations as originally enacted which are inconsistent with the provisions of these Regulations are hereby repealed, but this shall not affect any violations thereof already existing or any penalty incurred and the same may be prosecuted as if these Regulations had not been adopted. If any section, subsection, sentence, or phrase of these subdivision regulations is ruled invalid or unconstitutional, for any reason, by a decree or decision, or by any court of competent jurisdiction shall not affect or impair the validity of any other section or remaining portions of these regulations.
4
SECTION 1.06 CONFORMITY TO ZONING REGULATIONS
All subdivision plans shall conform to the East Haddam Zoning Regulations in effect at the time of receipt of the Subdivision Application.
SECTION 1.07 ENFORCEMENT
The Commission may designate an individual to serve as the Enforcement Officer to enforce the provisions of these Regulations. The Enforcement Officer may cause any place, premises, or work to be inspected or examined; order the cessation of any work when any condition is found to violate these regulations; and order the remedy of any such condition. The Commission may institute an action or proceeding to prevent or restrain any such work, or to correct or abate any such condition. In addition to any civil or criminal penalties or other remedies as may be provided by law, a violation of these regulations may be enforced by mandatory or other injunctive relief.
SECTION 1.08 INDEMNIFICATION OF TOWN AND COMMISSION
Although these regulations authorize and empower public officials and their designees to inspect premises and work in progress or completed, and to order cessation and re-execution of work where work does not conform to the provisions of these regulations; nothing in these regulations is intended to require any work to be performed under the supervision, direction, or control of the Town, the Commission, or any of their designees; and none of them shall be responsible for any work means, methods, controls, techniques, sequences, procedures, or for construction safety. Each applicant and/or owner of land who consents to an application, as outlined in these regulations, shall be deemed to agree, by making or consenting to such application, to indemnify and hold harmless the Town, the Commission, and authorized representatives, acting within the scope of authority vested by these regulations, from all claims, demands, and liability for any and all personal injuries, damages, losses, and expenses, of whatever kind and nature incurred by any person arising out of or in connection with the performance, correction, re-execution, cessation, or any related delays of work that is part of the subdivision plan approved under these regulations.
SECTION 1.09 PENALTY FOR FAILURE TO COMPLY
a. Failure to Obtain Subdivision Approval. In accordance with Connecticut General Statutes Section 8-25, any person, firm, corporation, partnership or association making the subdivision or re-subdivision of land without approval of the Commission shall be liable to a fine of Five Hundred ($500.00) Dollars for each lot sold or offered for sale. In the event that any subdivider shall violate these Regulations, or the conditions or requirements of any subdivision approved hereunder, the Commission may, following a public hearing with notice by certified mail to the violator, void, in whole or in part, any such subdivision approval, and may cause notice thereof to be filed in the East Haddam Land Records.
b. Violation of Subdivision Approval. Any person, firm, corporation, partnership or association which violates any provision of these Regulations; or any condition of modification of any Subdivision approval; or fails to comply with the plans and other documentation submitted in accordance with these Regulations; shall be provided notice of such violation by registered mail, return receipt requested. Said notice shall indicate the date of a regular or special meeting at which the Commission shall consider such violation, and the subdivider shall have the opportunity to be heard and present evidence at such meeting. If, following such meeting, the Commission determines that a violation as described in this paragraph has occurred, the Commission may take any or all of the following actions: Void the subdivision for any lots which have not been conveyed to purchasers not affiliated with the subdivider; call any bonds which have been placed to secure compliance with these Regulations and any approval granted hereunder; direct the Zoning Enforcement Officer to withhold any Certificate of Zoning Compliance for such any lot(s) in the subdivision; refuse to accept any public improvement in connection with such subdivision; refuse to grant any extension of time for the completion of improvements in such subdivision; require additional bonding; require additional engineering or other studies to evaluate the scope and nature of the violation; bring legal action seeking injunctive relief or such other relief as may the law or equity appertain.
SECTION 1.10 ADOPTION OF A TEMPORARY MORATORIUM
Section 1.10 Amendment to the East Haddam Subdivision and Zoning Regulation
Regulation Adopting a Temporary Moratorium on Subdivision Applications
Pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes 8-25 and 8-26, the East Haddam Planning and Zoning Commission hereby enacts the following as Section 1.10 of the East Haddam Subdivision Regulations, and
Pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes 8-2 and 8-3, the East Haddam Planning and Zoning Commission hereby enacts the
5
following as Section 23.10 of the East Haddam Zoning Regulations
a. Purpose East Haddam has experienced a steady continual growth of residential structures that have lead to the fragmentation of forest areas and have impacted watershed areas. The Plan of Development under Policy A “Encourage Residential Growth at a Slow Rate” is not being accomplished with the existing regulations. Under Action Program 1: the following directive is given - “Planning and Zoning Commission continue to reflect and emphasize in its land use policies and decisions, the need to manage residential growth in harmony with the natural resource base”. The fragmentation of forest and loss of important habitats is not in harmony with the nature of East Haddam and is not in compliance with the goals of the Plan of Development. East Haddam has almost 20,000 acres undeveloped and uncommitted acres of vacant land still available for use. East Haddam will be adversely impacted if these areas are not developed in accordance with current policies intended to minimize topographic disturbances, protect surface and subsurface waters, preserve wildlife habitats, avoid exceeding the capacity of the existing and proposed municipal infrastructure, and avoid sprawl.
The Commission therefore finds that a temporary, limited moratorium on subdivision applications and approvals is necessary to allow the Commission to study and revise its regulations in a manner that will allow the most effective and environmentally sensitive division of land and that will enhance the prospects for the conservation of natural resources and the preservation of open space for the welfare of all East Haddam residents and landowners.
More specifically, the Commission will review the Subdivision Regulations in its entirety, the Zoning Regulations that apply to Open Space Subdivisions, bulk and density of residential development, and sections of the Plan of Conservation and Development which relate to the implementation of these regulations.
b. Effective Date November 13, 2002 - The moratorium provided in these Sections 1.10 of the subdivision Regulations and 23.10 of the Zoning Regulations shall take effect upon publication of the notice of adoption of this Section. The moratorium shall remain in effect for a period of six months commencing on the Effective Date, which is November 13, 2002.
c. Application. During the Effective Period of these Sections 1.10 and 23.10, no application for subdivision and application for Special Exception for an Open Space Subdivision per Section 23 of the Zoning Regulation, shall be accepted or approved if the cumulative result of approval of such application, together with any other subdivision applications approved during the Effective Period, would be to divide any parcel of land existing immediately prior to the Effective Date into more than four lots.
d. Exclusions These Sections 1.10 and 23.10 shall not be deemed to apply to any tract for which (1) a subdivision approval that was made prior to the Effective Date expired by lapse of time and (2) an application is filed to subdivide the tract into the same number of lots, or fewer lots, than the Commission had previously approved.
SECTION 1.10 ADOPTION OF A TEMPORARY MORATORIUM - EXTENSION
The East Haddam Planning and Zoning Commission at a public hearing held May 1, 2003, took the following action:
Approved: An amendment to the East Haddam Subdivision Regulations, to revise a new Section 1.10; and the East Haddam Zoning Regulations to revise a new Section 23.10, the effect of these two amendments being to continue the approved six (6) month moratorium for an additional four (4) months on the acceptance or approval of subdivision applications, or special permits for open space subdivisions, comprised of more than 4 lots, but excluding previously approved subdivisions which have expired by lapse of time or the reconfiguration of existing subdivisions into the same number of lots or fewer.
6
SECTION 2 - DEFINITIONS
ACCELERATED EROSION: Erosion caused by development activities that exceeds the natural processes by which the surface of the land is worn away by the action of water, wind, or chemical action.
ACRES: An acre shall be defined by these regulations as an area of 43,560 contiguous square feet.
AMENDED SUBDIVISION: Any change in a property line or improvement shown on a Subdivision or Re-subdivision map which has been approved and filed with the Town Clerk pursuant to these Regulations, other than a new
subdivision or a re-subdivision.
APPLICANT: Any person, firm, corporation, partnership, association, or appointed agent having an interest in a parcel of land and who applies to the Commission for approval of a subdivision of such land. Consent shall be required from the owner of record of the premises.
APPLICATION: A request for approval of a specific subdivision, including an application form as may be prescribed by the Commission, accompanied by all supporting information, document, reports, and the like which may be required by these Regulations.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs): Measures, either structural or nonstructural, that are determined to be the most effective, practical means of preventing or reducing point or nonpoint source pollution inputs to stormwater runoff and waterbodies.
BOARD OF SELECTMEN: The Board of Selectmen of the Town of East Haddam.
BOND: See Section 6.2 of these Regulations.
BUFFERS/BUFFER STRIPS: Open spaces, landscaped areas, fences, walls, berms, or any combination thereof used to physically separate or screen one use or property from another so as to visually shield or block noise, lights, or other nuisances or to serve as a filter to protect natural resources from potential adverse impact of adjacent land uses.
CHANNEL: A natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and banks that conducts continuously or periodically flowing water.
COMMISSION: The East Haddam Planning and Zoning Commission
COMMON DRIVEWAY: A driveway serving more than one (1) lot.
CONNECTICUT GIUDELINES FOR SOIL AND EROSION CONTROL: The most current document entitled “Connecticut Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control”, including all corrections and revisions, as published by the Connecticut Council on Soil and Water Conservation
CONSERVATION AREA: Environmentally sensitive areas with characteristics such as wetlands, floodplains, unprotected elements of the natural landscape such as steep slopes, mature or productive forestland, potential contiguous open space or connective green belts, prime farmland, land that protects critical or threatened natural communities and species as identified by the Department of Environmental Protection, areas that have recreation value as recommended in the Recreation and/or Open Space Plan component of the Plan of Conservation and Development, wildlife habitats, and cultural features such as historic and archeological sites, and scenic views and vistas.
CONSERVATION DEVELOPMENT: A form of development that permits a reduction in lot area and bulk requirements, provided there is no increase in the number of lots permitted under a Conventional Subdivision, and the remaining land is dedicated to open space, active recreation, preservation of environmentally sensitive areas, or agriculture.
CONSERVATION EASEMENT: Conservation Easement shall mean the grant of a property right transferred to a non-profit or government entity acceptable to the Commission where the landowner retains the legal title and all rights associated with the land except that the land shall remain in its natural state and preclude future development as set forth in the standard “Conservation Easement” approved by the Town of East Haddam, including easements permitting agricultural and forestry uses.
7
CONVENTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: A form of development that permits the division of land in the standard subdivision form provided by these Regulations for the Zoning District in which it is located, other than Planned Residential Development and Conservation Developments.
CUL DE SAC: A proposed street, or any extension of an existing street, or any combination or pattern of streets or extensions thereof, having only one outlet to a through State or Town road.
DATE OF RECEIPT: The day of the next regularly scheduled Commission meeting immediately following the day of submission of an application, request, or appeal; or 35 days from the date of submission, which ever shall first occur.
DETENTION: The temporary storage of storm runoff in a stormwater management practice with the goals of controlling discharge rates and providing gravity settling of pollutants.
DETENTION BASIN: A facility for the temporary storage of stormwater runoff to prevent increases in post development runoff from a parcel of land.
DETENTION FACILITY: A detention basin or alternative structure designed for the purpose of temporary storage of stormwater runoff or surface runoff and gradual release of stored water at controlled rates.
DEVELOPMENT FOR AGRICULTURAL PURPOSES: Development exclusively for use as "agricultural land", as that term is defined in Connecticut General Statutes Section 22-26bb. (See definition of "Subdivision").
DISTURBED AREA: An area where the natural vegetative ground cover is destroyed, moved, or removed.
DRAINAGE EASEMENT: The right, at any time, to direct the flow of water, whether derived from surface or subsurface sources, across any property owned or proposed to be owned by another. Said right is defined to include direction of the flow of water by any method or means, including but not limited to, unrestricted sheet flows, direction by open ditch or trench, or direction by enclosed conduits. Said right also includes the right to enter upon the property and to maintain said direction of the flow of water in perpetuity.
EASEMENT: A right, established in deed or other legal means, of one party to use a designated portion of a second party's land for a specific limited purpose.
EROSION: The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by water, wind, ice or gravity.
FINAL SUBDIVISION PLAN: The final map, drawings, and all supporting data required by these Regulations upon which the subdivider's plan of subdivision is presented to the Commission for action and which, if approved without modifications, would be submitted to the Town Clerk for recording, where such recording is required by these Regulations.
HOTSPOTS: An area where land use or activities generate highly contaminated runoff, with concentrations of pollutants in excess of those typically found in stormwater.
HYDRAULIC STUDY: Maps and computations related to the watershed area that includes any portion of the subdivision, as prepared by a Connecticut Registered Professional Engineer. This study is for the purpose of determining storm water capacity of storm sewer pipes, culverts, drainage ditches, retention structures, wetlands, watercourses, and other natural or man-made destinations of storm water.
HYDROLOGIC SOIL GROUP (HSG): A Natural Resource Conservation Service classification system in which soils are categorized into four runoff potential groups. The groups range from A soils, with high permeability and little runoff production, to D soils, which have low permeability rates and produce much more runoff.
IMPERVIOUS COVER: Those surfaces that cannot effectively infiltrate rainfall (e.g., building rooftops, pavement, sidewalks, driveways, etc).
8
IMPROVEMENT: Any change or alteration to the existing conditions of the subdivision site or of public streets or other property for the purpose of complying with these Regulations or rendering the site more suitable for development and/or habitation. As used in these Regulations, improvements include but are not limited to: construction and installation of roadways, paved or gravel streets, curbs, gutters, snow shelf, utilities, street signs, monuments, shade trees, drainage facilities, erosion and sedimentation control measures, buildings, earth filling or removal, seeding, and grading.
INDUSTRIAL STORMWATER PERMIT: An National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit issued to a commercial industry or group of industries which regulates the pollutant levels associated with industrial stormwater discharges or specifies on-site pollution control strategies.
INFILTRATION: The process of percolating stormwater into the subsoil.
INFILTRATION FACILITY: Any structure or device designed to infiltrate retained water to the subsurface. These facilities may be above grade or below grade.
INLAND WETLANDS AGENCY: The agency acting as the East Haddam Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Commission.
HALF STREET: A proposed street, or any extension of an existing street, along and roughly parallel to a property line such that less than the entire required right-of-way and street improvements, longitudinally, would be located on one property.
LAND DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY: Any activity which changes the volume or peak flow discharge rate of rainfall runoff from the land surface. This may include the grading, digging, cutting, scraping, or excavating of soil, placement of fill materials, paving, construction, substantial removal of vegetation, or any activity which bares soil or rock or involves the diversion or piping of any natural or man-made watercourse.
LOOP DRIVEWAY: A driveway, serving more than one (1) dwelling, which starts and ends on a Town or State street, and typically parallel to a street and running across the front portion of the lots.
LOT: The unit or units into which land is divided with the intention of offering such units for sale, lease conveyance, or transfer; either as undeveloped or developed sites, regardless of how they are conveyed. Lot shall also mean parcel, site, or any similar term.
LOT, BUILDING: A lot capable of supporting a building, and on which all utilities required for habitation, such as water supply and sewage disposal, are available to the lot or on-site.
LOT, INTERIOR: A parcel of land that is situated generally behind lots fronting on a street that does not have the frontage required by the Zoning Regulations and that is accessible from the street only over an access strip.
MONUMENT: A granite or reinforced concrete post installed to designate the legal limits of a street right-of-way or other boundary of Town owned land.
OPEN SPACE: Land or water areas which include but are not limited to: areas left in their existing state; agricultural land for which development rights have been assigned or otherwise alienated in perpetuity; areas and facilities for non-commercial, non-profit recreation, areas for wildlife habitat, passive and active recreation, groundwater recharge, scenic preservation, and other lands accomplishing the purpose set forth in Section 4.9 of these regulations.
PEDESTRIAN WALK: A right-of-way dedicated to public use to facilitate pedestrian access through a subdivision and/or to a public facility such as a school or a park.
NONPOINT SOURCE POLLUTION: Pollution from any source other than from any discernible, confined, and discrete conveyances, and shall include, but not be limited to pollutants from agricultural, silvicultural, mining, construction, subsurface disposal, and development runoff sources.
9
PERFORMANCE BOND: A bond, furnished to the Town by the developer, to be used to complete subdivision improvements if the developer does not complete the improvements as promised, as required, and/or as indicated in the application. See Section 6.2.
PLAN AND PROFILE: The drawing(s) depicting respectively the horizontal and vertical design for street construction and drainage, and containing all information required by Section 3 of these Regulations. See Section 3.04
PRELIMINARY LAYOUT: The preliminary drawing(s) and all required supporting data as required by Section 3 of these Regulations, indicating the proposed manner and layout of the subdivision to be submitted to the Commission for consideration.
PRINT: A blueprint, Photostat, lithoprint, or other copy which reproduces exactly the data on the original drawing(s) from which it is made.
PLAN OF CONSERVATION AND DEVELOPMENT: The Plan of Conservation and Development is a master plan for the most desirable use of land for residential, recreational, commercial, industrial, open space preservation, resource protection, and other purposes; and contains the Commission's recommendations for population density, streets and other public ways, municipal development, public utilities, public housing, and redevelopment; pursuant to Chapter 126 of the General Statutes of Connecticut, as amended.
RECHARGE: The replenishment of subsurface water reserves.
RESERVE STRIP: Land controlling public access to an area dedicated or to be dedicated to public use, including streets, street connections, pedestrian ways, parks, or other land dedicated to public use.
RESUBDIVISION: A change in a map of an approved or recorded subdivision or resubdivision if such change: a) affects any street layout shown on such map; b) affects any area reserved thereon for public use; or c) diminishes the size of any lot shown thereon and creates an additional building lot, if any of the lots shown thereon have been conveyed after the approval or recording of such map.
RIGHT-OF-WAY
a) The parcel of land between street property lines, which are defined as the limits of land dedicated, secured or reserved for public transportation uses.
b) A narrow strip of land used to gain access to a parcel of land that does not have access to a street right-of-way. Right-of-way is usually owned in fee by the party having the right to use it.
ROAD: Same as “Street” as defined in these regulations.
SANITARIAN: The Chatham Health District, or its designee or successor agency.
SEDIMENT: Solid material, either mineral or organic, that is in suspension, is transported, or has been moved from its site of origin.
SETBACK LINES (BUILDING LINE): A line, usually fixed parallel to the lot line, beyond which a building cannot extend under the terms of the Zoning Regulations.
SOIL AND EROSION CONTROL CERTIFICATION: A signed written approval by the Commission that a soil erosion and sediment control plan complies with the applicable requirements of these Regulations.
SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN: A plan that minimizes soil erosion and sedimentation resulting from development and includes, but is not limited to, a map and narrative.
SOILS MAP: The officially adopted soils classification of the Town of East Haddam prepared by the U.S. Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation Service and published as the Middlesex County Soil Survey.
10
STORM WATER MANAGEMENT: The use of structural or non-structural practices that are designed to reduce storm water runoff pollutant loads, discharge volumes, and peak flow discharge rates. See Section 4.02.
STORMWATER RUNOFF: The flow on the surface of the ground, resulting from precipitation.
STREET: A road, avenue, lane, or any right-of-way: (a) dedicated and legally accepted by the Town or the State of Connecticut for the purpose of public travel; OR (b) shown on a subdivision map duly approved by the Commission and complying with all requirements of these Regulations, recorded in the Office of the Town Clerk, and bonded or constructed in accordance with these Regulations.
STREET, ABANDONED: A Street believed to be a Public Street at some time in the past, but which has not been maintained by the State of Connecticut or the Town of East Haddam for such a period of time, and which has so deteriorated in its capacity to support public vehicular traffic, so as to evidence an intent to terminate the status of the street as a Public Street. Status as an abandoned Street shall be determined by the East Haddam Board of Selectmen as provided in the Connecticut General Statutes.
STREET, DISCONTINUED: A Street that has been removed from the Town's system of accepted streets through formal action at a Town Meeting.
STREET LINE: The limit or property lines of the street right-of-way. Where such line has not been established, it is deemed to be a line parallel to and 25 feet distant from the center line of the traveled section of the pavement for the purposes of these Regulations.
STREET, LOOP: A Street which commences at an intersection with a through street and terminates at an intersection with the same through street. Sometimes referred to as a "horseshoe" street.
STREET PAVEMENT: The wearing or traveled surface of the roadway used by vehicular traffic.
STREET, PRIVATE: A Street which is not open to the general public for highway purposes, which is maintained by an association of the lot owners served or benefited by such Private Street, and which is contained within a subdivision which has been approved in accordance with these Regulations.
STREET, PUBLIC: A street accepted by legal procedure and maintained by the Town of East Haddam or the State of Connecticut as a public highway. "Public Street" does not include Abandoned Streets or Discontinued Streets.
STREET, THROUGH: A Connecticut State Highway, or a Public Street upon which a vehicle proceeding in either direction would be capable of reaching a separate Connecticut State Highway or Public Street of the Town of East Haddam or of an adjoining Town.
STREET WIDTH: The distance between Street Lines.
SUBDIVIDER: See, "Applicant".
SUBDIVISION: The division of a tract or parcel of land into three (3) or more parts or lots, made subsequent to the adoption of Subdivision Regulations in September, 1960; for the immediate or future purpose of sale or building development, and includes resubdivision. For purposes of this definition, a division of a tract or parcel of land under one ownership in September, 1960; into three (3) or more parts or lots shall be considered a subdivision whether such division was effected simultaneously, or successively by a single owner or by several successive owners of the tract or parcel of land.
SUBDIVISION EXPIRATION DATE: See the Connecticut General Statutes Section 8-26c.
SUBDIVISION PLAN: The final subdivision layout, plans, and all other required and supporting data that is presented to the Commission for approval; plus any additional data, representations, assurances, or other written or verbal statements made to the Commission during the course of the hearing on the Subdivision.
TOWN: The Town of East Haddam, Connecticut.
TOWN ENGINEER: The designated Town Engineer or engineering consultant to the Town of East Haddam acting personally or through assistants authorized in writing for such acts by the Engineer.
11
TRAVEL WIDTH: The distance between curb faces or the paved width of the street in the absence of curbs.
WATERCOURSES: Watercourses are the areas identified and defined in Section 22a-38 of the General Statutes of Connecticut, as amended. "Watercourses" means rivers, streams, brooks, waterways, lakes, ponds, marshes, swamps, bogs, and all other bodies of water that are contained within, flow through, or border upon any portion of this State; whether natural, artificial, public, or private; but does not include any tidal waters.
WETLANDS, INLAND: Wetlands are the areas identified and defined in Sections 22a-38 of the General Statutes of Connecticut, as amended; and officially delineated by the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Agency. "Wetland" means land that consists of any of the soil types designated as poorly drained, very poorly drained, alluvial, and flood plain by the National Cooperative Soils Survey, as amended, of the USDA Soil Conservation Service; and includes submerged land, but not tidal wetlands.
WETLANDS, TIDAL: Wetlands as identified and defined in Section 22a-29 of the General Statutes of Connecticut.
WATER QUALITY VOLUME (WQV): The volume of runoff generated by one inch of rainfall on the site. See Section 4.06
ZONING ENFORCEMENT OFFICER (ZEO): The East Haddam Planning and Zoning Commission Zoning Enforcement Officer.
ZONING PERMIT: An official finding that a planned use of a property, as indicated by an approved application, complies with the Zoning Regulations or meets special conditions of a variance or special permit; the Zoning Regulations may also specify additions or alterations that are required for a Zoning Permit.
ZONING REGULATIONS: The current adopted East Haddam Zoning Regulations.
12
SECTION 3 SUBDIVISION PROCEDURES AND APPLICATION
3.01 REQUIREMENT OF APPROVAL OF SUBDIVISION PLAN
Application for approval of a plan of subdivision shall be made to the Commission pursuant to Section 8-26 of Chapter 126 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
a) Subdivision Plan Approved and the Sale of Lots. All plans for the subdivision or re-subdivision of land must be submitted to the Commission for approval and no lot resulting from or affected by the subdivision or re-subdivision of any tract or parcel of land shall be sold or offered for sale or use for building development and no Certificate of Zoning Compliance (Zoning Permit) for any use, nor any building permit for the erection or enlargement of any building on such lot shall be granted without the prior approval of the subdivision or re-subdivision plan, or any amendment thereof, by the Commission, and the filing of the endorsed Final Subdivision Plan in the Office of the Town Clerk.
b) Amended Subdivision. An amended subdivision may be approved by the Commission with or without a public hearing. All provisions of the original approved subdivision or re-subdivision shall be complied with, except as specifically approved by the Commission. No amended subdivision shall be deemed final until an endorsed Final Subdivision Plan has been filed in the Office of the Town Clerk.
c) Purpose of Recommended Preliminary Procedure. Before submitting an application which must comply with the requirements of these Regulations including requirements for a Final Subdivision Plan, the preliminary procedure recommended should be followed to save time and expense. Prior to submission of an application for approval of a Conventional Subdivision or Conservation Subdivision, the applicant should initiate a pre-application conference with the Commission and its staff to discuss conceptual aspects of the proposed plans and prepare and present a preliminary layout for informal consideration by the Commission. The pre-application conference is recommended to permit the general consideration of factors and problems affecting the development of the subject site before the applicant proceeds with the application and the preparation of final maps, plans and documents required to accompany such application. This is a recommendation and not a requirement. A letter requesting consideration of the application under "Preliminary Layout” shall be submitted by the Applicant with the application.
3:02 GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF LAND SUBDIVISION
The following principles and standards are consistent with good subdivision design when applied to the rural, low density of population character of the Town. It is not the intent of the Commission to establish a rigid form of design, but rather to give the applicant freedom to lay out the property into a safe, sanitary, and desirable residential development, while achieving a benefit to himself, to the ultimate residents and to the Town itself. The subdivision plan must conform to the following requirements:
a) The Subdivision Map.
i) Shall conform to all requirements for filing with the Planning and Zoning Commission and the Town Clerk as part of the Land Records of the Town.
b) The Property.
i) On land contiguous to brooks, rivers or other bodies of water subject to flooding, proper provision shall be made by the developer for protective flood control measures in connection with the applicable provisions of the Zoning Regulations. Land subject to flooding and land otherwise deemed by the Commission to be unsuitable for residential use because of hazard to health, safety or property, shall not be subdivided for residential occupancy or for any use which might increase the hazard.
ii) When the proposed subdivision covers only a part of an existing tract or only a part of the subdivider's holding, a sketch of the prospective future street system of the remainder of the holding or tract shall be submitted. In reviewing the proposed subdivision, the Commission shall consider both the proposed subdivision and the remainder tract and their relationship.
c) Consideration of Conservation Plan and use of the four step development process.
i) The applicant shall use the four step process to create the proposed Conventional and Conservation Subdivisions. This process shall be demonstrated with a site plan and detailed narrative. The design process identifies historical, cultural and natural resources, potential open space corridors, views and vistas, sensitive wildlife areas, Conservation Areas, and other areas that should not be adversely impacted by development.
13
Step One: Identifying Conservation Areas
Conservation Areas limited to regulatory jurisdiction such as wetland and floodplains; and Conservation Areas including those unprotected elements of the natural landscape such as steep slopes (20% or greater), mature or productive forestland, potential contiguous open space or connective green belts, prime farmland, land that protects critical or threatened species or communities of special concern as identified by the Department of Environmental Protection, areas that have recreation value as recommended in the Recreation and/or Open Space Plan component of the Plan of Development; wildlife habitats, and cultural features such as historic and archeological sites; and scenic views and vistas. This phase will require the property boundary to be located, the wetland areas delineated, and the services of professionals such as a biologist and/or a landscape architect to determine the potential Conservation Area.
Step Two: Locating Developable House Sites
The second step involves locating approximate house sites on suitable soils outside of the Conservation Areas. Random soil testing throughout the property in a grid of approximately 200 feet apart will give a general indication of the areas suitability for development.
Step Three: Aligning Streets and Driveways
The third step consists of tracing a logical alignment for the location of streets to serve the house sites, which street pattern is in harmony with the natural topography to minimize cuts and fills.
Step Four: Drawing in the Lot Lines
The final step is to draw in the lot lines.
14
3.03 PRELIMINARY LAYOUTS
a) Application. The Subdivider, hereinafter sometimes called the Applicant, may present to the Commission a request for the consideration of the Preliminary Layouts. Six (6) paper prints of each of the Preliminary Layouts (Conventional versus Conservation), in accordance this Section 3.03.h of these Regulations, shall be submitted with the request.
b) Technical Reports. The Applicant shall obtain from a licensed professional engineer a written report or reports as to the general feasibility of the following: The proposed water supply, and the proposed drainage plan and sewage disposal in the area to be subdivided, and shall deliver said report(s) to the Commission. The Applicant shall demonstrate where the proposed development fits within the watershed, i.e. regional, subregional, and local drainage basins. The applicant shall cause to be performed, at his expense, such tests as the appropriate Town officer or officers may request. The Commission may request such other report(s) as are deemed advisable.
c) Check by Commission. At the time of the filing of a request for the consideration of the Preliminary Layouts, the Commission or its designee shall check such request and layouts and when the information contained in said request is substantially complete in accordance with this Section of these Regulations, the matter shall be placed on the agenda for a regular public meeting of the Commission. The applicant’s agents shall certify that the information contained in the request and layouts is true and correct and meets the requirements of these Regulations and any other applicable town or state regulations. Whenever desirable, the Commission and/or its representative(s) may examine the site of the proposed subdivision with the applicant or his authorized representative(s), prior to said meeting, and the applicant, by making a request under this Section, shall be deemed to consent to such site examination.
d) Notice of the Meeting of Commission. The Commission shall notify the applicant, prior to said meeting, of the date, time and place of the meeting of the Commission at which the Preliminary Layouts is to be considered and the applicant, or his fully authorized representative, should attend said meeting unless he has notified the Commission at least one day prior to said meeting of his inability to attend. All Preliminary Layout and reviews require the property to be posted with notice of such meeting. The requirements of such notification are explained in Section 4.20 General Requirements
e) Consideration of the Preliminary Layouts. The Preliminary Layouts will be considered at a regular public meeting of the Commission at which it is on the agenda. The Commission may hold a public hearing on any such request, and even in the absence of a public hearing, may, in its sole discretion, permit persons to be heard and written communications received at such meeting. The purpose of entering information from the public is to gather certain information such as environmental, historical, and archeological factors that may assist the Commission and applicant in the decision making process.
f) The Commission shall have the right to recommend the subdivision method (Conventional or Conservation) based on the information provided in the preliminary layouts provided by the applicant and from comments generated from other Commissions, Boards, Agencies, and the public.
g) Effect of Consideration of Preliminary Layouts. The purpose of the consideration of the Preliminary Layouts is to provide preliminary guidance to the Applicant, and to identify areas of concern or further study, so as to minimize delay, expense and inconvenience to the public, the Applicant, and the Commission upon the future receipt, if any, of a formal application for subdivision. Neither the applicant nor the Commission shall be in any way bound by any statement made during such Preliminary Layout consideration, nor shall the statement of any Commission member be deemed to be an indication of pre-judgment or prejudice, it being acknowledged by the applicant that the Commission's responses, like the request itself, are preliminary and subject to further change and refinement. There shall be no vote or other formal action on any request for Preliminary Layout consideration, other than referrals to other municipal, State, or Federal agencies for review and comment if deemed advisable by the Commission.
h) Preliminary Layouts submitted to the Commission should be drawings or prints of drawings produced by a landscape architect, engineer, or surveyor at a scale of one inch equals forty feet (1"=40') or one hundred (100') feet on sheets twenty-four by thirty-six inches (24"x36") in size. It is recommended that on complex projects that, at the minimum, the services of an landscape architect, engineer, surveyor, and biologist be contracted as part of the project team for presentation. The Preliminary Layout shall contain the following information:
i). Names of owners of record and proposed subdivider, proposed subdivision name and identifying title, location of subdivision, approximate north arrow and scale and date of drawing.
ii). Location and approximate dimensions of all existing property lines of the subdivision including assessor's block and parcel numbers.
15
iii). All pertinent features, such as existing structures, stonewalls, foundations, easements, wetlands, watercourses, swampland and wooded areas, and proposed Conservation Areas properly labeled.
iv). Approximate contours of the existing surface of land, with intervals adequate to indicate drainage and grades.
v). Proposed lot lines with approximate dimensions and area of all proposed lots
vi). Location and approximate dimensions and area of all property proposed to be set aside for open space, playground or park use.
vii). A reference map to the scale of one inch equals one thousand feet (1"=1000') showing the proposed subdivision and tie-in to the nearest street intersection. If the application submitted covers only a part of the applicant's holdings, a map which may appear on the same sheet, drawn on a scale no less than one inch equals two hundred feet (1"=200') showing an outline of the plotted area with its proposed road system and an indication of a proposed future road system and lot layout for the remaining portion of the tract.
viii). A set of maps demonstrating how the four step conservation development process of Section 3.02 was used.
ix). Where the subdivider anticipates that the Subdivision will be developed in phases, such phases should be delineated on the Preliminary Layout.
x). Mapping and a narrative describing the use of the four step development process for a Conventional and Conservation Plan.
xi). Maps indicating where the development exists in relationship with the watershed, i.e. regional, subregional, and local basins.
3.04 FINAL SUBDIVISION APPLICATION
a) Filing of Final Subdivision Application. Any Applicant seeking Subdivision approval shall file in the office of the Commission the following (in duplicate, unless otherwise noted). If the Applicant does not participate in the preliminary application process, the applicant shall submit full sets of a Conservation and Conventional Subdivision Plan. The Commission shall have the right to choose the subdivision method (Conventional or Conservation) based on the information provided by the applicant and from comments generated from other Commissions, Boards, Agencies, and the public:
i). An application on forms provided by the Commission, signed by the applicant and also the owner of the land to be subdivided or his authorized agent;
ii). A non-refundable application fee, in the form of a check made payable to the Town of East Haddam per the Town Fee Ordinance;
iii). Ten (10) prints of a Final Subdivision Plan conforming to these Regulations;
iv). Ten (10) prints of a Plan and Profile drawings for each street conforming to these Regulations. (Scale: 1” = 40’ horizontal, 1” =4’ vertical);
v). Three copies of a Hydraulic Study and Stormwater Control Plan conforming to these Regulations;
vi). Ten (10) prints of an Erosion and Sediment Control Plan, in accordance with the 2002 Connecticut Guidelines for Soil and Erosion Control as amended. The plan shall relate only to proposed improvements.
vii). Ten (10) prints of a Final Subdivision Plan conforming to these Regulations reduce to 11” x 17” for distribution to the Commission and public;
viii). A final report from the Sanitarian indicating that each and every lot proposed on the Final Subdivision Plan meets the sanitary requirements as defined in Section 4.04; or, if the applicant proposes to utilize a community sewerage system, as defined in the Connecticut General Statutes Section 7-245, a report from the East Haddam Water Pollution Control Authority indicating that all requirements of the Connecticut General Statutes Section 7-246f have been satisfied;
ix). A report from, and evidence of approval by, the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Commission of any permits required pursuant to the East Haddam Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations for the Final Subdivision Plan as submitted; and,
16
in addition, written evidence of a preliminary review of the proposed activities depicted on the Final Subdivision Plan by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers or Department of Environmental Protection where required by applicable law.
x). In accordance with Section 8-25a of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended by Public Act 84-330, any subdivision providing water by means of a "water company”, as that term is defined in Connecticut General Statutes Section 16-262m(a), shall provide to the Commission a certified copy of a resolution from the Board of Selectmen agreeing that the Town of East Haddam through the East Haddam Water Pollution Control shall be responsible for the ownership and operation of the subject water company as required by the Department of Public Utility Control Regulations (DPUC) and that a Certificate of Public Convenience and Necessity is issued by the DPUC.
xi). A written, itemized estimate, prepared and sealed by the applicant's Connecticut Registered Professional Engineer, of the cost of installation of any and all Improvements depicted on the Final Subdivision Plans or required by these Regulations. Such written estimate shall contain a detailed analysis of the materials and services required, the cost per unit, and such other information as the Town Engineer may require to facilitate his/her review of the estimate. The Town Engineer shall review the estimate, and make a recommendation to the Commission that it be accepted with or without modifications.
xii). Each sheet of the Final Subdivision Plans shall contain a printed signature box as follows;
Approved by the East Haddam Planning and Zoning Commission
Chairman/Secretary _____________________________ Date:_______________
Expiration Date: _________________
xiii). Where the proposed subdivision includes only a portion of an existing tract, or only a portion of the applicant's property, a preliminary plan of the future street and lot pattern for the remainder of the tract or property shall be submitted.
xiv). Where existing topography is proposed to be altered, the volumes of material to be removed from, or brought onto, the site; areas of proposed blasting, and the estimated volume thereof; the location to which excavated material being removed from the site will be deposited, if known, and the time within which such removal is anticipated to occur.
xv). A description of any existing deed restrictions, covenants, easements, rights-of-way, or similar encumbrances which run with the land, including the identity of the dominant and servant estates, the volume and page of the East Haddam Land Records where the same are recorded, and the date upon which they will expire, if any.
xvii). The name, address, responsible loan officer of the holder, and volume and page of recording, of any mortgage deed secured by the property to be subdivided.
xviii). A parcel history map, depicting the tract as of the effective date of the adoption of subdivision regulations for the Town of East Haddam (September 5, 1961). Such map shall be at a scale of 1" = 200', more or less, and shall indicate all divisions of the property, or any property of which was formerly a part, since the said effective date of subdivision regulation in East Haddam and a table containing the dates of such divisions and the grantors and grantees of any parcels or approved subdivisions so created.
xix). In accordance with C.G.S. §8-3i, in any subdivision application for any property which is within the watershed of a water company, as defined in C.G.S. §16-1, the applicant shall provide written notice of the application to the water company, provided such water company has filed a map showing the boundaries of the watershed on the land records of the Town. Such notice shall be by certified mail, return receipt requested, and shall be mailed at the time of application. The applicant shall submit evidence of such notice to the Commission at the time of application.
xx). It is the burden of the applicant to submit a complete application, and to demonstrate compliance with all criteria and requirement of these Regulations and, accordingly, the applicant may submit, or the Commission may require, such additional reports or information as may be required to satisfy that burden. Any application found to be incomplete may be denied by the Commission without prejudice to a future, complete application.
xxi). The filing of an application with the Commission shall be deemed to constitute permission by the applicant for the Commission or its agents to enter onto the subject property for the purpose of inspections and tests; and, if the Commission designates a formal site walk through the public hearing process, such permission shall allow the general public, in company with the Commission, to inspect such property.
b) Technical Approval or Report. In addition to the above, the applicant shall provide from a licensed professional engineer a written report of the adequacy of the water supply and sewerage arrangements, and from a licensed professional engineer and land surveyor of the proposed grades, drainage arrangements and drainage easements as shown on the Plan-
17
Profiles and the Final Subdivision Plan. The Applicant, at the request of the Commission, shall provide a traffic report. The applicant shall also obtain from the appropriate Town officers such other reports as the Commission may require. Where significant environmental or historical impact may be involved, the Commission may request a review of the application by the East Haddam Conservation Commission, East Haddam Historic District Commission, Midstate Regional Planning Agency, Connecticut River Coastal Conservation District, appropriate agencies in adjacent municipalities which may be affected by the proposed activity, or other technical agencies; or may undertake additional studies or investigations.
c) Receipt by Commission. Following the Date of Receipt of the Application for Final Subdivision in the Planning Office, the Commission shall place the matter on the agenda of its next regular meeting for acknowledgment, provided the complete Application is received in the proper form at least one (1) week prior to such meeting. If the aforesaid time requirement is not met, the Plan shall be held for the following public meeting of the Commission. Regardless of the appearance on the Commission's agenda for acknowledgment, the legal date for the receipt of the application shall be in accordance with the Connecticut General Statutes.
d) Notice of Meeting of Commission. The Commission shall schedule a public hearing as provided by Statute on any application for Final Subdivision. Any such public hearing shall commence no later than sixty-five (65) days following the Date of Receipt of the application, and shall be completed no later than thirty-five (35) days following its commencement. Upon written approval by the applicant, said time limitation may be extended by the Commission one or more times, provided the total period of any such extension or extensions shall not exceed 65 days in total. All final subdivision applications require the property to be posted to notice of such meeting. The requirements of such notification are explained in Section 4.20 General Requirements.
e) Notices Mandated by Statute. In accordance with C.G.S. §8-26b, any proposed subdivision which will abut or include land in another municipality, shall be referred to the regional planning agency or agencies of the region in which the other municipality or municipalities is/are located, prior to action on such subdivision application.
In accordance with C.G.S. §8-26f, the Commission shall notify the clerk of any adjoining municipality of the pendency of any application concerning any subdivision in which (1) any portion of the property affected is within five hundred (500') feet of the boundary of the adjoining municipality; (2) a significant portion of the traffic to the proposed subdivision will use streets within the adjoining municipality to enter or exist in the subdivision; (3) a significant portion of the sewer or water drainage from the subdivision will flow through or significantly impact the drainage or sewerage system within the adjoining municipality; (4) water run-off from the subdivision will impact streets or other municipal or private property with the adjoining municipality. Such notice shall be made by certified mail and shall be mailed within seven (7) days of the receipt of the subdivision application, and no public hearing shall be held on any subdivision application unless or until such notice has been received. The adjoining municipality may, through a representative, appear and be heard at any hearing on such application.
f) Consideration of Final Subdivision Application. The Commission will study the Final Subdivision application and all accompanying reports and other documents, and any new information or changed conditions which might necessitate alteration of the application, provided, however, that, in those cases where a public hearing has been held, the Commission shall receive no further testimony or information, orally or in writing, in public or in private, once the public hearing has been closed, other than from the Commission's staff, including its engineer, or disinterested Town, State, or Federal agencies, advisors, or officials.
g) Action by the Commission. Within sixty-five (65) days from the close of the public hearing, the Commission shall take action on the Final Subdivision application. Such action shall consist of approval, modification and approval, or disapproval of the application. "Modification", as used in this Section, may include conditions which must be satisfied prior to endorsement and filing of the Final Subdivision plans, prior to the issuance of Certificates of Zoning Compliance, prior to the release of bonds, or at other appropriate points in time. Upon written approval by the applicant, said time limitation may be extended by the Commission one or more times, provided the total period of any such extension or extensions shall not exceed the original time period. In addition, in the case of any application involving an activity regulated under the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations, the time limit for action shall be extended to thirty-five (35) days following a final decision on such activity by the East Haddam Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Commission if for any reason the report of the said Commission was not received at the time of application, or required updating due to changes in the application during its pendency.
h) Notification of Action. Within fifteen (15) days after action by the Commission, the Commission shall notify the applicant and all adjoining landowners who shall have requested notice in writing, of the action taken by the Commission. Such notice shall be by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the Town of East Haddam and by sending a copy thereof by registered or certified mail to the applicant, and by regular mail to the aforesaid adjoining landowners, on or before the date of publication. Such notice shall be a simple statement that such application was approved, modified and approved,
18
or disapproved, together with the date of such action. Any person aggrieved by the official action of the Commission may appeal there from within fifteen (15) days of publication of notice of such official action to the Superior Court, as provided by Statute.
i) Endorsement of Final Subdivision Plan. Upon approval of an application, the applicant shall, within sixty-five (65) days of approval, provide a Final Subdivision Plan on a material suitable for filing in the office of the East Haddam Town Clerk, which Plan shall incorporate any modification attached to such approval, and shall be accompanied by any documents required by these Regulations, such as bonds, road deeds, liens, conservation and drainage easements, and the like. Any conveyance to the Town of East Haddam shall be accompanied by a current Certificate of Title, prepared by an attorney admitted to the bar of the State of Connecticut, and certifying that such conveyance is free and clear of, or subordinated to, any mortgage, lien, restriction, or other encumbrance.
The Plan for filing shall include, reproduced on the face thereof, a copy of the motions of approval (including any conditions or modifications made a part thereof) from both the Planning and Zoning Commission's subdivision approval and any Inland Wetlands Permit approved by the East Haddam Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Commission. Not more than thirty (30) days after the expiration of the time for taking an appeal from the approval of the subdivision has lapsed, or, in the event of an appeal, not more than thirty (30) days after the termination of such appeal by dismissal, withdrawal or judgment in favor of the applicant, the Commission shall designate the Chairman or Secretary to endorse the Plan and the date thereof upon the Plan in its behalf.
j) Filing of Plan. At such time as the Commission Chairman or Secretary endorse the Final Subdivision Plan in accordance with the requirements of the preceding paragraph, the Commission shall cause the applicant to be notified, by certified mail that such endorsement has occurred. Such notice shall constitute "delivery" for the purposes of the Connecticut General Statutes §8-25. Within ninety (90) days following the date of such notice, the applicant shall file the endorsed Final Plan with the Town Clerk and pay any necessary filing fees. The Commission may, upon request of the applicant, grant up to two (2) extensions of up to ninety (90) days each for such filing. Any Final Subdivision Plan not so filed shall become void. The Commission shall have no responsibility to retain any Final Subdivision Plans rendered void by operation of this provision.
The approved plans shall be also submitted with a CD formatted to be compatible with ArcView 8.0/GIS extensions DXF, DWG, DGN, APR, SHP or a format that is specified by the Land Use Administrator as technology changes. The plane rectangular coordinate system shall be Connecticut State Plane Coordinates with a horizontal datum NAD 83 if control points are within 1000 feet or NAD 27 if control points are further.
k) Alteration of Final Subdivision Plan Prior to Filing with Town Clerk. If the Final Subdivision Plan is altered, changed, erased or revised in any way between the time the Commission's approval is endorsed thereon and the time the Plan is filed with the Town Clerk, the approval shall be void unless the alteration has been approved by the Commission and so indicated on the Plan.
l) Alteration of Final Subdivision Plan After Filing with Town Clerk. If the Final Subdivision Plan is altered, changed, erased, or revised in any way after the time the Plan is filed with the Town Clerk, the approval shall be void unless the Amended Subdivision has been approved by the Commission and a new Final Plan endorsed and filed with the Town Clerk.
3.05 PLAN FOR RECORD SUBDIVISION - MAP CRITERIA
a. The record subdivision map shall be prepared with an accuracy meeting the standards for a "Class A-2 Transit Survey". The map(s) shall be a clear and legible print at a scale of one inch equals forty feet (1"=40') feet on sheets twenty-four by thirty-six inches (24"x36"). When more than one (1) sheet is required an index sheet of the same size sheet showing the entire subdivision shall be submitted with the Plan. The Plan, which may composed of multiple sheets or sets of sheets, shall show the following information:
i). Name and address of the owner of the land to be subdivided; name and address of the applicant if different from the owner;
ii). The title of the subdivision, which shall not duplicate the title of any previous subdivision in the Town of East Haddam.
iii). Date of Map
iv). Graphic and word scale
19
v). North arrow with reference to true, grid, magnetic north or relationship to other map shall be noted. (If magnetic north, the date of the magnetic reading shall be noted.)
vi). Zones and Districts which subdivision lies in, total acreage, number of lots.
vii). Name, license number, and embossed seal or official stamp of State of Connecticut Land Surveyor and/or Registered Civil Engineer Name, license number, signature box for Soil Scientist if any.
viii). The plan shall contain the following statement: "The Subdivision Regulations of the East Haddam Planning and Zoning Commission are a part of this plan, and approval of this plan is contingent on completion of all the requirements of said Subdivision Regulations."
ix). A signature Box containing the following words:
Approved by the East Haddam Planning and Zoning Commission
Date:_______________ Chairman/Secretary ____________________
Expiration Date: _____________
b. Subdivision Plan: at 1" = 40' scale on sheets 24" x 36"
i). Existing and proposed property and street lines - Proposed street names.
Proposed road(s), names which shall not duplicate or be readily confused
with already existing names unless an extension thereof.
ii). Adjoining property lines for a distance of 200'; and the names of all adjacent subdivisions and/or property owners. Assessor's Map and Lot numbers included. Location and dimensions of all existing property lines of the subdivision with reference to monuments, pipes, drill holes, foundations or other points of reference of a fixed or semi-permanent nature.
iii). Existing and proposed easements and right-of-way either on of off site, including those for utilities, sewers, and drainage.
iv). Layout of lots and lot numbers, dimensions of all lot lines, acres and square footage of all lots, building set back lines, location of any monuments or markers to be placed at corners or angles of all lots. Dimensions on all lines shall be to the hundredth of a foot with bearings or deflection angles on all straight lines and the central angle, tangent distance, length of the arc, and radius of all arcs.
v). A-2 certification and Licensed Surveyor Seal, with ties to a known "State" coordinate system. NAD 83 if within 1000 feet or NAD 27 if further.
vi). A general location map showing the location of the subdivision area in relation to existing roads in the Town at a scale not less than 1" = 1000’.
vii). All permanent features, such as existing structures, stone walls, utility poles and numbers, fences, watercourses, ponds, swampland, wooded areas, specimen trees of greater than 12” measured at DBH (especially along existing streets), exposed ledge, areas designated for conservation, proposed buffer areas, and land to be set aside for playground, park or open space use.
viii). Topography is to be Class T-2 or T-3 standards and not interpolated from CGS quadrangle maps. Contours (existing and proposed) are to be at two feet intervals for lots to be subdivided and shall cover the entire lot unless a waiver is requested and granted. Elevation data shall be NAVD 88 if a benchmark is within 1000 feet of a subdivision.]
ix). Layout of lots and lot numbers. The proposed lot number and assigned street number shall be the same when creating new streets. All lots shall have street numbers assigned in accordance with the following system:
Heading north -odd numbers are assigned to the west, while the east side shall have the even numbers; heading south - odd numbers are assigned to the west, while the east side shall have the even numbers; heading east - odd numbers are assigned to the south, while the north side shall have the even numbers; heading west - odd numbers are assigned to the south, while the north side shall have the even numbers.
x). Soil type or types to include FEMA 100 year Flood Zones, wetlands and streambelt areas as taken from field data and the detailed soil map of East Haddam by Middlesex County Soil and Water Conservation district;
20
xi). Soil types and inland wetlands and watercourses, as defined in the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations, delineated by a certified soils scientists; Flood Zones, in accordance with the most current Federal Flood Insurance Rate Map; and regulated areas as defined by in the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations
xii). Areas with 20% or more slope delineated.
xiii). Proposed driveway grades over 8% labeled or noted.
xiv). Proposed land uses, including location of buildings, buffer strips, fences, signs, etc.
xv). Proposed limits of clearing and grading, stock pile sites.
xvi). Storm water drainage and dry wells location if any.
xvii). Proposed on site sanitary arrangements. This must include a report on soil conditions, based on drainage, deep test holes, and seepage testing made in accordance with the recommendations of the State Public Health Code as amended. The criteria for septic system design and reports is further explained in Section 4.04.
xviii). Certification by Town Sanitarian per Section 4.04 of the Subdivision Regulations including test pit data and signature box as described in Section 4.04
xix). Any additional data necessary, together with the aforesaid said data, to enable a licensed surveyor to determine readily the location of every street line, lot line, boundary line, and to reproduce such lines upon the ground to the A-2 Standard of Accuracy.
xx). Certificate under seal of (I) a Connecticut licensed professional engineer as to the adequacy of proposed public Improvements, suitability of water supply, and waste disposal, and (ii) a Connecticut licensed land surveyor that both the survey and the map conform to the standards of survey and map accuracy respectively of Class A-2 as defined in the "Recommended Standards for Surveys and Maps in the State of Connecticut" as adopted by the Connecticut Association of Land Surveyors, Inc. on September 24, 1992, or as the same may be amended from time to time; or any successor agency authorized to define standards of accuracy in surveys.
xxi). The location of any signs to be used for identification or sale of lots, in accordance with Section 12 Sign Regulations of the East Haddam Zoning Regulations.
xxii). Where the subdivisions are proposed to be developed in phases, such phases shall be clearly delineated on the Final Subdivision Plan.
xxiii). The Minimum Building Land Area as described in Section 4.06 shall be delineated on each lot. The plans shall include all soil investigate results.
21
c. Construction Plan and Profiles
When new roads or improvements of existing roads are involved in a subdivision, the Final Subdivision Plan shall be accompanied by complete Plan-Profiles of each such road drawn on a sheet, which shall be twenty-four by thirty-six inches (24" x 36") in size. The horizontal scale shall be a horizontal scale of one inch equals forty feet (1" = 40') and the vertical scale shall be one inch equals four feet (1" = 4'). The plan shall conform to Section 5 of the Subdivision Regulations. Topography for the centerline shall be of T-2 standards. Such Plan-Profiles shall show:
i) Layout of street with centerline horizontal geometry in stations coordinated with the profile.
ii) Paved roadways, proposed signs, street trees, landscaped areas, guide rails, pavement striping, curbs, swales, sidewalks, bike paths, street lighting, partial driveways, easements, partial lot lines, lot numbers, utilities with all invert and top of frame elevations.
iii) Lengths, slopes and types of pipe materials.
iv) Typical cross section of roadway.
v). Profile of roadway showing existing and finished grades, all tangent grades, and all vertical curve information.
vi). All catch basins and man holes and connecting pipes.
vii). By proper notation, location and elevations of bench marks, based on U.S.C.&G.S. datum NAD 83 and NAVD 88. Provide at least one bench mark per plan profile sheet.
viii). Grades expressed as percentages.
ix.) Data showing disposition of surface water, including, but not limited to, catch basins, plunge pools, swales, retention/detention basins, porous pavement, and the like; water and sanitary sewer pipes (if any), including sufficient data to permit checking of drainage designs; and the location of all associated easements or rights of way in favor of the Town or any public utility.
x) Typical cross-section of each road indicating location, dimensions and materials of proposed paved improvements and utilities.
xi) Location of street name, speed limit, stop, dead end, and other street signs..
xii) Certificate under seal of a Connecticut licensed professional engineer as to the adequacy of proposed public Improvements and that the Plan-Profiles are substantially correct.
xiii) Drainage system shall conform to Section 4.02.
22
SECTION 4.0 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
4.01 SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN FOR LAND DEVELOPMENT
A soil erosion and sediment control plan consistent with the publication of the Connecticut Council on Soil and Water Conservation in Cooperation with the Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection entitled, 2002 Connecticut Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control, as the same may be amended from time to time, shall be submitted with all subdivision applications when the disturbed area of development is more than one-half (½) acre.
The Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Plan (E&S Plan) is an integral part of the Subdivision Plan. For the purposes of review, certification, bonding and enforcement, the E&S Plan narrative and drawings should be developed so they can be separated from the overall site plan, as needed to facilitate their use. On small, non complex subdivisions of four lots or less, the E&S plan need not be separate if clarity of information is maintained.
The E&S Plan shall relate only to the construction of proposed roads, driveways, storm drainage and other improvements. E&S controls for the future development of individual lots shall be shown on plans depicting potential locations for house, driveway, well and septic system.
a). In the event that any developer shall intend to make changes in the contour of any land proposed to be subdivided, developed, or changed in use by grading, excavating, or the removal or destruction of the natural topsoil, trees, or vegetative covering thereon, for the purposes of road construction and/or access ways construction, reducing slopes, drainage, waste disposal, removal and/or filling over soils and other similar purposes, the same shall only be accomplished after the owner of said land or his agent has submitted to the Commission, or its duly authorized representative, of a site plan and narrative for erosion and sedimentation controls.
The Commission, or its duly authorized representative, shall review these plans as submitted and shall take necessary steps to insure compliance by the developer with these plans as finally approved.
b) E&S Plan Checklist All Plans shall contain the information requested in the E&S checklist provided in the 2002 Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control found in Chapter 3 and list underneath. A copy of this worksheet is attached in Appendix B of these regulations and shall be part of the subdivision submittal.
1. Narrative
1.1 Purpose and description of project.
1.2 Estimates of the total area of the project site and the total area of the site that is expected to be disturbed by construction activities.
1.3 Identification of site-specific erosion or sediment control concerns and issues.
1.4 The phases of development if more than one phase is planned.
1.5 The planned start and completion dates for each phase of the project.1
1.6 Either provide or identify where in the E&S plan the following information is found:
1.6.1 the design criteria, construction details and maintenance program for the erosion and sediment control measures to be used.
1.6.2 the sequence of major operations within each phase, such as installation of erosion control measures, clearing, grubbing, excavation, grading, drainage and utility installation, temporary stabilization, removal of temporary erosion control measures
1.6.3 the time (in days) required for the major operations identified in the sequence
1.7 Identify other possible local, state and federal permits required.
1.8 Identify the conservation practices to be used.
1.9 A listing of all other documents to be considered part of the E&S plan (e.g. reports of hydraulic and hydrologic computations, boring logs, test pit logs, soil reports, etc.)
2. Support Documents (as may be needed to support Engineering Designs)
2.1 Hydraulic calculations
1These are often subject to change depending on markets, financing, permit approvals and weather conditions. A change in a start date can cause a restriction or prohibition in the use of proposed measures, and thereby require revisions to the E&S plan.
23
2.1.1 Size and locations of existing and planned channels or waterways with design calculations and construction details.
2.1.2 Existing peak flows with calculations
2.1.3 Planned peak flows with calculations
2.1.4 Changes in peak flows
2.1.5 Off-site effects of increased peak flows or volumes
2.1.6 Design calculations and construction details for engineered measures used to control off-site erosion caused by the project
2.1.7 Design calculations and construction details for engineered measures used to control erosion below culverts and storm sewer outlets
2.1.8 Design calculation and construction details for engineered measures used to control groundwater, i.e. seeps, high water table, etc.
2.2 Boring logs, test pit logs, soils reports, etc.
3.0 Site Drawing(s) Checklist
3.1 Jurisdictional Features Required on All Maps or Drawings
3.1.1 North arrow
3.1.2 Scale (including graphical scale)
3.1.3 A title block containing the name of the project, the author of the map or drawing, the owner of record for the project, date of drawing creation and any revision dates
3.1.4 Property lines
3.1.5 Legend identifying the symbols used
3.1.6 For plans containing E&S measures which require an engineered design, the signature and seal of a professional engineer licensed to practice in Connecticut
3.2 Site Locus Map
3.2.1 Scale (1”= 1000’ recommended)
3.2.2 Project location (show property boundaries and at least the area that is within 1000 feet of the property boundaries)
3.2.3 Roads, streets/buildings
3.3.4 Major drainage ways (at least named watercourses)
3.3.5 Identification of any public drinking water supply watershed area
3.3 Topography, Natural Features and Regulatory Boundaries
3.3.1 Existing contours (2 foot intervals)
3.3.2 Planned grades and elevations
3.3.4 Limits of cuts and/or fills
3.3.5 Soils, bedrock
3.3.6 Seeps, springs
3.3.7 Inland wetlands boundaries
3.3.8 FEMA identified floodplains, floodways and State established stream channel encroachment lines
3.3.9 Streams, lakes, ponds, drainage ways, dams
3.3.10 Existing vegetation
3.3.11 Tidal wetland boundaries and coastal resource limits (e.g. mean high water, shellfish beds, submerged aquatic vegetation)
3.3.12 Public water supply watershed, well heads or aquifer boundaries (when available)
3.4 Drainage Patterns
3.4.1 Existing and planned drainage patterns (including off-site areas)
3.4.2 Size of drainage areas
3.4.3 Size and location of culverts and storm sewers (existing and planned)
3.4.4 Size and location of existing and planned channels or waterways
3.4.5 Major land uses of surrounding areas
3.5 Road and Utility Systems
3.5.1 Planned and existing roads and buildings with their location and elevations
3.5.2 Access roads: temporary and permanent
24
3.5.3 Location of existing and planned septic systems
3.5.4 Location and size of existing and planned sanitary sewers
3.5.5 Location of other existing and planned utilities, telephone, electric, gas, drinking water wells, etc.
3.6 Clearing, Grading, Vegetation Stabilization
3.6.1 Areas to be cleared, and sequence of clearing
3.6.2 Disposal of cleared material (off-site and on-site)
3.6.3 Areas to be excavated or graded, and sequence of grading or excavation
3.6.4 Areas and acreage to be stabilized with vegetation (Temporary and/or permanent)
3.6.5 Planned vegetation with details of plants, seed, mulch, fertilizer, planting dates, etc.
4. Erosion & Sediment Control Drawings
4.1 Location of E&S measure on site plan drawing with appropriate symbols
4.2 Construction drawings and specifications for measures
4.3 Maintenance requirements of measures during construction of project
4.4 Person [name and 24-hour telephone number] responsible for maintenance during construction of project and statement that such information shall be update within 24 hours of any change and designation.
4.5 Maintenance requirements of permanent measures after project completion
4.6 Handling of emergency situations (e.g. severe flooding, rains or other environmental problems).
4.7 If not provided in the narrative, the information listed in checklist paragraph 1.6 (see narrative heading)
c. The estimated costs of measures required to control soil erosion and sedimentation, as specified in the certified plan shall be submitted as part of the application. Measures to be taken to control erosion and sedimentation shall be described and provided for in the construction agreement and the estimated cost of accomplishing such measures shall be covered in a Bond or other assurances acceptable to the Commission.
d. Site development shall not begin unless the soil erosion and sediment control plan is certified and those control measures and facilities in the plan scheduled for installation prior to site development are installed. Planned soil erosion and sediment control measures and facilities shall be installed as scheduled according to the certified plan. All control measures and facilities shall be maintained in effective condition to ensure the compliance of the certified plan.
e. At the building permit application stage, a review will be conducted to insure conformance with the plan as approved for individual lots and site plans.
f. The Planning and Zoning Commission, or its duly authorized representative shall make the necessary review and evaluation of methods used and the overall effectiveness of the erosion and sedimentation control program.
g. To be eligible for certification, a soil erosion and sediment control plan shall contain proper provisions to adequately control accelerated erosion and sedimentation and reduce the danger from storm water runoff on the proposed site based on the best available technology. Such principles, methods and practices necessary for certification are found in the Connecticut Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control 2002) as amended. The Commission may require additional information or measures where conditions so indicate the need. Alternative principles, methods and practices may be used with prior approval of the Commission.
h The Commission or its duly authorized agent shall review and approve the soil erosion and sediment control plan, as filed, if it complies with the requirements and objectives of this regulation; or approve with limitations or modifications; or deny the plan when the development proposal does not comply with these regulations or may cause hazards or damage to the public safety and welfare.
i Nothing in these regulations shall be construed as extending the time limits for the approval of any application under Chapters 124, 124A or 126 of the General Statutes.
25
j Prior to approval, any plan submitted to the Commission may be reviewed by the Connecticut River Coastal Conservation District which may make recommendations concerning such plan, provided such review shall be completed within thirty days of the receipt of such plan.
SECTION 4.02 - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
No subdivision of land or proposed land use shall alter natural watercourses, natural drainage and runoff areas or existing drainage and runoff areas unless suitable plans meeting the other requirements of these Regulations, certified by a professional engineer licensed in the State of Connecticut, are provided and approved by the Commission.
All cross culverts, detention basins, channels and ditches, driveway culverts and street drainage shall be designed in conformance with the Connecticut Department of Transportation Drainage Manual dated October 2000, as amended and the Connecticut Stormwater Quality Manual (CTDEEP) as amended. This requirement may be varied by the Commission according to conditions of the land and drainage requirements.
All necessary drainage easements shall be provided and shall extend a minimum of 10 feet around the drainage facility, except that easements for pipes shall be 20 feet wide and centered on the pipe.
4.02.1 Waivers for Providing Stormwater Management
The minimum requirements for stormwater management may be waived in whole or in part upon written request of the Applicant, provided that the Applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Commission that the immediately downstream watercourses will not be subject to:
a. Deterioration of existing culverts, bridges, dams, and other structures.
b. Deterioration of biological functions or habitat.
c. Accelerated streambank or streambed erosion or siltation.
d. Increased threat of flood damage to public health, life and property.
4.02.2 General Performance Criteria for Stormwater Management
Unless judged to be exempt or granted a waiver by the Commission, the following performance criteria shall be addressed for stormwater management at all sites:
a. All site designs shall establish stormwater management practices to control the peak flow rates of stormwater discharge associated with specified design storms and reduce the generation of stormwater. These practices should seek to utilize pervious areas for stormwater treatment and to infiltrate stormwater runoff from driveways, sidewalks, rooftops, parking lots, and landscaped areas to the maximum extent practical to provide treatment for both water quality and quantity. Infiltration of stormwater shall be accommodated to the extent possible though limitation of land disturbance and grade changes, retention of existing natural drainage area and wetlands, and use or creation of vegetated islands, vegetated medians, and vegetated perimeter buffer strips. From Section 11- Parking.
b. All stormwater runoff generated from new impervious surfaces or changed habitats in the development shall not discharge stormwater directly into an inland wetland or watercourse without adequate treatment. Drainage shall be designed such that all surface runoff (both piped and overland flow) is conveyed through a vegetated swale, vegetated filter strip, created wetlands, rain gardens, detention basins with bio-filtration prior, or acceptable engineered solutions to discharge into existing wetlands, streams, ponds, or other waterbodies. From Section 11- Parking
c. Structural Best Management Practices (BMPs) shall be designed to remove 80 percent of the average annual post development total suspended solids load. It is presumed that a BMP complies with this performance standard if it is:
d. Sized to capture the prescribed water quality volume (WQV).
e. Designed according to the specific performance criteria outlined in the Connecticut Stormwater Quality Manual (CTDEEP).
f. Constructed properly.
4.02.3 Minimum Control Requirements
26
a. All stormwater management practices will be designed so that the specific storm frequency storage volumes (e.g., recharge, water quality, channel protection, 2, 10, 25, 100 year) as identified in the current Connecticut Stormwater Quality Manual (CTDEEP) are met, unless the Commission grants the applicant a waiver or the applicant is exempt from such requirements. Note especially the specific criteria related to channel protection and the use of multiple storm return frequencies, both cited in the Connecticut Stormwater Quality Manual (CTDEEP). The Connecticut Stormwater Quality Manuel Worksheet is attached in Appendix C of these regulations and shall be part of the subdivision or site plan submittal.
b. All stormwater management practices shall be designed to capture and treat stormwater runoff according to the specifications outlined in the Connecticut Stormwater Quality Manual (CTDEEP). These specifications will designate the water quantity and quality treatment criteria that apply to an approved stormwater management practice.
c. In addition, if hydrologic or topographic conditions warrant greater control than that provided by the minimum control requirements, the Commission reserves the right to impose any and all additional requirements deemed necessary to control runoff volume, timing, rate and treatment.
d. Applicants shall consult the Connecticut Stormwater Quality Manual (CTDEEP) for guidance on the factors that determine site design feasibility when selecting a stormwater management practice.
e. The Connecticut Stormwater Quality Manual (CTDEEP) shall be consulted for detailed guidance on the requirements for conveyance for each of the approved stormwater practices.
f. All stormwater management practices shall be designed to convey stormwater to allow for the maximum removal of pollutants and reduction in flow velocities. This shall include, but not be limited to:
i. Maximizing length of flow paths from inflow points to outflow points of basins, pools and ponds.
ii. Protection of inlet and outfall structures.
iii. Elimination of erosive flow velocities.
iv. Provision of underdrain systems, where applicable.
g. All stormwater management practices must have a landscaping plan detailing the vegetation to be planted. The use of native grasses and small diameter wood-stemmed shrubs is encouraged as plantings for all vegetated swales, vegetated filter strips, created wetlands, rain gardens, or detention basins with bio-filtration. From Section 11- Parking
h. The use of non-structural best management practices is encouraged in order to minimize the reliance on structural practices. Credit in the form of reductions in the amount of stormwater that must be managed can be earned through the use of non-structural practices that reduce the generation of stormwater from the site. These non-structural practices are explained in detail in the Connecticut Stormwater Quality Manual (CTDEEP) and applicants wishing to obtain credit for use of non-structural practices must ensure that these practices are documented and can reasonably be expected to remain maintenance-free and remain unaltered by subsequent property owners.
4.02.4 Stormwater Management Plan Requirements
The stormwater management plan shall include:
a. Calculations: Hydrologic and hydraulic design calculations for the pre-development and post-development conditions for the design storms specified in the Connecticut Stormwater Quality Manual (CTDEEP) (i.e., 2, 10, 25 & 100-yr storm). Such calculations shall include, at a minimum:
i. Description of the design storm frequency, intensity and duration,
ii. Time of concentration and travel time.
iii. Soil Curve Numbers or runoff coefficients.
iv. Peak runoff rates and total runoff volumes for each watershed area.
v. Infiltration rates, where applicable, as determined by field testing of hydraulic conductivity.
vi. Culvert capacities.
vii. Flow velocities.
27
viii. Data on the increase in rate and volume of runoff for the design storms referenced in the Connecticut Stormwater Quality Manual (CTDEEP).
ix. Water surface elevations showing methodologies used and supporting calculations.
xx. Stage-discharge curves, outlet rating curves and inflow and outflow hydrographs for storage facilities (e.g., stormwater ponds and wetlands).
xxi). Hydrologic and hydraulic analysis for all structural components of stormwater system (e.g., storm drains, open channels, swales, management practices, etc.) for applicable design storms including final analysis of potential downstream effects of project, where necessary.
xxii). Documentation of sources for all computation methods and field test results.
b. Soils Information: If a stormwater management control measure depends on the hydrologic properties of soils (e.g., infiltration basins), then a soils report must be submitted. The soils report must be based upon on-site boring logs or soil pit profiles. The number and location of required soil borings or soil sites must be determined based on what is needed to determine the suitability and distribution of soil types present at the location of the control measure. If infiltration is to be part of the stormwater management plan, then field testing of hydraulic conductivity may be required if determined necessary by the Commission’s engineer to evaluate the proposal.
c. Maintenance and Repair Plan: The design and planning of all stormwater management facilities shall include detailed maintenance and repair procedures to ensure their continued function. These plans will identify the parts or components of a stormwater management facility that need to be maintained and the equipment and skills or training necessary. All stormwater BMPs shall be designed in a manner to minimize the need for maintenance and reduce the chances of failure. Design and maintenance guidelines to be followed shall be in accordance with the most recent version of the Connecticut Stormwater Quality Manual (CTDEEP). From Section 11-Parking
The applicant shall demonstrate the failure pattern for any proposed BMP and shall ensure that such failure does not adversely impact adjacent structures or wetland systems. Surficial detention structures which include a construction embankment greater than one (1) foot in height shall be design to include emergency spillways and appropriate downstream erosion protection.
d. Landscaping plan: The applicant must present a detailed plan for planting of vegetation at the site after construction is finished.
e. Maps and plans: The applicant must depict the stormwater management on the supplemental plans (scale of 1" = 40' or greater detail). Such plans must illustrate, in addition to the mapping requirements cited in Section 3, at a minimum:
i. Perennial and intermittent streams.
ii. Location and boundaries of resource protection areas such as wetlands, lakes, ponds, and other setbacks (e.g., stream buffers, drinking water well setbacks, septic setbacks)
iii. Location of existing and proposed conveyance systems such as grass channels, swales, and storm drains.
iv. Flow paths.
v. Location of floodplain and floodway limits.
vi. Location and dimensions of proposed channel modifications, such as bridge or culvert crossings.
vii. Location, size, maintenance access, and limits of disturbance of proposed structural stormwater management practices.
viii. Representative cross-section and profile drawings and details of structural stormwater management practices and conveyances (i.e., storm drains, open channels, swales, etc.) which include existing and proposed structural elevations (e.g., invert of pipes, manholes, etc.) and design water surface elevations.
ix. Structural details of outlet structures, embankments, spillways, stilling basins, grade control structures, conveyance channels, etc.
x. Downstream structures within two-hundred (200) feet of proposed BMP. The Commission shall have the right to increase the separation distance from the downstream structure if the proposed BMP structure, in the opinion of the Town’s engineer, poses a significant risk.
28
4.02.5 Assumptions Made
All Stormwater Management plans shall disclose all assumptions made in regard to future land clearing and regrading, creation of impervious surfaces, and other development activities that influence the rate, quality and volume of runoff. These include, but are not necessarily limited to, clearing limits, size and locations of driveways, houses, tennis courts, barns, pools, etc. The Commission may require the establishment of restrictions on one or more lots in situations where limits to such characteristics of lot development cannot be accurately predicted and enforced in advance; provided, however, that the Commission has no obligation to accept land use restrictions as mitigation to potential drainage issues. Restrictions should be used only in unique situations and in areas where such restrictions are clearly enforceable.
4.02.6 Maintenance plan:
The applicant must submit a maintenance plan for all Stormwater BMPs. The plan must include:
a. Description of maintenance tasks with recommended implementation schedule.
b. Description of access and safety issues.
c. For those small individual stormwater management facilities that are to be maintained by future property owners, the mylars, as-builts, and deeds must include this notice that a declaration of responsibilities and obligations will be filed on the land records as part of the subdivision approval. See Appendix D for the declaration language.
* This note is to be part of the mylar for the subdivision plans, Site Plans, and Special Exception plans, as-builts for each structure prior to Certificate of Zoning Compliance, and on each deed associated with the transfer of the property.
*The stormwater management structure maintenance is the responsibility of the property owner. A Stormwater Treatment Facility Maintenance Declaration has to be filed on the East Haddam Land Records as part of the approval. The individual lots of this subdivision have engineered stormwater facilities that are to be installed prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Zoning Compliance. The stormwater facilities are designed to manage quantity and quality of stormwater before the water leaves the property. It is the responsibility of the property owner to maintain these facilities to insure they function properly. At a minimum they are to be maintained every five years and at the time of resale. Maintenance guidelines as to how to maintain the stormwater facility are included as part of the subdivision or site plan, can be found in the Connecticut Stormwater Quality Manual (CTDEEP) as amended, or the Land Use Office can be asked for guidance.
4.03 LAND WITH LIMITATIONS FOR DEVELOPMENT
1). No land shall be subdivided for building purposes which consists of soil types designated as very poorly drained, poorly drained, alluvial or flood plains or of soil types which have very significant limitations, significant limitations of steep slopes for on-site soil absorption sewerage disposal facilities, said soils designated by the U.S. Department of Agriculture and the National Resources Conservation Service, as may be amended from time to time and listed in (a) and (b) below.
a. Soil not suitable for the installation of septic tank absorption fields.
The soils that are categorized as being not suitable for the installation of septic tank absorption fields have been so, primarily because they are either inland wetlands or have a shallow depth to bedrock. Other limiting factors include year round and seasonal high water tables, frequent flooding and ponding, very slow permeability to substratum, steep slopes, rock outcrops, and in some cases the possible pollution of ground water.
Aa Adrian muck
BcA Berlin silt loam, 0 to 5 percent slopes
Ce Carlisle muck
HSE Hollis-Rock outcrop complex, 15 to 40 percent slopes
HyC Holyoke-Rock outcrop complex, 3 to 15 percent slopes
HZE Holyoke-Rock outcrop complex, 15 to 40 percent slopes
LG Leicester, Ridgebury and Whitman extremely stone fine sandy loam
Ps Poduck fine sandy loam
Rb Raypol silt loam
Ru Rumney fine sandy loam
Rv Rumney Variant silt loam
Sb Saco silt loam
Sc Scarboro mucky loamy fine sand
St Suncook loamy sand
Wd Walpole sandy loam
29
We Westbrook mucky peat
Wh Westbrook mucky peat, low salt
Wr Wilbraham silt loam
Wt Wilbraham extremely stony silt loam
b. Soils with significant limitations for the installation of septic tank absorption fields.
The soils that are categorized as having significant limitations for the installation of septic tank absorption fields are limited by steep slopes (15-45%), seasonal high water table, stoniness, shallow depth to bedrock and slow to very slow permeability to substratum. Within each major soil grouping, there may be found, upon field investigation "pockets" of soils with slight to moderate limitations. Due to the varied range of slope in each unit (15-45%), there may be areas where the slope is acceptable. With careful testing, design and installation, a septic system can be successfully constructed subject to the provisions of the State Health Code.
CdD Canton and Charlton extremely stony fine sandy loam, 15 to 35 percent slopes
EfA Ellington fine sandy loam, 0 to 5 percent slopes
HrC Hinckley gravely sandy loam, 3 to 5 percent slopes
HME Hickley and Manchester soils, 15 to 45 percent slopes
HuD Holyoke-Chesire very stony silt loams, 15 to 35 percent slopes
LpA Ludlow silt loam, 0 to 3 percent slopes
LpB Ludlow silt loam, 3 to 8 percent slopes
LuB Ludlow very stony silt loam, 3 to 8 percent slopes
LuC Ludlow extremely stony silt loam, 3 to 15 percent slopes
NnA Ninigret fine sandy loam, 0 to 5 percent slopes
PeD Paxton and Montauk extremely stony fine sandy loams, 15 to 35 percent slopes
SgA Sudbury sandy loam, 0 to 5 percent slopes
WkD Wethersfield loam, 15 to 35 percent slopes
WXA Woodbridge fine sandy loam, 0 to 3 percent slopes
WXB Woodbridge fine sandy loam, 3 to 8 percent slopes
WyA Woodbridge very stony fine sandy loam, 0 to 3 percent slopes
WyB Woodbridge very stony fine sandy loam, 3 to 8 percent slopes
WzA Woodbridge extremely stony fine sandy loam, 0 to 3 percent slopes
WzC Woodbridge extremely stony fine sandy loam, 3 to 15 percent slopes
YaB Yalesville fine sandy loam, 3 to 8 percent slopes
YaC Yalesville fine sandy loam, 3 to 8 percent slopes
c. Soils that are generally suitable for the installation of septic tank absorption fields.
The soils that are categorized as being generally suitable for the installation of septic tank absorption fields are mostly well drained, have moderate to rapid permeability, and a slight slope. In some cases there is slow permeability in the substratum and a shallow depth to bedrock. For the most part, with careful testing, design and installation, a septic system can be installed with few complications.
d. Engineered design systems accepted by the Commission may require a bond in an amount determined by the Commission and for a period of time specified by the Commission to provide that the Town is placed in an assured position that the proposed designs work satisfactorily. After the approval of the Planning and Zoning Commission and the concurrence of the First Selectman, such bond shall be released by the Commission.
4.04 CERTIFICATION BY TOWN SANITARIAN
The Chatham Health District Official or any official or agency so appointed by the Board of Selectmen is the Town Sanitarian.
Each proposed subdivision lot shall be approved by the Town Sanitarian as having sufficient details and data to demonstrate that said lot can support a septic system, prior to its approval by the Commission.
All percolation tests and test pits shall be witnessed by the Town Sanitarian and shall be specified on all subdivision plans. Each proposed lot shall at the minimum have two test pits located in each of the proposed primary and reserve leaching areas.
30
Test pits and percolation tests shall be performed in accordance with Section 19-13-B103e(d) Site Investigation, of the Connecticut Public Health Code (as amended), and inspected by the Town Sanitarian. The location of test pits and percolation tests shall be in accordance with Section 19-13-B103e(e) (as amended).
All test pit data shall be shown on all subdivision/resubdivision maps and filed and recorded. The data shall be certified by the Town Sanitarian.
Groundwater and ledge observation test pits shall be filled in immediately after witnessing by the Town Sanitarian and / or the applicant’s engineer. Test pits which remain open more that 72 hours after witnessing are in violation of the zoning regulations. Applications received in which test pits remain open shall be subject to denial on that basis.
"As-Built" plans are required for the above sections and for any grading done in conjunction with reducing slopes for onsite sewerage disposal systems.
Engineered onsite sewage disposal plans, by proposed lot, as may be required by the Town Sanitarian and/or the Commission.
A signature box shall contain the following words:
CERTIFICATION BY THE TOWN SANITARIAN.
I HERE-BY CERTIFY THAT ALL LOTS ON THIS MAP MAY HAVE SEPTIC SYSTEMS
AND WELLS AT LOCATIONS SHOWN. THE FOLLOWING LOTS, IF ANY, SHALL HAVE
ENGINEERED DESIGNED SYSTEMS_________________________________________.
TOWN SANITARIAN _____________________________. DATE _____________.
4.05 RESERVE PARCELS
1) No privately owned parcel or portion of property shall be reserved in such a way that it can control or impede access to any part of the subdivision from any street or other public area, or from any abutting property to any proposed street, unless expressly approved by the Commission.
2) Any existing rights-of-way, easements or other rights on land to be subdivided shall be recorded on the Subdivision Map.
3) No parcel of land may be subdivided into lots or parcels that can not be demonstrated to support the intended use for residential, commercial, or industrial uses unless the property is subdivided for municipal, agricultural, or conservation purposes as allow in the C.G.S. under Section 8-18.
4.06.1 MINIMUM BUILDABLE LAND REQUIREMENTS
Scope of Requirement
No proposed plan of a new Subdivision in any district except the R1/2, C/B/IG, EHVD and C3 districts shall hereafter be approved unless the proposed lots equal or exceed the minimum size, width, and criteria requirements set forth in the various districts of these Regulations except as may otherwise be specifically provided in a Conservation Subdivision. Each proposed lot shall include an area of minimum buildable land which complies with all of the criteria as defined in the section below. Lots constructed in the past that have not met these requirements have demonstrated undesirable effects such as unnecessary and excessive blasting, flooded basements, ground water management problems, stormwater management issues, questionable long term septic viability, ground water contamination, and erosion control problems. Additional testing in the field may be required as directed by the Town of East Haddam representative to verify compliance with the Minimum Buildable Land Area.
Minimum Criteria of Buildable Land
Each lot shall meet the following criteria:
a. In the R2 and R4 Districts an area of at least 3/4 acre (32,670 square feet) shall be delineated, having at least four sides with the shortest side being no less than 130 linear feet. The shape of such an area shall generally resemble a rectangle,
31
pentagon or other like geometric figure. In the R and R1 District an area of at least 1/2 acre (21,780) shall be delineated, having at least four sides with the shortest side being no less than 90 linear feet. The shape of such an area shall generally resemble a rectangle, pentagon or other like geometric figure. (Hereinafter the “MBL Area”)
b. Within the MBL Area, naturally occurring topography not exceeding twenty-five percent (25%) slope in grade, as measured in 40 foot increments throughout the MBL Area. Topography exceeding 25% slope shall only be permitted to comprise 20% of the MBL Area. Areas exceeding twenty-five percent (25%) slope shall be shaded on the proposed plans.
c. Lots where testing indicates that there is less than twenty four inches (24”) of naturally occurring soil to ground water shall not to be included in the MBL Area.
d. Ledge rock no higher than four (4) feet below the natural ground surface as observed during soil testing shall not be included in the MBL Area.
e. No Inland or Tidal Wetlands or Watercourses, determined by a professional soils scientist, who is certified by the Society of Soils Scientists of Southern New England or the one hundred foot Upland Review Areas for wetlands and watercourses as defined by the East Haddam Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Commission, shall be contained in the MBL Area.
f. No MBL Area shall contain areas of vehicular travel easements, right of ways, underground utilities, drainage easement areas, nor shall restrictive cutting easements or conservation easements be used in lieu of Stormwater Management. Easement areas of overhead electrical wires can be used for the MBL Area as long as the plan does not violate any easement prohibitions (ie buildings/structures).
4.06.2 ALTERNATIVE SOIL BASED SUBDIVISION REVIEW – Alternative Minimum Buildable Land Regulation Intent – for existing lots which cannot meet the minimum lots criteria in Section 10.4 of the Zoning Regulations and Section 4.06 of the Subdivision Regulations but with additional land area may be able to meet the Stormwater Management Criteria in Section 4.02 of the Subdivision Regulations and the Public Health Code.
For an existing parcel which is unable to meet the subdivision regulations under the current minimum buildable land area regulations (Section 10.4 and 4.06, an alternative soil based investigation may be explored and implemented if the following conditions are met. As with all subdivisions, it is recommended that all subdivisions be reviewed on a preliminary layout. See Section 3.01 through Section 3.03 of the East Haddam Subdivision Regulations.
a. In the R2 and R4 Districts an area of at least ¾ acre (32,670 square feet) shall be delineated, having at least four sides with the shortest side being no less than 130 linear feet. In the R and R1 District an area of at least ½ acre (21,780 square feet) shall be delineated, having at least four sides with the shortest side being no less than 90 linear feet. The shape of such an area shall generally resemble a rectangle, pentagon or other like geometric figure (Hereinafter the “MBL Area”). This MBL Area is to be within the Proposed Lot Development Area.
b. One acre of additional land will be required in each district, but the proposed lot and the additional acreage should be comprised of soils designated as Class A, B, and C soils. If the addition of one acre of soil does not meet the requirement of these regulations, additional acreage in one (1) acre increments shall be added to meet the requirements of these regulations.
c. All newly proposed lots will have to meet the Connecticut Public Health Code.
d. All newly proposed lots will have to meet the Stormwater Management Criteria in Section 4.02 of the Subdivision Regulations. Stormwater management shall be contained on each subject lot and will not be subject to restrictive cutting easements or conservation easement to obtain the stormwater management goals.
e. Within the proposed lot development area, naturally occurring topography exceeding twenty five percent (25%) slope in grade, as measured in 40 foot increments throughout the Lot Area shall be shaded on the proposed plans. Topography exceeding twenty five percent (25%) slope shall only be permitted to comprise twenty five percent (25%) of the proposed Lot Development Area.
f. Within the proposed lot development area no more than twenty five percent (25%) of the Lot Area can contain soils classified as Class D and E soils combined. Areas consisting of Class D and E soils shall be identified on each lot and the percentage of the area of Class D and E soils shall be noted on the proposed subdivision map. See Appendix E for soil classifications.
32
g. No proposed Lot Area shall contain existing areas of vehicular travel easements, right of ways, underground utilities, drainage easement areas, nor shall restrictive cutting easements or conservation easements be used in lieu of stormwater management. Easement areas of overhead electrical wires can be used for MBL Area as long as the plan does not violate any easement prohibitions (ie: buildings/structures).
h. All proposed lots shall meet the other requirements of the Subdivision and Zoning Regulations. Applicant has to choose one method of subdivision review process for the proposed lot under Section 4.06.1 or Section 4.06.2. Under the filing of an alternative subdivision review under Section 4.06.2 the applicant cannot apply as part of a Conventional or Conservation Subdivision. Existing parcels, as of the effective date of this regulation, shall not be brought in for review in phases to circumvent the intent of these regulations.
4.07 INLAND WETLANDS AND WATERCOURSES COMMISSION
No application for Subdivision shall be deemed complete without the submission of a certified copy of the motion for approval or report as issued by the East Haddam Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Commission. Any plans submitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission shall conform, in all relevant respects, to those plans submitted to the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Commission as the same were approved, or modified and approved, by said Commission.
4.08 PASSIVE SOLAR ENERGY TECHNIQUES
The applicant shall demonstrate to the Commission that they have considered, in developing the plan, using passive solar energy techniques. Passive solar energy techniques mean site design techniques which maximize solar heat gain, minimize heat loss and provide thermal storage within a building during the heating season and minimize heat gain and provide for natural ventilation during the cooling season. The site design techniques shall include, but not limited to: (1) house orientations; (2) street and lot layout; (3) vegetation; (4) natural and man-made topographical features; and (5) protection of solar access within the development.
4.09 OPEN SPACES AND RECREATIONAL AREAS
4.09.01) DISPOSITION
For any subdivision of land under these Regulations, the Commission may require of the subdivider the disposition and official dedication of appropriately located and sized open space or recreation areas. For the purpose of this Section, "open space or recreation areas" shall be defined to include, but not be limited to: areas left in their natural, undisturbed state; agricultural land for which development rights have been assigned or otherwise alienated in perpetuity; areas and facilities for non-commercial, non-profit recreation; and similar areas for wildlife habitat, passive and active recreation, groundwater recharge, scenic preservation, and the like. In determining the appropriateness of an open space and/or recreation area disposition, the Commission shall consider Plan of Conservation and Development objectives and map designations and the subject site's characteristics with respect to the following objectives: The conservation and protection of wildlife and natural or scenic resources including lakes, ponds, rivers, streams, streambelts, inland wetlands, aquifers, significant woodlands, ridges, ravines, ledge outcroppings and other unusual physical features; the protection of historic or archeological sites; the expansion of existing open space and recreational areas and the meeting of neighborhood and/or community-wide recreational needs. In determining the location of open space, the Commission may consider potential for combination with existing or proposed open space on adjoining properties owned by any public or private institution.
4.09.02) SIZE
Where open space and/or recreation area disposition is deemed appropriate, the size of the required areas shall be determined by the Commission based on the site's value and importance in meeting the objectives cited in Section 4.09.01 and the scope of the subdivision proposal. Required open space and/or recreation areas shall be not less than 15% percent of the property under consideration. In determining the total land to be reserved as open space or recreation land, the Commission may consider not only the tract or tracts of land to be immediately subdivided, but also any other adjacent tract or tracts owned, controlled or under agreement to buy or optioned by the subdivider. Areas to be reserved as open space and/or recreation land shall be shown on the subdivision map. This Section shall only apply to subdivisions of more than 5 lots or 15 acre parcels created since the adoption of these Regulations. For purposes of calculating the percentage of open space required, any lot upon which a dwelling existed prior to the filing of the subdivision or resubdivision application shall be excluded; provided, however, that the open space required may be located within such lot. Any open space required under this Section shall be credited toward the requirements for any subsequent resubdivision of any component lot of the subdivision.
33
4.09.03: SITES OF ARCHAEOLOGICAL OR HISTORICAL SIGNIFICANCE
Any significant sites shall, where possible, be left undisturbed and may be considered in meeting the minimum open space requirements of this Section.
4.09.04: METHOD OF DISPOSITION
The Commission shall determine the most appropriate method of disposition after considering, among other things, the relationship of the subject area(s) and its specific characteristics to the Plan of Development and the objectives cited in Section 9.01; the desirability and suitability of public access and use and the scope of the subdivision proposal. The following disposition options may be utilized by the Commission:
a. Perpetual dedication in fee simple to the Town.
b. Perpetual dedication in fee simple to the State of Connecticut.
c. Perpetual dedication in fee simple to a land trust (at the option of the subdivider).
d. Dedication in fee simple to a homeowners' association (see, Section 4.09.08).
e. Utilization of conservation easement(s), with or without public access.
f. Utilization of a recreation easement.
g. Private ownership with the appropriate taking of development rights.
h. Any combination of the above or any suitable alternative approved by the Commission. Any conservation easements or other open space covenants or restrictions shall be subject to the approval of the Commission in form and content.
4.09.05: REFERRALS
The Commission may refer for review and comment any subdivision plan and proposal for the provision of open spaces and/or recreation land to the Conservation Commission, Open Space Committee, Recreation Commission, Connecticut River Coastal Conservation District, or any other appropriate agency.
4.09.060: CONDITION OF OPEN SPACES AND/OR RECREATION LAND
Open space and/or recreation areas shall typically abut or have direct public access to a public street and, as appropriate, any existing park or public land. All such areas shall include access roadways to be graded and improved in a manner suitable for safe pedestrian and vehicular traffic. Access roadways shall have an adequate base, shall be adequately drained and shall typically be twenty (20') feet wide and have a slope no greater than twelve (12%) percent.
Land to be provided as open space for the purpose of conservation and protection of wildlife and natural or scenic resources shall typically be left in its natural state by the Subdivider. Except for improvement as may be required by the Commission, open space areas shall not be graded, cleared, or used as a repository for brush, stumps, earth, building materials or debris. The Commission may require that any land to be dedicated for recreational use be cleared of brush, trees and debris; be graded to properly dispose of surface water; be covered with organic topsoil to a depth of four (4") inches; be seeded with low maintenance grass seed and be otherwise improved so that the land is left in a condition appropriate to the intended use. The Commission need not accept land composed entirely or substantially of inland wetlands in satisfaction of the requirements of this Section, unless it considers such areas to have special habitat or other environmental value.
When site improvements are required, they shall be clearly shown on the final subdivision maps or alternatively on a separate site improvements plan and they shall be approved by the Commission prior to the filing of the subdivision plan.
4.09.07: ENFORCEMENT BONDING
To ensure proper construction of any required Improvements, the Commission shall require the subdivider to post a performance bond in an amount and with terms acceptable to the Commission. Unless modified by the Commission in accordance with Section 3.04g of these Regulations, all required Improvements of open space and/or recreation land shall be completed prior to the occupancy of fifty (50%) percent of the dwellings within the subdivision.
34
4.09.08: HOMEOWNERS' ASSOCIATION
The Commission may, upon the request of the subdivider, permit the ownership and maintenance of the open space and/or recreation area to be transferred to an association of property owners. Such transfer shall be in accordance with standards established by the Commission to include, but not be limited to, the following which:
a) Establishes a mandatory participation in an association of property owners to maintain the land reservation for open space park and playground purposes, with power to assess all members for all necessary costs.
b) Will be binding on all future property owners.
c) Will be perpetual.
d) Will not be affected by any change in zoning or land use.
e) Will assure adequate maintenance.
f) May be enforced by the Town by appropriate legal action.
g) Shall provide that if maintenance or preservation of the dedication no longer comply with the provisions of the document, the Town may take all necessary action to assure compliance and assess against the association all costs incurred by the Town for such purposes.
After approval by the Town Attorney and Commission, said document shall be filed by the subdivider in the Office of the Town Clerk.
4.09.09: LEGAL TRANSFERAL
Properly executed legal documents, including warranty deeds for any title transferals, shall be prepared in accordance with the provision of this section and shall be submitted in triplicate with the final subdivision map to be filed. All documents must be acceptable to the Town Attorney and Planning Staff and shall refer to the subdivision maps by title. All warranty deeds for dedication of land to the Town shall be held in escrow by the Commission to be recorded on the Town Land Records upon acceptance by the Board of Selectman. In the event that acceptance is rejected by the Board of Selectman, the deed shall be returned and the subdivider shall return to the Commission for determination of an alternative means of preserving the open space and/or recreation areas. In no case, shall the acceptance of any deed by the Commission or an employee of the Town be deemed as acceptance of the open space and/or recreation area by the Town.
4.09.10: DEDICATION FOR OTHER MUNICIPAL PURPOSES
In the event the subdivider desires to transfer to the Town land for other municipal purposes such as future schools, fire houses, etc., the dedication provisions of this Regulation shall be complied with. The Commission may consider such a municipal dedication as a credit toward any open space and/or recreational area disposition requirements.
4.09.11: PAYMENT OF FEE IN LIEU OF OPEN SPACE
In accordance with Connecticut General Statutes §8-25, as amended by Public Act 90-239, Section 1, the Commission may authorize a subdivider to pay a fee to the Town of in lieu of the disposition of land by one of the methods set forth in Section 4.09.04 hereinabove. Such authorization may be granted by the Commission if and when it determines, in its sole discretion, that there are inadequate areas on the subdivision which merit preservation by one of the methods set forth in Section 4.09.04, or that there are other areas in the Town of East Haddam where preservation would be more beneficial to the public health, safety and welfare. In the event that such authorization is granted by the Commission, such payment or combination of payment and the fair market value of land transferred shall be equal to not more than ten (10%) percent of the fair market value of the land to be subdivided prior to the approval of the subdivision. The fair market value shall be determined by an appraiser jointly selected by the Commission and the subdivider. A fraction of such payment, the numerator of which is one and the denominator of which is the number of approved lots in the subdivision, shall be made at the time of the sale of each approved lot in the subdivision and placed in a fund. Such fund shall be used solely for the purpose of preserving open space or acquiring additional land for open space or for recreational or agricultural purposes. The said payment obligation shall be secured by a lien against each lot in the subdivision which shall be filed at the time that the final subdivision plans are filed in the Office of the Town Clerk, in accordance with Section 3.05 of these Regulations. The said lien shall be in a form approved by the Commission, and shall be unencumbered by any mortgage or encumbrance having priority over said lien, as evidenced by a Certificate of Title, in accordance with Section 3.05 of these Regulations.
35
4.09.12: EXEMPTIONS FROM FEE IN LIEU OF OPEN SPACE DISPOSITION REQUIREMENTS
In accordance with Public Act 90-239, Section 1, the provisions of Section 9.b and 9.k shall not apply if:
a) The transfer of all land in a subdivision of less than five (5) lots is to a parent, child, brother, sister, grandparent, grandchild, aunt, uncle, or first cousin of the property owner for no consideration. Such intended transfer shall be evidenced by covenants, restrictions, contracts, or other legally binding documents as the Commission may approve, which documents shall be filed in the Land Records in accordance with the procedure and other requirements of Section 3.05 of these Regulations. If the Commission determines, based on events subsequent to the approval of such subdivision, that such transfers were intended to be temporary, and for the sole purpose of evading the requirements of this Section 4.09, the Commission may void the subdivision in accordance with Section 1.07 of these Regulations.
b) The subdivision is to contain affordable housing, as defined in Section 8-39a of the Connecticut General Statutes, equal to twenty (20%) percent or more of the total housing to be constructed in such subdivision. Such restrictions for affordable housing shall be evidenced by such documents as the Commission may require, and such restrictions shall run with the lots affected thereby in perpetuity. If, subsequent to approval of the Subdivision, the lots designated for affordable housing shall not be sold for that purpose, the Commission may void those subdivision lots in accordance with Section 1.07 of these Regulations.
4.10: STREAMBELT RESERVATIONS
The applicant shall delineate a streambelt along any watercourses passing through the property to be subdivided. The streambelt shall be established in accordance with the publication of the “Streambelt Map”, dated April 1973, and on file at the Town Clerk’s Office and the Zoning Office.
4.11: GROUNDWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN
If the seasonal groundwater elevations could affect the structures, sewage disposal systems or the roadway, a system of underdrains shall be shown on the plans. This includes curtain drains, footing drains, swales, and other features for groundwater management.
4.12: FIELD REVIEW BY COMMISSION
The Commission may request that all proposed roadway centerline, lot lines, house sites, septic areas, wetland borders and locations of all major drainage facilities be staked in the field by the developer's engineer or surveyor to permit the Commission to view the proposed locations. The centerline shall be staked every one hundred (100) feet and the stakes shall show the roadway station.
4.13: REQUIREMENT OF AFFORDABLE HOUSING
Reserve
4.14: TREES, SOIL REMOVAL AND ROADS
4.14.01: For the purpose of enhancement of property values and for erosion control, the preservation and protection of shade trees throughout the Subdivision shall be encouraged, except where they interfere with roads and utilities.
4.14.02: Approval of a subdivision by the Commission shall not constitute approval of the removal of soil, topsoil or other excavated material from the premises other than that from the road area, and then only to the depths shown on the approved plan.
4.14.03: The land located within a subdivision shall be properly graded and left in a condition which will be free of rubble and debris, and property stabilized to eliminate erosion. Stumps, logs, construction materials, and other debris shall only be buried on site in locations designated on the approved subdivision plans, and in compliance with all applicable Town and State laws and regulations.
4.14.04: The Commission shall require that Street trees be planted on both sides of any Street to be dedicated to the Town. The Commission may also required buffers planted as described in Section 4.18. Said planting plans shall be prepared by a landscape architect or other credentialed professional acceptable to the Commission and shall be accompanied with a planting timeline. Trees shall be spaced approximately fifty (50') feet apart subject to the variations made necessary by driveways,
36
street corners and walks, and shall be located approximately ten (10') feet from the street line. Trees to be planted shall be 2 1/2" to 3 1/2" in caliper or larger, and shall have a minimum height of eight (8') feet. The kind of tree shall be subject to the approval of the Commission who shall not approve low branching trees, trees which are disease bearing or cause damage to sewers or drains, or trees which create a traffic hazard. Acceptable species are Sugar Maples (Acer saccharum), Red Maple (Acer rubrum), London Planetree (Plantanus acerfolia), Pin Oak (Quercus palustris), Red Oak (Quercus rubra), Green Ash (Fraxinus pennsylvanica), and Blackgum (Nyssa sylvatica). Alternative native tree species and groupings of native shrub species may be substituted with the Commission’s approval. Where the tree may interfere with utility poles and wires (under or above ground), the Commission may permit the location of required trees within the front ten (10') feet of the proposed lots. Existing trees along the proposed street which conform to these requirements may be substituted for new trees. Specimen or historic trees located within the right-of-way of any existing Town street shall not be removed without the prior approval of the Commission.
4.15 PEDESTRIAN WALKWAYS / BIKEWAYS
In areas where the proposed street system does not conform to the anticipated pattern of pedestrian circulation, particularly in the area of existing or proposed parks, playgrounds, or open spaces, the Commission may require the dedication and construction of separate pedestrian walkways, bikeways, or trails on public easements no less than fifteen (15') feet in width.
4.16 SITES OF HISTORICAL, CULTURAL, AND ARCHEOLOGICAL SIGNIFICANCE
4.16.01) Cultural Resource Preservation
Subdivisions and resubdivisions shall be laid out to preserve significant cultural resources and unique natural features. Suitable public access to any cemetery may be required by the Commission. Any significant sites shall, where possible, be left undisturbed and may be considered in meeting the minimum open space requirements of the Subdivision Regulations.
4.16.02) Cemeteries and Human Burials
All cemeteries within the proposed subdivision shall be deeded to the Town of East Haddam, an existing cemetery association, a homeowners association, or other responsible party, as deemed appropriate by the Commission, along with a twenty (20) foot protective buffer, as measured from stonewalls surrounding a cemetery, or from any identified human burial in the absence of walls or other demarcated boundary.
4.16.03) Archaeological Assessment
An on-site archaeological assessment shall be required, if in the opinion of the Commission, there is a likelihood that significant cultural resources or undetected human burials will adversely impacted by construction activities associated with the proposed development.
In all subdivisions of twenty (20) acres or more, all applicants shall make written inquiry of the State Archaeologist to determine if there is evidence of sites of archaeological significance within the subdivision. The assessment shall be conducted in accordance with standards outlined in the Environmental Review Primer for Connecticut’s Archaeological Resources. Permanent reference copies are on file at the State Historic Preservation Office and the East Haddam Planning and Zoning Office.
4.16.04) Determination of Need
The Commission’s determination of need for an archaeological assessment shall be based on:
a. The proximity to identified cemeteries, human burials, archaeological sites, historic sites; and/or
b. The natural terrain features such as proximity to wetlands or watercourses, soils, slope, aspects of rock shelters, where factors reflect scientifically documented settlement patterns preferred by Native Americans or European Colonist.
In making this determination, the Commission shall seek the advice and comment from the Office of State Archaeology and/or State Preservation Officer. A letter seeking such advice shall be mailed within two (2) working days after the Commission’s subdivision preliminary review, as defined in Section 3.03 of these regulations.
37
4.16.05) Management Plans: Cultural resource management plans submitted to the Commission by the applicant shall consist of:
a. A written investigative report prepared by a professional archaeologist, containing appropriate historic documentation, a description of research design methods and techniques, and a description of sites, features and artifacts discovered as a result of the archaeological investigation. A list of accredited professional archaeologists is maintained by the State Historic Preservation Officer;
b. An evaluation of impact of the proposed subdivision on identified cemeteries, human burials, archaeological sites and historic sites
c. A description of measures to be undertaken by the applicant to mitigate adverse impacts of construction activities, on identified cultural resources. This may include an estimate of mitigation cost and time required for more extensive investigations. Measures may include open space dedication, conservation easements, redesign or relocation of roads, drainage features or buildings so as to minimize adverse impacts, or excavation and removal of cultural remains supervised by a professional archaeologist;
d. Copies of all investigative reports and management plans shall be submitted to the Office of State Archaeology and State Historic Preservation Officer for review and comment prior to any Planning and Zoning public hearing. Comments received from the state officials shall be incorporated into the public hearing record. . The copies will also be distributed, by the applicant, to the East Haddam Historical Society, East Haddam Historic District Commission, East Haddam Library, Rathbun Library, and the Planning & Zoning Office.
4.17 STONE WALLS AND FOUNDATIONS
Stonewalls and foundations are significant man made features important to the character of the community. Proposed street, utility and future building shall be designed to preserve stonewalls and foundations to the maximum extent possible. The Applicant should allow the existing stonewalls to become lot lines as much as is feasible. The Commission may require conservation easements along stonewalls and foundations to ensure their future protection. The Commission may require the reconstruction of significant stonewalls and foundations by the subdivider where their preservation is not possible. In cases where stonewalls or foundations cannot be preserved, the Commission may require the features be photo-documented and mapped. Photographs shall be professional black and white images with scales to demonstrate size of the stone ruins. Five copies of these documents shall be submitted to the Commission. The copies will be distributed to the East Haddam Historical Society, East Haddam Historic District Commission, East Haddam Library, Rathbun Library, and the Planning & Zoning file.
4.18 RURAL, RESIDENTIAL, & AGRICULTURAL BUFFER AREAS
4.18.01 Rural Buffer Areas, Natural or Historic Features. When natural features of the land or historical features of the area have been identified as “Conservation Areas” in the Plan of Conservation and Development by the Commission or other advisory agencies, the Commission shall require the implementation of buffers to preserve the visual character of the natural or historic features. Said buffers shall be one hundred (100) in width but may be reduced to no less than twenty-five (25) feet in width after review and deliberation by the commission depending on the type of natural features, the topography, existing vegetation and the proposed design and plantings of such areas. It shall be the responsibility of the developer, subject to approval by the Commission, to provide an effective barrier that will reasonably buffer adjacent natural or historic features. It shall be the responsibility of individual lot owners where such buffers are established on their lots, to maintain the buffer in accordance with the designed intent, such responsibility to be implemented and enforced by a declaration of covenants and restrictions in a form to be approved by the Commission and approved in final version by its legal counsel.
4.18.02) Residential Buffers Areas When the application proposes a different type of housing or other use (e.g., multi-family, two-family, commercial, mixed use) or density of housing in the neighborhood, the Commission shall require the implementation of buffers to separate development types or density and protect property values. Said buffers shall be one hundred feet (100) in width but may be reduced to no less than twenty-five (25) in width after review and deliberation by the commission depending on the type of adjoining use, the topography, existing vegetation and the proposed design and plantings of such areas. It shall be the responsibility of the developer, subject to approval by the Commission, to provide an effective barrier that will reasonably buffer adjacent residential living areas. It shall be the responsibility of the individual lot owners where such buffers are established on their lots, to maintain the buffer in accordance with the designed intent, such responsibility to be implemented and enforced by a declaration of covenants and restrictions in a form to be approved by the Commission and approved in a final version by its legal counsel.
38
4.18.03) Agriculture Buffer Areas Buffers adjacent to actively farmed land shall be established around residential subdivisions. Said buffer areas shall be one hundred feet (100) in width but may be reduced to no less than fifty (50) feet in width as directed by the Commission, depending on the type of agricultural or farm use, the topography, existing vegetation and the proposed design and plantings of such areas. It shall be the responsibility of the developer, subject to approval by the Commission, to provide an effective barrier that will reasonably protect adjacent farming area. It shall be the responsibility of the individual lot owners where such buffers are established on their lots, to maintain the buffer in accordance with the designed intent, such responsibility to be implemented and enforced by a declaration of covenants and restrictions in a form to be approved by the Commission and approved in a final version by its legal counsel. In addition, the following statement shall be noted on the subdivision plan: “This property abuts or is in proximity to an active agricultural or farming operation which is a permitted zoning use. The policy of the Town is to encourage agricultural uses which are an integral component of the existing community character. Agricultural operations sometimes emit such things as noise, odor, or dust which are unavoidable byproducts of such operations.” If the abutting actively farmed land changes use to residential, commercial, or industrial development, then these requirements shall be voided, and the implementing declaration and covenant shall so provide.
4.18.04) New Roads When a subdivision application proposes a new road and the development pattern proposal is not consistent with the existing pattern, spacing, density, or style of the residences that are on the existing street, the Commission shall require buffers. Said buffer shall be one hundred feet (100) in width from the existing road but may be reduced to no less than fifty (50) feet in width as directed by the Commission, depending on the type of adjoining use, the topography, existing vegetation and the proposed design and planting of such areas. It shall be the responsibility of the developer, subject to approval by the Commission, to provide an effective barrier that will reasonably protect adjacent area. It shall be the responsibility of the individual lot owners where such buffers are established on their lots, to maintain the buffer in accordance with the designed intent, such responsibility to be implemented and enforced by a declaration of covenants and restrictions in a form to be approved by the Commission and approved in final version by its legal counsel.
4.18.05) Preservation and Maintenance of Buffer Areas Such responsibility for the subsections .01 through .04 above shall be specifically noted on the subdivision plan and in the deeds of affected lots. Where a buffer area is part of a common open space, the responsibility for maintenance will be assumed by a homeowners association or by other arrangements that is acceptable to the Commission. The preservation and maintenance of the said buffer strip shall be recorded as a restrictive covenant and the buffer strip shall be maintained by the property owner as required in the restrictive covenant. The restrictive covenant language acceptable to the Commission must be used, and the execution and filing of such covenant shall be subject to review and approval by the Commission legal counsel. Said restrictive covenant shall be filed in the land records of the Town Clerk prior to endorsement of any record map.
4.18.06) Waiver The Commission recognizes that each parcel of property is unique in location, dimensions, orientation, topography, etc., and the various factors in the design of subdivisions are variable with relation to each other and to the above characteristics of the property. Therefore, in accordance with Connecticut General Statutes Section 8-26, the Commission may modify or waive, subject to appropriate conditions, such requirements as is in its judgment of the special circumstances and conditions that are not requisite to the interest of public health, safety and general welfare. See Section 7 of the Subdivision Regulations for specific conditions.
4.18.07) Buffer Plant Requirements All landscaping of the site shall be designed so as to protect and enhance the historic and rural character of the Town and the subject neighborhood, and to provide all-season visual buffers between the proposed use and any incompatible use of adjacent property through the use of grade separation, landscaping, buffer areas, and/or open spaces. Landscaped areas shall be strategically placed to enhance property values and to protect adjacent uses. All deciduous trees shall be 2 ½” to 3 ½” in caliper or larger, and shall have a minimum height of eight (8) feet; all evergreen trees shall have a minimum height of six (6’) feet; and all shrubs shall be of a size at least one-third their mature potential.
4.18.08) Use of Open Space as a Buffer When the Commission determines the maximum amount of buffering required under these regulations is not sufficient in certain areas, the Commission may direct the applicant to create additional buffering through the use of the Open Spaces and Recreational Areas required in Section 4.09.
4.19 FIRE PROTECTION
The Commission may refer any Subdivision application to the East Haddam Board of Fire Commissioners for recommendations concerning fire safety. Regardless of any such referral, the applicants may be required by the Commission to install water storage tanks or a suitable fire pond with associated hydrants and piping. Fire protection related
39
improvements shall include appropriate access and maintenance easements to be deeded to the Town when fire protection improvements have been completed and accepted by the Town.
4.20 PUBLIC NOTICE
a) Notice to Adjoining Owner The applicant shall notify all owner(s) of parcel(s) (as recorded on the last completed Grand List of the Town of East Haddam) within a distance of one hundred (100) feet from any boundary of said parcel(s) effected. Notification shall be in writing, certified mail return receipts requested, not less than fourteen (14) days prior to said hearing. No notice shall be required for the continuation of a public hearing once it has been open.
b) Posting of Sign No less than ten (10) days prior to the opening of any public hearing, the applicant shall post a sign on the property which is the subject of any application for subdivision. The face of the sign shall be provided with the following information in the following format;
NOTICE OF PUBLIC HEARING
SUBDIVISION APPLICATION
DATE OF HEARING
TIME
LOCATION
EAST HADDAM PLANNING & ZONING COMMISSION APP. #
It shall be the obligation of the Applicant to post such sign on the property in a location which is plainly visible from the nearest public street (or streets where applicable), and to maintain the sign until the opening of the public hearing. The sign shall be four (4) feet by four (4) feet in size. Lettering shall be clearly visible from the street. No sign need be posted for the continuation of a public hearing once it has opened. Signs are to be removed within seven days after the closing of the public hearing.
40
SECTION 5
SUBDIVISION ROAD STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS
5.01 PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY:
These subdivision road standards and specifications (the "Standards") have been adopted for the following purposes: to promote the public health, safety and welfare: to assure protection of the public against the dangers of unsafe roads; to assure protection of the use, value and enjoyment of premises adjoining roads and to assure the protection of the Town against costs and expenses in the repair and maintenance of roads after acceptance which are avoidable through careful planning, appropriate design and competent construction.
5.02 DESCRIPTION
a) The Improvements set forth in this Section shall be required in all Subdivisions except where waived by the Commission pursuant to Section 8 of these Regulations. The subdivider shall also be required to install street signs, monuments, driveway aprons, loam and seeding, and shade trees. The Commission may require the installation of sidewalks, fire hydrants, dry hydrants and fire ponds, and street lights. Such Improvements shall be installed in accordance with Town, State highway, or utility company standards. The Applicant is encouraged to investigate and propose, after preliminary consultation with the Commission, “non-standard” streets, including boulevard street with variable-width medians, streets more narrow than specified herein, cul-de-sacs with less pavement than specified herein, etc.
b) The "Rules and Regulations of the State Board of Registration for Professional Engineers and Land Surveyors," dated January 1, 1966, with all revisions, shall apply to all technical work done in conjunction with subdivisions. The technical responsibilities of the Registered Professional Engineer and Land Surveyor in regard to subdivision work are:
i) The design of roads, both horizontal and vertical alignment; drainage systems, including the design and location of structures and pipe; sanitary sewer systems; sewage disposal systems; and water supply and distribution constitute professional engineering and as such shall be sealed by a Registered Professional Engineer. A land surveyor's seal or an architect's seal is not acceptable for this phase of land subdivision design work.
ii) The phase of land subdivision which relates to topography maps and the delineation of the boundary lines of the outside perimeter as well as the interior lots and streets constitutes land surveying within the meaning of the statute and as such shall be sealed by a Registered Land Surveyor. A professional engineer's seal or an architect's seal is not acceptable.
iii) Roadway widths and curve radii shall be adequate to satisfy emergency vehicle needs. Where deemed necessary by the Commission, drainage easements shall be obtained and all private roads and driveways shall be designed to prevent stormwater flows from entering a Town street.
5.03 ROAD DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION PROCESS:
The following is a summary of the recommended sequential steps in the design and construction of improvements for existing and proposed subdivision roads.
1. Applicant approaches the Commission for guidance concerning road responsibility.
2. Functional road classification for existing and proposed new roads are determined by the Commission by reference to the criteria of these Regulations and the Plan of Conservation and Development.
3. Functional road classification and development situation combine to determine road responsibility.
4. Applicant's engineer consults these Standards for information regarding road design.
5. Applicant approaches Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Commission for input concerning wetlands crossings and other impacts.
6. Applicant approaches Commission with preliminary road and lot layout.
7. Final road design gains approvals from Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Commission and the Commission as part of total subdivision approval.
8. Applicant's Engineer provides written estimate of costs of all improvements, including, but not limited to, road construction and improvement, drainage, erosion and sedimentation control measures, street signs, and all other improvements required by the Commission in the subdivision approval by these Standards.
41
9. Applicant provides bonding in an amount and form acceptable to the Commission in accordance with Section 6.01 of these Regulations and these Standards.
10. Applicant provides payment of a fee in accordance with Town's Fee Schedule Ordinance.
11. Applicant applies in writing to the Board of Selectman for a Road Construction Permit in accordance with Town Ordinance.
12. As-built plans are required to be presented to the Commission prior to the release of any bond and the acceptance of any road by the Town.
13. State Highways. The subdivision plan shall be submitted to the State Department of Transportation if a proposed street in the subdivision intersects with a State Highway
5.04 FUNCTIONAL ROAD CLASSIFICATION: FOR EXISTING AND PROPOSED ROADS:
1. ARTERIAL: Route 82 –Norwich Road, Town Street, Norwich-Salem Road, Route 149 – Main Street, Moodus - East Haddam Road, Falls Road, Sipples Hill Road -, Route 151 -Moodus – Leesville Road, Plains Road, Town Street, [Route 148], Route 156 – Hamburg Road, Route 434- Mt Parnassus Road, Millington Road, Hopyard Road, Route 431 - River Road, and Route 609 – Leesville Road.
2. COLLECTOR: East Haddam-Colchester Turnpike, Tater Hill Road, Clark Hill Road, Smith Road, Falls Bashan Road, North Moodus Road, (junction of Sillmanville Road to Route 149), Landing Hill Road, and Haywardville Road.
3. RESIDENTIAL: Overlook Road, O'Connell Road, O’Connell Road Extension, Palmer Martin Road, A.P. Gates Road, Ackley Cemetery Road, Ackley Road, Alexander Road, Alger Road, Algonquin Trail, Andrews Road, Apple Lane, Babcock Road, Baker Lane, Baker Road, Ballahack Road, Banner Road, Banning Road, Barberry Lane, Beebe Road, Boardman Road, Bogel Road, Bogue Lane, Bone Mill Road, Bonfoey Road, Briarcliffe Road, Brooke Hill Road, Broom Road, Cantrall Road, Casner Road, Cedar Meadow Road, Cherry Swamp Road, Clark Hill Road, Cold Spring Road, Commerce Drive, Cove Road, Cragmere Road, Creamery Road, Creek Row, Cross Road, Daniel Peck Road, Daniels Road, Davison Road, Day Hill Road, Deer Run, Desmond Road, Dock Rock, Dolbia Hill Road, Early Road, East Lane, East Shore Drive, Echo Farm Road, Ed Williams, Road, Eli Chapman Road, Essex Turnpike, Fay Drive, Florida Road, Forest Way, Foxtown Cemetery Road, Geoffrey Road, Great Hillwood Road, Gristmill Road, Hall Kilbourne Road, Hedlund Road, Helon Cone Road, Hem Street, Hemlock Valley Road, Heritage Brooke Road, Highland Avenue, Hillside Road, Hilltop Road, Honey Hill Road, Hungerford Road, Joe Williams Road, Johnsonville Road, Jones Hill Road, Juda Lane, Lake Shore Drive, Lakeside Drive, Landing Hill Road, Launching Area Road, Laurel Lane, Long Pasture Lane, Longwood Drive, Lookout Drive, Lori lane, Lumberyard Road, Maple Avenue, Matthews Drive, Mill Road, Millington Road, Mitchell Road, Mott Lane, Neptune Avenue, Newberry Loop, Newberry Road, Nichols Road, Old East Haddam Road, Old Kentwood Road, Old Millington Road, Old Mt Parnassus Road, Old Orchard Road, Old Town Street, Olde Field Drive, Olmsted Road, Oriole Road, Parker Road, Petticoat Lane, Phelps Road, Porges Road, Powerhouse Road, Ray Hill Road, Ray Palmer Road, Red Mill Lane, Ridge Road, Ridgebury, Ridgewood Road, Ridgewood Road Extension, Robbie Road, Salem Road, Schulman Veselak, School Road, Scoville Landing, Shanaghan Road, Sheepskin Hollow, Silas Holmes, Sillmanville Road, Sims Lane Sims Road, Southwinds Road, Starr Road, Stockburger Road, Stocking Lot Road, Stony Brook Drive, Sunset Road, Tater Hill Road, Three Bridges Road, Town Farm Road, Town Road, Trowbridge Road, Valley Brook Road, Warner Road, West Cove Road, West Road, Westwood Road, Whip-O-Whill Terrace, Whitewood Road, Wickham Road, Wigwam Road, Wildwood Road, William F. Palmer Road, Wocl Road, Woodmont Circle.
4. PRIVATE: All streets not listed above.
5. SCENIC: An Arterial, Collector, Residential or Unclassified road which has also been designated as a scenic road by applicable Connecticut State Statute and Town Ordinance.
6. UNCLASSIFIED: Any existing streets which are not listed above shall be classified by the Commission as Arterial, Collector, Residential or Private, or, if not a road, as a driveway or common driveway, based on a review of the Plan of Development and consultation with the Board of Selectmen. The Commission may, in its discretion, hold a public hearing to solicit such information, or may defer any classification until the completion of pending or potential adjudication by a court of competent jurisdiction. Classification of proposed streets shall be in accordance with the criteria of Section 5.05 of these
42
Regulations. Any such classification which the Commission makes under this subsection 6 shall be for the purpose of these Regulations only, and shall not be construed to be a determination or adjudication of any property or other rights among private parties.
7.DRIVEWAY: An access way serving a single lot.
8. COMMON DRIVEWAY: An access way serving 2 to 4 lots.
5.05 CLASSIFICATION FACTORS:
Proposed subdivision roads shall be classified as Arterial, Collector or Residential by the Commission after evaluating the following factors:
a. The type of land use permitted in the subject zone and/or proposed for the Subdivision, such as, residential, commercial, industrial or institutional;
b. The residential density and/or development intensity of any permitted land use;
c. The number of acres and/or residential units and/or nonresidential buildings to be served, both immediately and in the future, including potential extensions of the proposed Streets and traffic considerations;
d. The physical characteristics of the property through which the Street is proposed such as topographs, surface geology, water table level, and the like; and
e. The Commission shall also consider recommendations from the Plan of Development.
43
5.06 DEVELOPMENT SITUATION - IMPROVEMENTS TO EXISTING ROADS:
A. GENERAL: Whenever any Subdivision is proposed for land abutting or accessible by any existing improved, unimproved or unpaved Town Street and the Commission determines that approval of the subdivision plan would endanger the public safety or compromise the general welfare unless such Street were widened, straightened, altered and/or improved along the portion(s) of the Street abutting the proposed subdivision, the Commission may condition its approval upon completion of the widening, alteration and/or improvements of such Street in accordance with the standards set forth below, or may deny such application where conditions or the scope of improvements required cannot reasonably or reliably be determined without additional engineering design, field or survey work, or other information not set forth in the application and supporting information. Wherever practical, existing significant stonewalls and trees shall be preserved along the existing Street. Required improvements are determined by matching the development situation with or modifying the corresponding response set forth below. The Commission may waive these requirements after the Applicant has submitted a resolution from the Board of Selectmen requesting the modification or elimination of the improvements required by these Standards.
B. DEVELOPMENT ON ONE SIDE OF COLLECTOR STREET.
Situation: 2 to 9 lot subdivision on one side of Collector Street by Applicant.
Response - At the Applicant's expense, Street improvements are to be shown by Engineer's plan with drainage upgrading. Deeded drainage easements and rights to drain to be provided only as the Selectmen or the Commission require. Along developed Street frontage, Street right of way is to be established at a minimum of 25 feet from the center of the existing right of way. Road Base is to be widened by Applicant along developed road frontage from the centerline to a minimum of 15 feet with greater widths required where alignment improvements are required. Road Base to be 8" compacted bank-run gravel (18" in rock) with 4" compacted processed gravel top-coat. Surface Treatment is to be provided by the Town of East Haddam at its option. The construction, dredging or enlargement of new and existing fire ponds may be required at the Applicant's expense. In the place of pond construction or improvements, installation of a holding tank or tanks may be required. All fire protection installed shall require dry hydrants as deemed necessary. Inspection of the road improvements by an Engineer is required. Final approval and acceptance of the Street improvements is the responsibility of the Board of Selectmen and is based upon compliance with these Regulations. All Street improvements are to be completed before lot conveyance, or bonding be posted to provide for completion of the Street improvements in accordance with Section 6.01.
Situation: 10 or more lot subdivision on one side of Collector Street by Applicant:
Response - At the Applicant's expense, road improvements are to be shown by Engineer's plan with drainage upgrading. Deeded drainage easements and rights to drain are required. Along developed Street frontage, Street right of way are to be established at a minimum of 25 feet from center of existing right of way. Road Base to be widened by Applicant along developed Street frontage from centerline to a minimum of 15 feet with greater widths required where alignment improvements are required. Road Base is to be 8" compacted bank-run gravel (18" in rock) with 4" compacted processed gravel top-coat. Surface Treatment is to be provided by the Town of East Haddam at its option. The construction, dredging or enlargement of new and existing fire ponds may be required at the Applicant's expense. In the place of pond construction or improvements, installation of a holding tank or tanks may be required. All fire protection installed shall require dry hydrants as deemed necessary. The cleaning out or enlargement of an existing fire pond with the installation of a dry hydrant may also be an alternative. Inspection of the Street improvements by an Engineer is required. Final approval and acceptance of the Street improvements is the responsibility of the Board of Selectmen and is based upon compliance with these Regulations. All road improvements are to be completed before lot conveyance, or bonding be posted to provide for completion of the road improvements in accordance with Section 6.01.
C. DEVELOPMENT ON BOTH SIDES OF COLLECTOR STREET.
Situation: 2 to 9 lot subdivision on both sides of Collector Street by Applicant.
Response 4 - At the Applicant's expense, road improvements are to be shown by Engineer's plan with drainage upgrading. Deeded drainage easements and rights to drain shall be required. Along developed Street frontage, Street right of way to be established at a width of 50 feet and arranged to allow for improvements to the horizontal alignment along the Street adjacent to the proposed subdivision Road Base to be widened by Applicant along developed road frontage from centerline to a minimum of 15 feet with greater widths required where alignment improvements are required. Road Base to be 8" compacted bank-run gravel (18" in rock) with 4" compacted processed gravel top-coat. Surface Treatment of liquid asphalt in two applications is to be provided by the Applicant at their expense. The construction, dredging or enlargement of new and existing fire ponds may be required at the Applicant's expense. In the place of pond construction or improvements, installation of a holding tank or tanks may be required. All fire protection installed shall require dry hydrants as deemed necessary. The cleaning out or enlargement of an existing fire pond with the installation of a dry hydrant may also be an
44
alternative. Inspection of the Street improvements by an Engineer is required. Final approval and acceptance of the Street improvements is the responsibility of the Board of Selectmen and is based upon compliance with these Regulations. All Street improvements are to be completed before lot conveyance or bonding be posted to provide for completion of the Street improvements in accordance with Section 6.01.
Situation: 10 or more lot subdivision on both sides of Collector Street by Applicant.
Response 3 - At the Applicant's expense, road improvements are to be shown by Engineer's plan with drainage upgrading. Deeded drainage easements and rights to drain shall be required. Along developed easements and rights to drain shall be required. Along developed road frontage Street right of way to be established at a width of 50 feet and arranged to allow for improvements to the horizontal alignment along the Street adjacent to the proposed subdivision. Road Base to be widened by Applicant along developed road frontage from centerline to a minimum 15 feet with greater widths required where alignment improvements are required. Road Base to be 8" compacted bank-run gravel (18" in rock) with 4" compacted processed gravel top-coat. Surface Treatment of 1-1/2" base course and 1-1/2" top course bituminous asphalt surface in accordance with Conn. DOT standard 814 as amended, to be provided by the Applicant at its expense. The construction, dredging or enlargement of new and existing fire ponds may be required at the Applicant's expense. In the place of pond construction or improvements, installation of a holding tank or tanks may be required. All fire protection installed shall require dry hydrants as deemed necessary. The cleaning out or enlargement of an existing fire pond with the installation of a dry hydrant may also be an alternative. Inspection of the road improvements by an Engineer is required. Final approval and acceptance of the Street improvements is the responsibility of the Board of Selectmen and is based upon compliance with these Regulations. All Street improvements are to be completed before lot conveyance or bonding be posted to provide for completion of the Street improvements in accordance with Section 6.01.
D. DEVELOPMENT ON ONE SIDE OF RESIDENTIAL STREET.
Situation: 2 to 9 lot Subdivision on one side of Residential Street by Applicant.
Response - At the Applicant's expense, improvements are to be shown by Engineer's plan with drainage upgrading. Deeded drainage easements and rights to drain provided that drainage upgrading, deeded drainage easements and rights to drain are to be provided as the Board of Selectmen or the Commission require and shall be shown on the subdivision plan. Along developed Street frontage, Street right of way to be established at a minimum of 25 feet from center of existing right of way, with greater distances where improvements to the horizontal alignment can be achieved on the side of the Street adjacent to the proposed subdivision. Road Base to be widened by Applicant along developed Street frontage from centerline to a minimum of 12 feet with greater widths required where alignment improvements are required. Road Base to be 8" compacted bank-run gravel (18" in rock) with 4" compacted processed gravel top-coat. Surface Treatment is to be provided by the Town of East Haddam at its option. The construction, dredging or enlargement of new and existing fire ponds may be required at the Applicant's expense. In the place of pond construction or improvements, installation of a holding tank or tanks may be required. All fire protection installed shall require dry hydrants as deemed necessary. Inspection of the Street improvements by an Engineer is required. Final approval and acceptance of the Street improvements is the responsibility of the Board of Selectmen and is based upon compliance with these Regulations. All Street improvements are to be completed before lot conveyance or bonding be posted to provide for completion of the Street improvements in accordance with Section 6.01.
Situation: 10 or more lot Subdivision on one side of Residential Road by Applicant.
Response - At the Applicant's expense, improvements are to be shown by Engineer's plan with drainage upgrading. Deeded drainage easements and rights to drain shall be required. Along developed Street frontage, Street right of way to be established at a minimum of 25 feet from center of existing right of way, with greater distances where improvements to the horizontal alignment can be achieved on the side of the Street adjacent to the proposed subdivision. Road Base to be widened by Applicant along developed road frontage from centerline to a minimum of 12 feet with greater widths required where alignment improvements are required. Road Base to be 8" compacted bank-run gravel (18" in rock) with 4" compacted processed gravel top-coat. Surface Treatment is to be provided by the Town of East Haddam at its option. The construction, dredging or enlargement of new and existing fire ponds may be required at the Applicants expense. In the place of pond construction or improvements, installation of a holding tank or tanks may be required. All fire protection installed shall require dry hydrants as deemed necessary. Inspection of the Streets improvements by an Engineer is required. Final approval and acceptance of the Street improvements is the responsibility of the Board of Selectmen and is based upon compliance with these Regulations. All Street improvements are to be completed before lot conveyance or bonding be posted to provide for completion of the Street improvements in accordance with Section 6.01.
45
E. DEVELOPMENT ON BOTH SIDES OF RESIDENTIAL STREET.
Situation: 2 to 9 lot Subdivision on both sides of Residential Street by the Applicant.
Response - At the Applicant's expense, improvements are to be shown by Engineer's plan with drainage upgrading. Deeded drainage easements and rights to drain shall be required. Along developed Street frontage, Street right of way to be established at a width of 50 feet and arranged to allow for improvements to the horizontal alignment along the Street adjacent to the proposed subdivision. Road Base to be widened by Applicant along developed Street frontage to a minimum of 24 feet with greater widths required where alignment improvements are required. Road Base to be 8" compacted bank-run gravel (18" in rock) with 4" compacted processed gravel top-coat. Surface Treatment of liquid asphalt in two applications is to be provided by the Applicant at their expense. The construction, dredging or enlargement of new and existing fire ponds may be required at the Applicant's expense. In the place of pond construction or improvements, installation of a holding tank or tanks may be required. All fire protection installed shall require dry hydrants as deemed necessary. Inspection of the Street improvements by an Engineer is required. Final approval and acceptance of the Street improvements is the responsibility of the Board of Selectmen and is based upon compliance with these regulations. All Street improvements are to be completed before lot conveyance or bonding be posted to provide for completion of the Street improvements in accordance with Section 6.01.
Situation: 10 or more lot Subdivision on both sides of the Residential Street by the Applicant.
Response - At the Applicant's expense, improvements are to be shown by Engineer's plan with drainage upgrading. Deeded drainage easements and rights to drain shall be required. Along developed Street frontage, Street right of way to be established at a width of 50 feet and arranged to allow for improvements to the horizontal alignment along the Street adjacent to the proposed subdivision. Road Base to be widened by Applicant along developed Street frontage to a minimum of 24 feet with greater widths required where alignment improvements are required. Road Base to be 8" compacted bank-run gravel (18" in rock) with 4" compacted processed gravel top-coat. Surface Treatment of 1-1/2" base course and 1-1/2" top course bituminous asphalt surface in accordance with Conn. DOT Standard 814 as amended to be provided by the Applicant at its expense. The construction, dredging or enlargement of new and existing fire ponds may be required at the applicant’s expense. In the placed of pond construction or improvements, installation of a holding tank or tanks may be required. All fire protection installed shall require dry hydrants as deemed necessary. Inspection of the Street improvements by an Engineer is required. Final approval and acceptance of the Street improvements is the responsibility of the Board of Selectmen and is based upon compliance with these Regulations. All Street improvements are to be completed before lot conveyance or bonding be posted to provide for completion of the Street improvements in accordance with Section 6.01.
F. DEVELOPMENT ON EXISTING PRIVATE STREET.
Applicant is urged to contact private association for standards and specifications regarding Street improvements and development. The Commission may apply the applicable standards and specifications of the private association or shall select the most appropriate standards from among those applicable to Town Streets or new Private Streets, making allowance for pre-existing, non-conforming rights of way.
G. DEVELOPMENT ON EXISTING SCENIC STREET.
Road improvements shall be as permitted or required by applicable State statute or Town ordinance by reference to the provisions of this Section 5 which are applicable to the underlying road classification of such Scenic road, i.e., Arterial, Collector, Residential or Unclassified.
5.07 DEVELOPMENT SITUATION - CONSTRUCTION OF NEW PUBLIC STREETS:
Revised 4/23/97: Effective Date: 5/30/97
1. New Subdivision Streets shall conform to the following design criteria. The Commission shall select the class or classes of Streets to be constructed in a Subdivision after consideration of the criteria contained in this Section 5 and the Plan of Development. Proposed Streets in a Subdivision shall be compatible with existing or projected thoroughfares; Shall have free access to or be a continuation of one or more accepted Public Streets or approved Private Streets, and shall be so constructed as to present no safety hazard at their intersections with such Streets. Streets planned for the present or future use of other than strictly local traffic and Streets indicated on the Plan of Conservation and Development as Collector Streets be of such width as considered necessary by the Commission.
2. Streets shall follow natural contours wherever practical and shall have grades of not less than 1.0% Banks adjoining a Street right of way shall have a slope of not more than one foot vertical to two feet horizontal, except when necessarily modified by rock formation. Grade requirements shall apply to the full width of street rights-of-way. Dead-end streets shall
46
end in a turning circle of at least a 50 feet radius. See diagram entitled "Typical cul de sac:" All streets in a subdivision shall be constructed and surfaced in accordance with standards as shown in this Section. Final requirements for Street bond release shall be in accordance with Section 6.01.
3. Cul de Sac Street are intended to provide residential areas with adequate vehicular access while maintaining privacy and minimizing traffic flow. Therefore, cul de sac streets shall service no more than 20 lots nor exceed 2000 feet in length. The Commission may grant a waiver in length not to exceed an additional 450 feet and may allow more than 20 lots when special conditions exist such as: 1) future Street extension; 2) the extension shall reduce the overall impact on the site and preserve significant natural features; or 3) other good cause determined by the Commission. Street construction methods shall conform to these regulations and accepted standards in accordance with Conn. DOT form 814 as amended. The turn-around shall be constructed with a right-of-way width stub extension and there shall be a notation on the subdivision plan stating that all segments of the turn-around outside the normal right of way shall be returned to the record owners of adjacent properties at such time as the turn-around is eliminated. Such notation shall also be entered on the deeds for the lots affected. All Streets right-of-ways shall extend to the property line of adjoining parcels.
4. If a development includes land reverting to abutting owners, the surplus Surface Treatment shall be removed and the area regraded and seeded at the Applicant's expense. Dead end streets with less than 7 lots and less than 600 feet in length may be terminated with turn arounds other than turn-arounds such as a "T", or other design acceptable to the Commission upon advice of the Town's engineering consultant or public safety officials. No more than 5 lots shall have any frontage on, or driveway access to, the arc of the turn-around.
5. These standards allow the creation of Loop Streets, provided such Streets do not exceed a length of 3000 feet. The total length of any Loop Street, plus any and all Streets accessible only from such Loop Street, shall also not exceed 3000 feet.
6. These standards allow Cul-de-sac Streets to be constructed off of other Cul-de-sac Streets, provided that the total Street lengths, as defined in these Regulations, does not exceed a length of 2,000 feet nor serve more than twenty (20) lots. See the waiver provision of the third paragraph of this Section 5.07.
5.08 DEVELOPMENT SITUATION - CONSTRUCTION OF NEW PRIVATE STREETS
Any Subdivision proposing the use of Private Streets shall submit an acceptable Street maintenance agreement to the Commission as part of the Application. This agreement shall demonstrate the ability of the Subdivision to maintain its roadways in perpetuity to the satisfaction of the Commission.
Subdivisions proposing the use of Private roads shall submit to the Commission, as part of the Application, provisions for the creation of a homeowners association with full authority to maintain Private roads through the use of mandatory membership and assessment, such association to have the powers of enforcement, and to comply in all respects, with the Connecticut Common Interest Ownership Act as amended and in effect from time to time. In the alternative, the Applicant may present evidence of acceptance of existing Private roads which complies with the foregoing requirements. Regardless of the manner of ownership of the Private Street, the instrument of conveyance must include provisions satisfactory in form and substance to the Commission to ensure:
a) The continued use of such Street for the intended purposes.
b) The continuity of proper maintenance for the Private Street, appurtenant stormwater drainage systems, walkways, and other improvements depicted on the final plans or required pursuant to these regulations.
c) Adequate insurance protection.
d) Methods of assuring the perpetual availability of funds required for such maintenance and insurance.
e) Recovery for loss sustained by casualty, condemnation or otherwise.
The boundary lines of all Private Streets shall be set in the field and marked by permanent monuments at angle points and points of curvature and tangency and at points of intersection with any Street or perimeter line within the proposed Subdivision and at such other points as may be required by the Commission to insure identification in the field.
At the time the approved subdivision plan is filed, the Applicant shall record on the East Haddam Land Records all legal documents required to ensure the aforesaid guarantees.
47
5.09 INSPECTION
a) All subdivision Improvements to be dedicated to the Town shall be inspected by the Commission or such agent as may be designated by the Commission in consultation with the Board of Selectmen. In addition, the subdivider shall, prior to the commencement of construction, arrange with the Commission and the Board of Selectmen for the employment of an inspector to supervise the installation of all Improvements. Such inspector shall be the design engineer or an individual(s) approved by the First Selectman; shall be answerable and report, as requested, to the Commission and the Board of Selectmen, acting by and through the First Selectman; and all fees and expenses of such Clerk of the Works shall be payable by the subdivider, per the Town Ordinance.
b) Inspections shall be made at the following stages of construction:
1) When road and utility rough grading is complete.
2) When drainage and all other underground facilities are installed, but prior to any backfilling.
3) During construction of street base courses.
4) During construction of bituminous concrete surface and binder courses.
5) During the placing of concrete for sidewalks.
6) When curbing is complete.
7) A final inspection shall be made when all Improvements are complete, and before acceptance by the Town.
c) The Subdivider shall not proceed to work on any stage subsequent to the first stage until such inspection has been made by the Commission or its appointed agent, on the preceding stage and approval in writing has been obtained on the preceding stage. At least two full working days notice, shall be given by the developer to the Commission or its appointed agent for each inspection.
d) The inspector shall submit a final inspection report, along with all test results and other documentation generated during the course of the construction to the Commission, the Director of Public Works, and the Office of the First Selectmen. Such inspection report shall bear the seal and signature of a professional engineer. A land surveyor’s seal or an architect’s seal is not acceptable.
e) The applicant shall also submit an As-Built plan for all Improvement (Public or Private). Such As-Built plan shall document accurately all Improvements including all field changes, and shall bear the seal and signature of a land surveyor. A professional engineer’s seal or an architect’s seal is not acceptable.
48
5.10 NEW STREET SPECIFICATIONS:
1. New Collector Street Design Criteria.
Clearing Trees and brush to be chipped, burned or removed.
Stumps To be removed or buried above the water table (burial location determined by the Town Sanitarian)
Right of Way Width 50 feet min.
26 feet min. (travel width), unless boulevard road, in which case Applicant shall propose special typical cross section to the commission.
Surface Treatment 1 1/2" bituminous binder
1 1/2" bituminous top course
Road Base 8" compacted Bank-Run Gravel
4" compacted Process Gravel
The base shall extend at least one foot past the paving as a shoulder on each side.
None, unless required by the Commission, in which case, curbing shall be 6” bituminous or “cape-cod” style, and road width shall be reduced to 24 feet inside curb to curb.
Drainage Design in accordance with Conn. DOT Drainage manual and Section 4.2 of these Regulations
Design Speed 35 MPH
1% min, 10% max, except that cul-de-sac and 50’ of road leading to cul-de-sac shall be 5% max.
Curve Radius 350 feet min.
Tangent 100 feet min.
Intersection Sight Distance 285 feet min.
Stopping Sight Distance 250 feet min.
Cross Slope 1/4" per feet
Vertical Alignment Max. 3% within 50 feet of intersection
Angle of Intersection 90 degrees preferred, 60 degrees minimum only when approved by the Commission
Curb Radius 30 feet min.
Intersection Offset 600 feet min. with Collector
150 feet min. with Residential
125 min. with Private
Approach Tangent 50 feet min.
Sidewalks May be required in areas on high existing or projected pedestrian
activity with handicap ramps at intersections.
Sidewalk Width 4 feet
Sidewalk Offset 8 feet from curb line
49
Utilities Underground (Commission may allow overhead utilities where
excessive conditions such as rock or wetlands exist).
Fire Protection Refer to Fire Department review recommendations
Lighting May be required at every intersection and in areas the
Commission requires.
Road Signs All name and safety signs (stop, speed limit, etc.) must be erected
All painted lines (stop bars, pedestrian crossing, centerlines, etc.) must be installed
Landscaping As required by the Commission.
2. New Residential Street Design Criteria – Public or Private
Clearing Trees and Brush to be chipped, burned or removed.
Stumps To be removed or buried above the water table (burial location
determined by Town Sanitarian)
Right of Way Width 50 feet min.
18 to 24 feet (travel width) The Commission will review proposed traffic counts, road curvature, site lines and other consideration in determining the minimum width. Unless a boulevard, in which case the Applicant shall propose special typical cross section to the Commission. Alternative porous pavement substitutes may be implemented if approved by the Commission.
26 feet minimum – area not paved shall be covered with topsoil and seeded
8" compacted Bank-Run Gravel
4" compacted Process Gravel
Surface Treatment 1 1/2" bituminous Binder
1 1/2" bituminous Top Course
None, unless required by the Commission, in which case, curbing shall be 6” bituminous or “cape-cod” style.
Drainage Design in accordance with Conn. DOT Drainage manual and Section 4.2 of these Regulations.
Design Speed 25 MPH
1% min, 10% max, except that cul-de-sac and 50’ of road leading to cul-de-sac shall be 5% max.
Curve Radius 150 feet min.
Tangent 50 feet min.
Intersection Sight Distance 200 feet min.
Stopping Sight Distance 200 feet min.
Cross Slope 1/4" per feet
Vertical Alignment Max 3% within 50 feet of intersection
Angle of Intersection 90 degrees preferred, 60 degrees minimum only when approved by the Commission.
Curb Radius 25 feet min.
Intersection Offset 500 feet min with Collector
50
150 feet min. with Residential
125 min. with Private
Approach Tangent 30 feet min.
Sidewalks May be required in areas of high existing or projected pedestrian
activity with handicap ramps at intersections.
Sidewalk Width 4 feet
Sidewalk Offset 6 feet from curb line.
Utilities Underground (Commission may allow overhead utilities where
excessive conditions such as rock or wetlands exist).
Fire Protection Refer to Fire Department review recommendations.
Lighting May be required at every intersection and in areas the Commission
requires.
Road Signs All name and safety signs (stop, speed limit, etc.) must be erected.
All painted lines (stop bars, pedestrian crossing, centerlines, etc.) must be installed.
Landscaping As required by the Commission.
51
5.11 DRIVEWAY DESIGN CRITERIA:
Revised: 2/25/97 Eff: 4/1/97
a) Driveway Standards. To promote traffic safety and prevent or minimize drainage and icing problems, driveways for all proposed subdivision lots shall be designed and constructed in conformance with the minimum provisions of this Regulation, unless requirements are waived as per the provisions noted below. To enable the Commission to verify compliance, all subdivision proposals shall depict driveway locations, proposed grading, tree and brush removal, drainage improvements and, as appropriate, other construction details. Upon approval, minor on-site modifications may be authorized by the Planning and Engineering staff, provided the required driveway standards are complied with.
b) Proposed lots which cannot be served by a driveway conforming with the required standards shall not be approved by the Commission unless requirements are specifically waived in accordance with Section 8 of these Regulations. Said waivers may be approved in situations where no detrimental traffic or drainage impact is anticipated; where the driveway involves unusual site or roadway conditions or where roadway improvements are pending or anticipated.
Unless a waiver is authorized, driveways shall comply with the following standards:
1) Driveways shall conform with any curb cut and driveway standards established by the Zoning Regulations, the Board of Selectmen and the Engineer and, as appropriate, the State Department of Transportation.
2) Unpaved driveways shall not exceed a slope of eight (8%) percent; paved driveways shall not exceed a slope of twelve (12%) percent.
3) Driveways shall be designed to prevent stormwater flows from entering a Town roadway and, wherever possible, the Town right- of-way. Privately owned and maintained drainage diversion swales, detention areas and/or dry wells shall be utilized to the greatest extent possible. Culverts, fifteen (15") inches in diameter at a minimum, shall be used when crossing Town drainage ways.
Whenever a private drainage swale or private detention area is utilized in diverting driveway water from the Town right-of-way, the owner of the subject lot(s) shall be responsible for maintaining the depicted swale or detention area and any culverts in accordance with the approved design. To ensure proper maintenance, no Certificate of Use and Compliance shall be issued on the subject lot until a deed restriction, approved by the Planning and Zoning Staff, is filed on the Land Records. Said deed restriction shall clearly note the maintenance responsibility and, subject to proper notification by the Town, it shall allow the Town to undertake any necessary maintenance activity and charge the property owner for expenses.
52
All Driveways:
3% maximum grade for first 20 feet from the street intersection
Transitional grade for next 30 feet from the street intersection
1. Single Driveway Serving One Lot.
Driveway Width 10 feet minimum. 14 feet maximum.
Paving 10 foot apron and slopes 8% or over - 2" bituminous single course.
Curbing 6" bituminous. Only used where Commission deems necessary
Base 12" bank-run Gravel
The base shall extend one foot past the paving as a shoulder on each side.
Drainage As required based on 10 year storm calculations
Grade 1% min to 12% max.
Vertical Alignment 8% change in 10 feet
Curb Radius 5 feet min.
Intersection Offset 75 feet min. 1/2 acre zone
100 feet min. 1 acre zone
125 feet min. 2 acre zone
150 feet min. 4 acre zone
Utilities Underground (Commission may allow overhead utilities where
excessive conditions such as rock or wetlands exist).
Fire Protection Passing areas provided 800 feet max separation (areas to be 10 feet
x 60 feet)
2. Common Driveway Serving 2 Lots.
Right of Way 25 feet min.
Driveway Width 12 feet min. 14 feet max
10 feet min. at split to 1 Lot
Paving 10 foot apron and slopes 8% or over - 2" bituminous single course
Curbing 6" bituminous. Only used where Commission deems necessary
Base 12" bank-run Gravel
The base shall extend one foot past the paving as a shoulder on each side.
Drainage As required based on 10 year storm calculations.
Grade 1% min to 12% max.
3% Intersection for 20 feet
5% Approach for 30 feet
Vertical Alignment 8% change in 10 feet
Curb Radius 5 feet min.
Intersection Offset 75 feet min. 1/2 acre zone
100 feet min. 1 acre zone
125 feet min. 2 acre zone
53
150 feet min. 4 acre zone
Utilities Underground (Commission may allow overhead utilities where
excessive conditions such as rock or wetlands exist).
Fire Protection Passing areas provided 800 feet max. separation. (areas to be 10
feet x 60 feet)
3. Common Driveway Serving 3 or 4 Lots.
Right of Way 25 feet min.
Driveway Width 18 feet min. 20 feet max
12 feet min. at split to 2 Lots
10 feet min. at split to 1 Lot
Paving 15 foot apron and slopes 8% or over - 2" bituminous single course
Curbing 6" bituminous. Only used where Commission deems necessary.
Base 12" bank-run Gravel
The base shall extend one foot past the paving as a shoulder on each side.
Drainage As required based on 10 year storm calculations.
Grade 1% min. 12% max.
Vertical Alignment 8% change in 10 feet
Curb Radius 5 feet min.
Intersection Offset 75 feet min. 1/2 acre zone
100 feet min. 1 acre zone
125 feet min. 2 acre zone
150 feet min. 4 acre zone
Utilities Underground (Commission may allow overhead utilities where excessive conditions such as rock or wetlands exist).
54
SECTION 6 - INSURANCE, BOND REQUIREMENTS, CERTIFICATE OF USE,
BOND RELEASE, AND STANDARD AGREEMENT FOR INSTALLATION OF IMPROVEMENTS
6.01 INSURANCE
a) The Subdivider shall file with the Commission a general liability insurance policy. This policy shall be of the same term as the Performance Bond and shall be extended in conformance with any extension of the Performance Bond.
b) The policy shall insure the Town of East Haddam and its agents, and the Subdivider and shall cover all his operations in the development involving existence and maintenance of property and buildings and contracting operations of every nature including all public Improvements. Said policy shall have the following limits:
Property Damage (including automobile)
Each Accident: Not less than $250,000
Bodily Injury (including automobile)
Each Person: Not less than $1,000,000
Each Accident: Not less than $1,000,000
6.02 PERFORMANCE BOND
A Performance Bond shall be posted by the Subdivider prior to the commencement of construction of any Improvement or work on any lot to insure the completion of required Improvements and utilities in the event the Subdivider shall fail to install same within two (2) years from the date of the Bond. The term of the Performance Bond may be extended by the Commission upon approval of a petition from the developer to the Commission requesting an extension subject to agreement of such extension by the Surety.
In computing the amount of the Bond, the Commission shall include the construction cost of the following items:
a) The construction cost of all required Improvements, including storm drainage system, erosion and sedimentation control measures, roads and pavements, sidewalks and curbs, trees, plantings, grading, setting of monuments, and any other requirements made as a condition for subdivision approval or depicted on the endorsed Final Subdivision Plan, Plan and Profile, Erosion and Sedimentation Control Plan, or any other plan as approved by the Commission.
b) Estimated costs shall be those that would allow for the Town advertising and awarding a contract for construction of the Improvements.
c) Costs shall be projected to a point at the end of the Performance Bond term. Any extension of the term of the Performance Bond may result in an adjustment as to the Bond total.
d) The total estimated cost of the Performance Bond shall also include a 15% addition to cover contingencies and Commission's Engineering.
e) Where a subdivision is to be developed in phases, the subdivider may petition the Commission in writing for permission to post a Performance Bond covering the costs itemized in paragraphs (6.a) through (6.d) above, related to those Improvements and utilities located within or required to serve one or more phases rather than for the entire development. Similar permission shall be obtained by the subdivider prior to commencing development of any or all additional phases. Where the subdivider bonds in phases as authorized in this paragraph, no Improvement, as that term is defined in these Regulations, shall be commenced in any phase for which no bond has been posted.
f) As used in these Regulations, the term "Performance Bond" shall refer to one of the following methods of assuring completion of Subdivision Improvements:
1) Cash in the form of a certified check; or a passbook, assigned to the Town by assignment forms prescribed by the Commission's legal counsel. The issuing bank ("Surety") shall be one maintaining offices in either Middlesex, Hartford or New London Counties.
55
2) A Letter of Credit in favor of the Town in the form prescribed by the Commission's legal counsel. Such Letter of Credit shall be issued only by a bank or comparable lending institution maintaining offices in the State of Connecticut. The issuing bank ("Surety") shall be one maintaining offices in Middlesex, Hartford or New London Counties.
3) A restrictive covenant, in a form prescribed by the Commission's legal counsel, to be filed on the Land Records of the Town of East Haddam, prohibiting the sale of any subdivision lot(s) until such time as all Improvements are completed in accordance with these Regulations, or until the incomplete portions of such Improvements are bonded by one of the methods in the preceding two (2) paragraphs.
The above-referenced forms shall be as provided by the Town and shall be the only ones acceptable to the Commission. The amount of the Bond shall be the sum which the Commission shall require. The completion date of all required Improvements shall be as required by the Commission, but, in no event, longer than the period set forth in Chapter 126 of the Connecticut General Statutes.
g) For all Performance bond documents: If the Subdivision Applicant is a corporation, then the corporate seal must be shown in addition to the seal of the lending institution issuing the passbook assignment or Letter of Credit, and a corporate resolution must be provided indicating that the corporate officer executing the bond documents has authority to do so. If the subdivision applicant is a partnership, then a partnership resolution must be provided indicating that the partner executing the bond documents has authority to do so. Any corporation shall provide a Certificate of Good Standing from the Connecticut Secretary of the State; any limited partnership shall provide a Certificate of Legal Existence from the Connecticut Secretary of the State; out-of-state applicants shall present evidence from the Secretary of the State that they are authorized to do business in Connecticut.
g) If at any time, the bond required by this Section shall not be in effect for incomplete or unaccepted Improvements, the Commission may file a caveat on the Land Records warning potential purchasers of such fact; or may void the subdivision following a public hearing with notice to the Subdivider and property owner(s).
6.03 BUILDING PERMIT, CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY
Before any Building Permit is issued for the construction of any building in such subdivision on a lot which fronts on a Subdivision Street which has not been accepted by the Town as a Public Street, the Subdivider shall complete such Street, in accordance with the specifications up to the farther side line of such lot, to a stage in construction at which only final surfacing of the Street remains to be done before completion of the Street; the foregoing shall not apply to Street trees, sidewalks, or other types of Street-related Improvements not required for vehicular travel, but shall apply to the installation of Street name signs to facilitate the provision of emergency services. The balance of the work on such Street, and all other Public Improvements, shall be bonded in accordance with the provisions of this Section 6.0. In addition, water and effluent disposal, be it by individual on-site systems or community systems, shall be operational and accepted by the appropriate Town or State agencies prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy of the building on any lot.
6.04 BOND RELEASE
a) Prior to the release of the Performance Bond, the subdivider shall present a Maintenance Bond equal to ten (10%) percent of the Performance Bond. Such Bond shall be for the period of one (1) year and shall guarantee the Improvements installed against defects in materials or workmanship, or damage caused to the Improvements by any construction activity in the subdivision. The said one-year period shall commence upon the effective date of the acceptance of any Street or other Public Improvements by that agency having authority for such acceptance.
b) Application for the release of any Bond upon completion of all required Improvements shall include the submission of scale as-built drawings which shall include all changes in the plans as authorized by the Commission or the Commission's Engineer during the course of construction. The "As-Built" drawings shall be signed and sealed by a Connecticut Registered Professional Engineer and/or a Land Surveyor Licensed in the State of Connecticut.
c) Upon submission of a written report from the Commission's Engineer that all or a certain specified stage in the construction of Improvements has been satisfactorily completed, the applicant may request that the Commission reduce any outstanding bond to reflect the cost of construction of the remaining Improvements. The Commission shall grant no more than three (3) such reductions prior to the final release of bonds, and the Commission may refuse such reductions if it finds that the construction of any Improvements in violation of any provision of these Regulations or the plans or conditions for any subdivision approved hereunder.
56
6.05 AGREEMENT FOR INSTALLATION OF IMPROVEMENTS
For any subdivision involving the installation of public Improvements, the subdivider shall, prior to the endorsement of the Final Plans, enter into a written agreement with the Town to perform such Improvements, which agreement shall be in the form specified by the Commission.
6.06. DEFINITION OF "IMPROVEMENTS"
For the purposes of this Section 6.0, the term "Improvements" shall include any change or alteration to the existing conditions of the subdivision site for the purpose of complying with these Regulations, or any approval granted hereunder, or depicted on the subdivision plans approved hereunder, or rendering the site more suitable for development and/or habitation. As used in these Regulations, Improvements include, but are not limited to, construction and installation of roadways, paved or gravel streets, curbs, gutters, snow shelf, utilities, street signs, monuments, drainage facilities, erosion and sedimentation control measures, earth filling or removal, seeding, grading, and shade trees and plantings, when and if the foregoing are required by applicable provisions of these Regulations.
SECTION 7 - WAIVER
The Commission recognizes that each parcel of property is unique in location, dimensions, orientation, topography, etc., and the various factors in the design of subdivisions are variable with relation to each other and to the above characteristics of the property. Therefore, in accordance with Connecticut General Statutes Section 8-26, the Commission may modify or waive, subject to appropriate conditions, such requirements as is in its judgment of the special circumstances and conditions that are not requisite to the interest of public health, safety and general welfare. In considering a modification or waiver under this Chapter, the Commission shall only approve such modification or waiver upon a finding that all of the following conditions are met:
a) Conditions exist on the subject property which are not generally applicable to other land in the area;
b) Said conditions would render the subject property unusable for any viable use permitted in the subject zone if these Regulations were strictly applied;
c) Said conditions were not created by the property owner nor by his predecessor(s) in title;
d) The granting of the modification or waiver would be in harmony with the purpose and intent of these Regulations;
e) The granting of the modification or waiver would not have a significant adverse impact on adjacent properties values, the public health, safety, and welfare, and would not be in violation of the recommendations of the Plan of Development, as the same may be amended from time to time.
Any request for waiver under this Section shall be stated on the Subdivision Application form, and, if granted, shall be noted on the Subdivision Plans with a reference to the lot(s) affected, and the Section of these Regulations modified or waived, and the extent or nature thereof. In granting or denying any request for waiver, the Commission shall state upon the record the reasons for such action.
SECTION 8- AMENDED SUBDIVISION
8.0 Regulation
An application shall be filed with the Commission along with a fee for any request for an amended subdivision lot line change. An amended subdivision may be approved by the Commission through site plan review when such amended subdivision in and of itself does not constitute a new subdivision or resubdivision. All provisions of the original approved subdivision or resubdivision shall be complied with. Upon approval of the Commission, the applicant shall file with the Town a revised mylar referenced to the original mylar.
57
APPENDIX A Revisions to the East Haddam Subdivision Regulations
Section 3.04 a) viii Final Subdivision Application - Removes need to produce CD formatted plans for applications. Effective Date - November 1, 2006
Section 3.04 (i) Final Subdivision Application - Requires CD formatted plans for subdivision filing. Effective Date - November 1, 2006
Section 3.05 b) V Subdivision Plan - ties to a "State Coordinate". Effective Date - November 1, 2006
Section 4.01 b) Adds that the Erosion and Sediment Control Worksheet shall be part of the subdivision submittal. Effective Date - November 1, 2006
Section 4.02.2 Notes that the Connecticut Stormwater Design Checklist shall be used.
Effective Date - November 1, 2006
Section 4.02.6 Maintenance plan for stormwater facilities Adds that a declaration shall be filed describing the responsibilities of the owner of such facilities. Effective Date - November 1, 2006
Section 4.06 (e) Minimum Buildable Land Requirements - Wetlands Commission Changed the term "Regulated Area" to "Upland Review". Effective Date - November 1, 2006
Section 4.14.04 Adds that street tree and buffer planting plans shall be designed by a landscape architect and a planting timeline shall be supplied. Effective Date - November 1, 2006
Section 5.11 Driveway Design All Driveways The base shall extend one foot pass the paving as a shoulder on each side. Effective Date - November 1, 2006
New Appendix B - Adds the Erosion and Sediment Control Checklist
Effective Date - November 1, 2006
New Appendix C - Adds the Connecticut Stormwater Quality Manual Worksheet
Effective Date - November 1, 2006
New Appendix D - Adds the stormwater maintenance declaration. Effective Date - November 1, 2006
Requirement for filling of test pits. Section 4.04. Effective date – April 1, 2011
Buffers for Rural, Residential, & Agricultural Areas – Section 4.18 Effective date – April 1, 2011
Minimum Square Amendments – Section 4.06.1 & 4.06.2 Effective date – January 1, 2014
Appendix E Suitable Soils Effective date – January 1, 2014
Stormwater Management Section 4.02 Effective Date – October 1, 2016
58
Appendix B
b) E&S Plan Checklist All Plans shall contain the information requested in the E&S checklist provided in the 2002 Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control found in Chapter 3 and list underneath.
1. Narrative
____ 1.1 Purpose and description of project.
____ 1.2 Estimates of the total area of the project site and the total area of the site that is expected to be disturbed by construction activities.
____ 1.3 Identification of site-specific erosion or sediment control concerns and issues.
____ 1.4 The phases of development if more than one phase is planned.
____ 1.5 The planned start and completion dates for each phase of the project.2
____ 1.6 Either provide or identify where in the E&S plan the following information is found:
____ 1.6.1 the design criteria, construction details and maintenance program for the erosion and sediment control measures to be used.
_____ 1.6.2 the sequence of major operations within each phase, such as installation of erosion control measures, clearing, grubbing, excavation, grading, drainage and utility installation, temporary stabilization, removal of temporary erosion control measures
_____1.6.3 the time (in days) required for the major operations identified in the sequence
____ 1.7 Identify other possible local, state and federal permits required.
____ 1.8 Identify the conservation practices to be used.
____ 1.9 A listing of all other documents to be considered part of the E&S plan (e.g. reports of hydraulic and hydrologic computations, boring logs, test pit logs, soil reports, etc.)
2. Support Documents (as may be needed to support Engineering Designs)
2.1 Hydraulic calculations
____2.1.1 Size and locations of existing and planned channels or waterways with design calculations and construction details.
____ 2.1.2 Existing peak flows with calculations
____ 2.1.3 Planned peak flows with calculations
____ 2.1.4 Changes in peak flows
____ 2.1.5 Off-site effects of increased peak flows or volumes
____ 2.1.6 Design calculations and construction details for engineered measures used to control off-site erosion caused by the project
____ 2.1.7 Design calculations and construction details for engineered measures used to control erosion below culverts and storm sewer outlets
____ 2.1.8 Design calculation and construction details for engineered measures used to control groundwater, i.e. seeps, high water table, etc.
2.2 Boring logs, test pit logs, soils reports, etc. _____
3.0 Site Drawing(s) Checklist
3.1 Jurisdictional Features Required on All Maps or Drawings
____ 3.1.1 North arrow
____ 3.1.2 Scale (including graphical scale)
____ 3.1.3 A title block containing the name of the project, the author of the map or drawing, the owner of record for the project, date of drawing creation and any revision dates
____ 3.1.4 Property lines
____ 3.1.5 Legend identifying the symbols used
____ 3.1.6 For plans containing E&S measures which require an engineered design, the signature and seal of a professional engineer licensed to practice in Connecticut
3.2 Site Locus Map
____ 3.2.1 Scale (1”= 1000’ recommended)
2These are often subject to change depending on markets, financing, permit approvals and weather conditions. A change in a start date can cause a restriction or prohibition in the use of proposed measures, and thereby require revisions to the E&S plan.
59
____ 3.2.2 Project location (show property boundaries and at least the area that is within 1000 feet of the property boundaries)
____ 3.2.3 Roads, streets/buildings
____ 3.3.4 Major drainage ways (at least named watercourses)
3.3.5 Identification of any public drinking water supply watershed area
3.3 Topography, Natural Features and Regulatory Boundaries
____ 3.3.1 Existing contours (2 foot intervals)
____ 3.3.2 Planned grades and elevations
____ 3.3.4 Limits of cuts and/or fills
____ 3.3.5 Soils, bedrock
____ 3.3.6 Seeps, springs
____ 3.3.7 Inland wetlands boundaries
____ 3.3.8 FEMA identified floodplains, floodways and State established stream channel encroachment lines
____ 3.3.9 Streams, lakes, ponds, drainage ways, dams
____ 3.3.10 Existing vegetation
____ 3.3.11 Tidal wetland boundaries and coastal resource limits (e.g. mean high water, shellfish beds, submerged aquatic vegetation)
3.3.12 Public water supply watershed, well heads or aquifer boundaries (when available)
3.4 Drainage Patterns
3.4.1 Existing and planned drainage patterns (including off-site areas)
____ 3.4.2 Size of drainage areas
3.4.3 Size and location of culverts and storm sewers (existing and planned)
3.4.4 Size and location of existing and planned channels or waterways
____ 3.4.5 Major land uses of surrounding areas
3.5 Road and Utility Systems
3.5.1 Planned and existing roads and buildings with their location and elevations
____ 3.5.2 Access roads: temporary and permanent
____ 3.5.3 Location of existing and planned septic systems
3.5.4 Location and size of existing and planned sanitary sewers
____ 3.5.5 Location of other existing and planned utilities, telephone, electric, gas, drinking water wells, etc.
3.6 Clearing, Grading, Vegetation Stabilization
____ 3.6.1 Areas to be cleared, and sequence of clearing
3.6.2 Disposal of cleared material (off-site and on-site)
3.6.3 Areas to be excavated or graded, and sequence of grading or excavation
3.6.4 Areas and acreage to be stabilized with vegetation (Temporary and/or permanent)
____ 3.6.5 Planned vegetation with details of plants, seed, mulch, fertilizer, planting dates, etc.
4. Erosion & Sediment Control Drawings
____ 4.1 Location of E&S measure on site plan drawing with appropriate symbols
____ 4.2 Construction drawings and specifications for measures
____ 4.3 Maintenance requirements of measures during construction of project
____ 4.4 Person [name and 24-hour telephone number] responsible for maintenance during construction of project and statement that such information shall be update within 24 hours of any change and designation.
____ 4.5 Maintenance requirements of permanent measures after project completion
____ 4.6 Handling of emergency situations (e.g. severe flooding, rains or other environmental problems).
____ 4.7 If not provided in the narrative, the information listed in checklist paragraph 1.6 (see narrative heading)
____ c. The estimated costs of measures required to control soil erosion and sedimentation, as specified in the certified plan shall be submitted as part of the application. Measures to be taken to control erosion and sedimentation shall be
60
described and provided for in the construction agreement and the estimated cost of accomplishing such measures shall be covered in a Bond or other assurances acceptable to the Commission.
____ d. Site development shall not begin unless the soil erosion and sediment control plan is certified and those control measures and facilities in the plan scheduled for installation prior to site development are installed. Planned soil erosion and sediment control measures and facilities shall be installed as scheduled according to the certified plan. All control measures and facilities shall be maintained in effective condition to ensure the compliance of the certified plan.
____ e. At the building permit application stage, a review will be conducted to insure conformance with the plan as approved for individual lots and site plans.
____ f. The Planning and Zoning Commission, or its duly authorized representative shall make the necessary review and evaluation of methods used and the overall effectiveness of the erosion and sedimentation control program.
____ g. To be eligible for certification, a soil erosion and sediment control plan shall contain proper provisions to adequately control accelerated erosion and sedimentation and reduce the danger from storm water runoff on the proposed site based on the best available technology. Such principles, methods and practices necessary for certification are found in the Connecticut Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control 2002) as amended. The Commission may require additional information or measures where conditions so indicate the need. Alternative principles, methods and practices may be used with prior approval of the Commission.
____ h. The Commission or its duly authorized agent shall review and approve the soil erosion and sediment control plan, as filed, if it complies with the requirements and objectives of this regulation; or approve with limitations or modifications; or deny the plan when the development proposal does not comply with these regulations or may cause hazards or damage to the public safety and welfare.
____ i Nothing in these regulations shall be construed as extending the time limits for the approval of any application under Chapters 124, 124A or 126 of the General Statutes.
____ j Prior to approval, any plan submitted to the Commission may be reviewed by the Connecticut River Coastal Conservation District which may make recommendations concerning such plan, provided such review shall be completed within thirty days of the receipt of such plan.
61
APPENDIX C Connecticut Stormwater Quality Manual Worksheet
For Use with New Land Development
Proposed Stormwater Management Practices:
Site planning and design
Stormwater Treatment
Practices (STPs)
Provide location of the following information:
Location
(Identify page or sheet # of any that apply)
Plans
Report
Site Description
1. Natural and manmade features at the site
2. Site topography, drainage patterns, flow paths, and ground cover
3. Impervious area and runoff coefficient
4. Site soils as defined by USDA
5. Stormwater discharge from site and known sources of pollutants and sediment loading
6. Critical areas, buffers, and setbacks established by authorities
7. Water quality classification of on-site and adjacent water bodies
8. Identity of any on-site or adjacent waterbodies included on CT 303(d) list of impaired waters
Potential Stormwater Impacts
1. Potential pollutant sources
2. Type of anticipated stormwater pollutants and relative/calculated load of each pollutant
3. Summary of calculated pre- and post-development peak flows
4. Summary of calculated pre- and post-development groundwater recharge
Critical on-site resources (Check all that apply):
Critical off-site resources:
Wells, aquifers
Neighboring land uses
Wetlands, streams, ponds
Wells, aquifers
Public drinking water supplies
Wetlands, streams, ponds
Other:
Public drinking water supplies
Other:
Section -A- Applicant & Site Information
Applicant Name-
Applicant Address-
Phone-
Fax-
Email-
Site Name-
Site Address-
Connecticut Stormwater Quality Manual Worksheet Page of .
62
Part -1- Site Planning and Design
See Chapter 4 of Stormwater Quality Manual for complete descriptions of items in this section
A- Site Planning and Design Concepts
1- Has the development been designed to fit the terrain?
2- Has the development been designed to limit land disturbance?
3- Have impervious areas been reduced or disconnected where possible?
(Where Alternative Site Design techniques have been utilized, describe in Section B)
4- Has the development been designed to preserve and utilize natural drainage system?
5- Have setbacks and vegetated buffers been provided?
6- Has the creation of steep slopes been minimized?
7- Has pre-development vegetation been maintained?
8- Briefly describe post-construction landscaping practices used including attention to native/non-invasive planting?
B- Alternative Site Design
Check all aspects included in the development design.
Reduced street widths
Reduced street lengths
Alternative cul-de-sac design
Reduced use of storm sewers
Reduced parking lot size
Using permeable paving material
Removal of curbing and addition of slotted curb stops
Incorporation of bioretention into parking lot islands
Alternative lot development
Incorporation of rain gardens on house lots
For all aspects checked, provide detailed explanation:
Connecticut Stormwater Quality Manual Worksheet Page of .
63
Part 2- Stormwater Treatment Practices
Complete Parts B-G for all developments
Complete and include appropriate sheets from Part 3.
A- Practices Used
Check all practices used in development
Primary Treatment Practices
Stormwater Pond (P1)
Stormwater Wetlands (P2)
Filtering Practices (P4)
micropool extended detention pond
shallow wetland
surface sand filter
wet pond
extended detention wetland
underground sand filter
wet extended detention pond
pond/wetland system
perimeter sand filter
multiple pond system
Infiltration Practices (P3)
organic filter
pocket pond
infiltration Trench
bioretention
infiltration Basin
Water Quality Swales (P5)
dry swales
wet swales
Secondary Treatment Practices
Conventional
Dry detention pond (S1)
Dry wells (S5)
Underground detention facilities (S2)
Permeable pavement (S6)
Deep sump catch basins (P3)
Vegetated filter strips (S7)
Oil/particle separators (P4)
Grass drainage channels (S8)
Innovative/ Emerging Technologies
Catch basin inserts (S9)
Hydrodynamic separators (S10)
Media filters (S11)
Underground infiltration systems (S12)
Alum injections (S13)
If there no primary treatment practice used, explain why?
Connecticut Stormwater Quality Manual Worksheet Page of .
64
D- Has the STP been designed to minimize the potential for Nuisance Insects and Vectors?
See Section 8.7 for guidance
E- Has the STP been designed to reduce the impact on natural wetlands and vernal pools?
See Se See Section 8.8 for guidance
B- Stormwater Quality Management Objectives
Check all that apply
Groundwater Recharge
Pollutants expected from development:
Runoff Volume Reduction
Sediment
Metals
Stream Channel Protection
Phosphorus
Hydro-Carbons
Peak Flow Control
Nitrogen
Bacteria
C- Downstream Resources
See Section 8.4 for guidance
Practice
Sensitive Watercourses
Water Supply Aquifers
Lakes and Ponds
Surface Water Drinking Supplies
Estuary/ Coastal
65
Part 3 - Stormwater Treatment Practice (STP) Design Worksheets
A. Stormwater Ponds (P1) (Chapter 11-P1)
Type:
Wet Pond
Micropool Extended
Detention Pond
Wet Extended
Detention Pond
Multiple Pond System
Parameter
Design Criteria
Provide page or sheet number showing aspect or calculation
Setback
50 feet from on-site sewage disposal systems
50 feet from private wells
10 feet from any property line
20 feet from any structure
50 feet from any steep slope
750 feet from any vernal pool
Preferred Shape
Curvilinear
Side Slopes
3:1 or maximum
Terminate at safety benches
Length to Width Ratio
3:1 minimum along the flow path between the inlet and outlet at mid-depth
Pretreatment Volume
10% of WQV
100% of WQV for higher pollutant loading (see Chapter 7)
Pond Volume
Equal or exceeding WQV
Drainage Area
Wet ponds
Minimum contributing drainage area 25 acres
Extended Detention
Minimum contributing drainage area 10 acres
Pocket Ponds
Minimum contributing drainage area 1-5 acres
Underlying Soils
Low permeability unless groundwater intercepted
Capacity
Minimum ratio of pool volume to WQV between 2:1 and 4:1
Depth
Pool
3-6 feet, not greater than 8 feet
Aquatic bench
12-18 inches
Low Flow Orifice
Protected from clogging
Pond Drain
Present
Principle Spillway
Inaccessible to children
Warning Signs
Posted against swimming/skating
Maintenance Access
Extending to public road
Cross Sections
Describe Cold Climate Design Features:
Other Design Features:
66
Part 3 - Stormwater Treatment Practice (STP) Design Worksheets
B. Stormwater Wetlands (P2) (Chapter 11-P2)
Type:
Shallow Wetland
Extended Detention Wetland
Pond/Wetland System
Parameter
Design Criteria
Provide page or sheet number showing aspect or calculation
Setback
50 feet from on-site sewage disposal systems
50 feet from private wells
10 feet from any property line
20 feet from any structure
50 feet from any steep slope
750 feet from any vernal pool
Preferred Shape
Curvilinear
Side Slopes
3:1 or maximum
Terminate at safety benches
Length to Width Ratio
3:1 minimum along the flow path between the inlet and outlet at mid-depth
Pretreatment Volume
10% of WQV
100% of WQV for higher pollutant loading (see Chapter 7)
Drainage Area
Minimum contributing drainage area 25 acres
Surface area of wetland 1 to 1.5% of contributing drainage area
Underlying Soils
Low permeability unless groundwater intercepted
Size
Based on calculations on page 11-P2-7 and 8. Approximate guidelines: ratio of wetland to drainage area 0.2 for shallow marshes and 0.1 for extended detention shallow wetland systems
Depth
Marsh/Wetland
0.5 to 1.5 feet
Forebays/Micropools
4-6 feet
Low Flow Orifice
Protected from clogging
Wetland Drain
Present
Principle Spillway
Inaccessible to children
Warning Signs
Posted against swimming/skating
Maintenance Access
Extending to public road
Cross Sections
Describe Cold Climate Design Features:
Other Design Features:
67
Part 3 - Stormwater Treatment Practice (STP) Design Worksheets
C. Infiltration Practices (P3) (Chapter 11-P3)
Type:
Trench
Basin
Parameter
Design Criteria
Provide page or sheet number showing aspect or calculation
Design Volume
Entire water quality volume (WQV)
Pretreatment Volume
25% of WQV
Maximum Draining Time
48 to 72 hours after storm event (entire WQV)
Minimum Draining Time
12 hours (for adequate pollutant removal)
Maximum Contributing Drainage
Trench
5 acres
Basin
25 acres
Minimum Infiltration Rate
0.3 in/hr (as measured in field
Maximum Infiltration Rate
5.0 in/hr (as measured in field)
Depth
Trench
2 to 10 feet (trench depth)
Basin
3 feet (pondering depth) recommended
Vegetated Buffers
Around Trench
Cross Sections
Describe Cold Climate Design Features:
Other Design Features:
68
Part 3 - Stormwater Treatment Practice (STP) Design Worksheets
D. Filtering Practices (P4) (Chapter 11-P4)
Type:
Surface Filters
Underground Filters
Parameter
Design Criteria
Provide page or sheet number showing aspect or calculation
Maximum Drainage Area
5 to 10 acres
Bio-retention
Less then 5 acres
Slope
6% or less
Head Difference
5 to 7 feet
Underlying Soils
Highly impervious
Distance to Water Table
At least 3 feet separation
Pretreatment Volume
at least 25% WQV
Length to Width Ratio
1.5:1 to 3:1
Design Volume
At least 75% WQV
Draining Time
Designed to Drain within 24 hours
Cross Sections
Describe Cold Climate Design Features:
Other Design Criteria:
69
Part 3 - Stormwater Treatment Practice (STP) Design Worksheets
E. Water Quality Swales (P5) (Chapter 11-P5)
Type:
Dry Swale
Wet Swale
Parameter
Design Criteria
Provide page or sheet number showing aspect or calculation
Pretreatment Volume
25% of the water quality volume (WQV)
Preferred Shape
Trapezoidal and parabolic
Bottom Width
4 feet minimum recommended for maintenance, 8 feet maximum, widths up to 16 feet are allowable if a dividing berm or structure is used
Side Slopes
3(h): 1(v) maximum, 4:1 or flatter recommended for maintenance (where space permits)
Longitudinal Slope
1% to 2% without check dams, up to 5% with check dams
Drainage Area
No more than 5 acres
Sizing Criteria
Length, width, depth and slope needed to provide surface storage for the WQV.
Dry Swale
Maximum ponding time of 24 hours
Wet Swale
retains the WQV for 24 hours; ponding may continue longer (5 days recommended maximum duration to avoid potential for mosquito breeding
Underlying Soil Bed
Equal to Swale width
Dry Swale
Moderately permeable soils ( USCS ML, SM, or SC), 30 inches deep with gravel/pipe underdrain system
Wet Swale
Undisturbed soils, no underdrain system
Depth and Capacity
Surface storage of WQV with maximum ponding depth of 18 inches for water quality treatment
Safely convey 2-year storm with non-erosive velocity
Adequate capacity for 10-year storm with 6 inches of freeboard
Cross Sections
Describe Cold Climate Design Features:
Other Design Features:
70
Part 3 - Stormwater Treatment Practice (STP) Design Worksheets
F. Secondary Treatment Practices (S1-S13)
Provide location of explanatory narrative, computations and plan/detail for each numbered item consistent with “Design Consideration” for each measure.
S1 Dry Detention Ponds
Explain why this practice is suitable for this site (see pp 11-S1-1 to 2):
Item:
Location of Information:
1.
Sediment Forebay with Deep Permanent Pool
2.
Extended Detention Storage Design (no longer than 5 days)
3.
Outlet Wet Pool
4.
Pond Configuration
5.
Low Flow Channels
6.
Dam Safety Section of CTDEP IWRD consulted regarding State jurisdiction?
S2 Underground Detention Facilities
Explain why this practice is suitable for this site (see pp 11-S2-1 to 3):
Item:
Location of Information:
1.
Siting
2.
Pretreatment
3.
Inlets, Outlets, and Overflows
S3 Deep Sump Catch Basins
Explain why this practice is suitable for this site (see pp 11-S3-1 to 3):
Item:
Location of Information:
1.
Drainage Area
2.
Design
3.
Maintenance
4.
Sediment Disposal
S4 Oil/Particle Separators
Explain why this practice is suitable for this site (see pp 11-S4-1 to 6):
Item:
Location of Information:
1.
Drainage Area
2.
Sizing/Design
3.
Maintenance
S5 Dry Wells
Explain why this practice is suitable for this site (see pp 11-S5-1 to 4):
71
Item:
Location of Information:
1.
Soils
2.
Land Use
3.
Drainage Area
4.
Water Table/ Bedrock
5.
Size/Depth
6.
Miscellaneous
7.
Construction
8.
Operation and Maintenance
S6 Permeable Pavement
Explain why this practice is suitable for this site (see pp 11-S6-1 to 4):
Item:
Location of Information:
1.
Soils
2.
Land Use
3.
Slope
4.
Water Table/ Bedrock
5.
Construction (Site Preparation and Planting)
6.
Operation and Maintenance
S7 Vegetated Filter Strips and Level Spreaders
Explain why this practice is suitable for this site (see pp 11-S7-1 to 6):
Item:
Location of Information:
1.
Slope
2.
Soils
3.
Drainage Area
4.
Water Table/ Bedrock
5.
Size
6.
Vegetation
7.
Level Spreader
8.
Construction
9.
Operation and Maintenance
S8 Grass Drainage Channels
Explain why this practice is suitable for this site (see pp 11-S8-1 to 3):
Item:
Location of Information:
1.
Provides sufficient channel length
2.
Provides non-erosive velocities
3.
Sufficient capacity and conveyance for 10-year frequency storm event.
72
S9 Catch Basin Inserts
Explain why this practice is suitable for this site (see pp 11-S9-1 to 3):
Item:
Location of Information:
1.
High Flow Bypass
2.
Maintenance
3.
Sediment Disposal
S10 Hydrodynamic Separators
Explain why this practice is suitable for this site (see pp 11-S10-1 to 3):
Item:
Location of Information:
1.
Drainage Area
2.
Sizing/Design
3.
Performance
4.
Maintenance
5.
Sediment Disposal
S11 Media Filter
Explain why this practice is suitable for this site (see pp 11-S11-1 to 3):
Item:
Location of Information:
1.
Sizing/ Design
2.
Maintenance
3.
Sediment Disposal
S12 Underground Infiltration Systems
Explain why this practice is suitable for this site (see pp 11-S12-1 to 3):
Item:
Location of Information:
1.
Siting
2.
Pretreatment
3.
Design Volume
4.
Draining Time
5.
Infiltration Rate
S13 Alum Injection
Explain why this practice is suitable for this site (see pp 11-S13-1 to 2):
Item:
Location of Information:
1.
Design
2.
Operation and Maintenance
73
Calculations Worksheet
Use separate sheet for each STP
1. Water Quality Volume:
Compute water quality volume.
WQV= (ac-ft)
2. Water Quality Flow:
Compute the water quality flow.
WQF= (cfs)
3. Groundwater Recharge Volume:
Compute the groundwater recharge volume.
GRV= (ac-ft)
4. Runoff Capture Volume:
Compute the runoff capture volume.
RCV= (ac-ft)
5. Peak Discharge Rates:
Storm Event
24 hr storm
Pre-Development
(cfs)
Post-Development
(cfs)
Change
(+/- cfs)
2-year
10-year
25-year
100-year
500-year
74
Appendix D
Stormwater Treatment Facility Maintenance Declaration for Individuals Lots
WHEREAS, [Subdivider], hereinafter, “the Declarant,” has obtain approval of the [Subdivision], hereinafter, “the Subdivision,” as shown on plans entitled, “[Subdivision Plan title]”, hereinafter “the Subdivision Plans;” and
WHEREAS, the Town of East Haddam, acting by and through its Planning and Zoning Commission and in consultation with the Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection, has determined that the protection of both surface and subsurface water quality in the Town requires that stormwater runoff from roofs, driveways, and other impervious surfaces be treated before being discharged into streams, lakes, and wetlands; and
Whereas, the treatment of stormwater is achieved by a variety of methods prescribed by the 2004 Connecticut Stormwater Quality Manual (as amended) published by the Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection.
WHEREAS, the Subdivision Plans depict one or many of these stormwater treatment methods, depending on the soil and groundwater conditions encountered on each lot; and
WHEREAS, each of these stormwater treatment systems require regular maintenance in order to operate as designed; and
WHEREAS, failure of these stormwater treatment systems could result in damage to the lots in the Subdivision, to downstream owners, and/or to waters that are used for domestic wells, recreation, and wildlife habitat;
NOW THEREFORE, the Declarant creates the following obligations for the protection and maintenance of the stormwater treatment systems on the lots in the Subdivision, which obligations shall run with the land and be binding on the heirs, successors, and assigns of the Declarant. This Declaration shall be noticed in each subsequent deed for this property.]
1. Protection and Maintenance of Stormwater Management Systems. No owner of a lot in the Subdivision shall remove any stormwater treatment system, or sever, re-route, or otherwise alter any drainage line leading to such system, nor take any other action which prevents water from reaching such system and flowing through it as designed. No less than every five (5) years or upon the change of ownership if less than five years, the lot owner shall remove accumulated sediment, leaves, litter, or other material which may have accumulated within stormwater treatment systems.
2. Access by Town in the Event of Default. In the event that any lot owner fails to maintain any stormwater treatment system, or alters it so that it cannot operate as designed, the Town of East Haddam shall have the authority, but no the obligation, to enter onto such lot and perform such repairs or maintenance to the stormwater treatment system as may be required to restore it to proper operation. For this purpose, the Town shall have the right to enter onto any lot with equipment and personnel sufficient to perform the work required, and to remove any landscaping, accessory structures, fences, walls, or other obstacles which might prevent such access. It is the duty of the owner to insure that a viable access to the stormwater treatment system exists on the lot for normal maintenance and repair, and, in the event that the Town performs such work due to the lot owners failure to do so, the Town shall have no obligation to restore any disturbed areas, other than to rough grade and seed such areas. Before exercising any access, maintenance, or repair rights under this paragraph, the Town shall provide written notice at least thirty (30) days before such access, such notice to be by certified mail, return receipt requested, and setting forth the work required to be done. If the lot owner performs the specified work at its own cost and expense, and notifies the Town of its completion, the Town shall not enter onto the lot unless such work has not been performed fully or correctly.
75
3. Lien to Secure Town Work in Event of Default. In the event that the Town of East Haddam performs maintenance, repairs, or other corrective action due to any action of the lot owner, or the failure of the lot owner to perform the maintenance work described in this Declaration, the lot owner shall reimburse the Town of East Haddam for the cost of performing said work. The Town shall notify the lot owner by certified mail, return receipt requested, and setting forth the work performed and the cost thereof. The lot owner shall pay said sum to the Town within thirty (30) days of receipt. The Town may secure the payment of such reimbursement by a filing a lien in against the lot, indexed in the name of the record owner thereof.
4. Payment of Attorney’s Fees. Any party to this Declaration may enforce the provisions hereof against any other party in an action for compensatory damages, injunction, or such other remedy as the conditions may indicate. In the event that any party to this Declaration seeks to enforce its provisions, the non-prevailing party shall be liable to the prevailing party for the prevailing party’s reasonable costs, including, but not limited to, attorney’s fees, witness fees, court entry fees, marshal’s fees, and transcription costs.
Dated at East Haddam, Connecticut, this day of , 20 .
Declarant, [name of property owner]
By
It’s , Duly Authorized
[witness line and acknowledgement].
76
APPENDIX E – SOILS CLASSIFICATIONS
Soils Characteristics – National Cooperative Soil Survey
Favorable Soils, Questionable Soils, Unfavorable Soils
FAVORABLE SOILS
Class A Soils – Slight limitations / High Potential
ChB – Canton and Charlton fine sandy loams, 3 to 8 percent slope – soil depth of 60 inches or more – well drained soils – good potential for community development.
CsB – Cheshire silt loam, 3 to8 percent slopes – soil depths of 60 inches or more – well drained soils – good potential for community development.
CcB – Canton and Charlton very fine sandy loams – 3 to 8 percent slopes – soil depths of 60 inches or more – well drained soils – good potential for community development.
CcC – Canton and Charlton very stony fine sandy loams, 8 to 15 percent slopes – soil depth of 60 inches or more – well drained soils – good potential for community development.
CsC – Cheshire silt loams, 8 to 15 percent slopes, soil depth of 60 inches or more – moderately drained soils –fair potential for community development.
CrC – Charlton-Hollis very stony fine sandy loam, 3 to 15 percent slopes – soil depth of 60 inches or more with rock out crops – moderate to well drained soils – good potential for community development due to bedrock.
CyC – Cheshire-Holyoke very stony silt loams, 3 to 15 percent slopes – soil depth of 60 inches or more with bedrock out crops – moderate to well drained soils – fair potential for community development due to bedrock.
CdC – Canton and Charlton extremely stony fine sandy loams, 3 to 15 percent slopes - soil depth of 60 inches or more – well drained soils – fair potential for community development due mainly to stoniness and slope.
PbB – Paxton and Montauk fine sandy loams, 3 to 8 percent slopes - soil depths of 60 inches or more - well drained soils – fair potential for community development – slow permeability.
PbC – Paxton and Montauk fine sandy loams, 8 to 15 percent slopes - soil depth to 60 inches or more - well drained soils – fair potential for community development – slow permeability.
PdB – Paxton and Montauk very stony fine sandy loams, 3 to 8 percent slopes - soil depth of 60 inches or more - well drained soils – fair potential for community development – slow permeability
PdC – Paxton and Montauk very stony fine sandy loams, 8 to 15 percent slopes, soil depth of 60 inches or more, well drained soils – fair potential for community development – slow permeability.
PeC – Paxton and Montauk extremely stony fine sandy loams, 3 to 15 percent slopes - soil depth of 60 inches or more - well drained soils – fair potential for community development – slow permeability.
WkB – Wethersfield loams, 3 to 8 percent slopes - soil depth to 60 inches or more - fair potential for community development – slow permeability.
WkC – Wethersfield loam, 8 to 15 percent slopes - soil depth of 60 inches or more - well drained soils - fair potential for community development – steep slopes and slow permeability.
77
WmB – Wethersfield very stony loam, 3 to 8 percent slopes - soil depth of 60 inches or more - fair potential for community development – slow permeability.
WmC – Wethersfield very stony loam, 8 to 15 percent slopes - soil depth of 60 inches or more - fair potential for community development – slow permeability.
Group 1 – Slight limitations/low potential.
Because of rapid permeability, groundwater may become polluted.
AfA – Agawam fine sandy loam, 0 to 3 percent slopes - depth to 60 inches or more – outwash plains and stream terraces, good potential for community development.
AfB – Agawam fine sandy loams, 3 to 8 percent slopes - depth to 60 inches or more – outwash plains and stream terraces, good potential for community development.
BoA – Branford silt loam, 0 to 3 percent slopes - depth to 60 inches or more – outwash plains and stream terraces, good potential for community development.
BoB – Branford silt loam, 3 to 8 percent slopes - depth to 60 inches or more – outwash plains and stream terraces, good potential for community development.
HfA – Hartford sandy loam, 0 to 3 percent slopes - depth to 60 inches or more – outwash plains and stream terraces, good potential for community development.
HfA – Hartford sandy loam, 3 to 8 percent slopes - depth to 60 inches or more – outwash plains and stream terraces, good potential for community development.
MgA – Manchester gravelly sandy loam, 0 to 3 percent slopes - depth to 60 inches or more – outwash plains and stream terraces, good potential for community development.
MyA – Merrimac sandy loam, 0 to 3 percent slopes - depth to 60 inches or more – outwash plains and stream terraces, good potential for community development.
MyB – Merrimac sandy loam, 3 to 10 percent slopes - depth to 60 inches or more – outwash plains and stream terraces, good potential for community development.
PnA – Penwood loamy sand, 0 to 3 percent slopes - depth to 60 inches or more – outwash plains and stream terraces, good potential for community development.
PnB – Penwood loamy sand, 3 to 8 percent slopes - depth to 60 inches or more – outwash plains and stream terraces, good potential for community development.
WvA – Windsor sandy loam, 0 to 3 percent slopes - depth to 60 inches or more – outwash plains and stream terraces, good potential for community development.
WvB – Windsor sandy loam, 3 to 8 percent slopes - depth to 60 inches or more – outwash plains and stream terraces, good potential for community development.
BoC – Branford silt loam, 8 to 15 percent slopes - depth to 60 inches or more – outwash plains and stream terraces, fair potential for community development due to slope.
HkC – Hinckley gravelly sandy loam, 3 to 15 percent slopes - depth to 60 inches or more – stream terraces, kames, and eskers, good potential for community development.
78
MgC – Manchester gravelly sandy loam, 3 to 15 percent slopes - depth to 60 inches or more – stream terraces, kames, and eskers, good potential for community development.
Class B Soils – Severe limitations / Medium Potential / Slopes
CdD – Canton and Charlton extremely stony fine sandy loam, 15 to 35 percent slope - soil depth of 60 inches or more – well drained soils – poor potential for community development due to slope and stoniness.
PeD – Paxton and Montauk extremely stony fine sandy loams, 15 to 35 percent slopes - soil depth of 60 inches or more, well drained soils – poor potential for community development – steep slopes, stoniness, and slow permeability.
WkD – Wethersfield loam, 15 to 35 percent slope - soil depth of 60 inches or more, well drained soils, poor potential for community development – steep slopes and slow permeability.
QUESTIONABLE SOILS
Class C Soils
Seasonal High Water Table 18 to 20 inches
LpA – Ludlow silt loam, 0 to 3 percent slopes - soil depth of 60 inches or more – soil has a high water table at a depth of 20 inches from late autumn until mid-spring – fair potential for community development – slow permeability and seasonal high water table.
LpB – Ludlow silt loam, 3 to 8 percent slope - soil depth of 60 inches or more – soil has a high water table at a depth of 20 inches from late autumn until mid-spring – fair potential for community development – slow permeability and seasonal high water table.
LuB – Ludlow very stony silt loam, 3 to 8 percent slopes - soil depth of 60 inches or more, - soil has a high water table at a depth of 20 inches from late autumn until mid-spring – fair potential for community development – slow permeability and seasonal high water table.
WxA – Woodbridge fine sandy loam, 0 to 3 percent slopes - soil depth of 60 inches or more but soil has a seasonal high water table at a depth of about 18 inches from autumn until mid-spring. Fair potential for community development – limited by wetness and slow permeability.
WxB – Woodbridge fine sandy loam, 0 to 3 percent slopes - soil depth of 60 inches or more but soil has a seasonal high water table at a depth of about 18 inches from autumn until mid-spring. Fair potential for community development – limited by wetness and slow permeability.
WyB – Woodbridge very stony fine sandy loam, 3 to 8 percent slopes - soil depth of 60 inches or more but soil has a seasonal high water table at a depth of about 18 inches from autumn until mid-spring. Fair potential for community development – limited by wetness and slow permeability.
BcA – Berlin silt loam, 0 to 5 percent slope, glacial lacustrine terraces - soil depth of 60 inches or more, soil has a seasonal high water table at a depth of 20 inches, fair potential for community development – slow permeability and high water table.
EfA – Ellington fine sandy loam, 0 to 3 percent slopes, broad outwash terraces - depth to 60 inches or more, seasonal high water table at a depth of about 20 inches from late fall through early spring. Fair potential for community development – high water table
79
LvC – Ludlow extremely stony loam, 3 to 15 percent slopes, concave slopes of drumlins and slight depression in glaciated uplands, soil depth of 60 inches or more, soil has a seasonal high water table at 20 inches from autumn until mid-spring, fair potential for community development – seasonal high water table and slow permeability
NnA – Ninigret fine sandy loam, 0 to 5 percent slopes, outwash plains and stream terraces, soil depth of 60 inches or more, seasonal high water table at a depth of 20 inches from late autumn until spring fair potential for community development – seasonal high water table
SgA – Sudbury sandy loam, 0 to 5 percent slopes, broad outwash terraces and narrow stream valleys, soil depth of 60 inches or more, seasonal high water table at a depth of 20 inches from late autumn until midspring, fair potential for community development – seasonal high water table
WzA – Woodbridge extremely stony fine sandy loam, 0 to 3 percent, soil depth of 60 inches or more, seasonal high water table at a depth of 18 inches, fair potential for community development – seasonal high water table and slow permeability
WzC – Woodbridge extremely stony fine sandy loam, 3 to 15 percent slopes, soil depth of 60 inches or more, seasonal high water table at a depth of 18 inches, fair potential for community development – seasonal high water table and slow permeability
Bedrock – 20 to 40 inches
YaB – Yalesville fine sandy loam, 3 to 8 percent slopes, glacial till over bedrock – 20 to 40 inches, fair potential for community development – shallowness to bedrock
YaC – Yalesville fine sandy loam, 8 to 15 percent slopes, glacial till over bedrock – 20 to 40 inches, fair potential for community development – shallowness to bedrock
Slope 15 to 45% no areas exceeding 25%
UNFAVORABLE SOILS
HME – Hinckley and Manchester soils, kames and eskers of outwash terraces, 15 to 45 percent slopes, depth of 60 inches or more, poor potential for community development – steep slopes
Class D Soils – Disturbed soils, variable in nature, on-site investigation by licensed soil scientist
UD – Udorthents - Urban land complex
Ur – Urban land – paved roads and parking lots
Class E Soils – Inland Wetlands Soils
0% Applied Area – Severe limitations / Low Potential
Rb – Raypol silt loam, 0 to 3 percent slopes, poorly drained soils in depressional areas, soil depth of 60 inches or more, poor potential for community development – wetness is the major limitation
St – Suncook loamy sand – nearly level excessively drained soil on the flood plains, poor potential for community development – flooding
80
Wr – Wilbraham silt loam – nearly level to gently sloping poorly drained soil in drainageways and depressions of glacial till uplands, seasonal high water table at a depth of 8 inches, poor potential for community development – wetness is the major limitation
Aa – Adrian Muck – nearly level, poorly drained organic soil. Water is at the surface most of the year, poor potential for community development – wetness is the major limitation
Ce – Carlisle Muck – Nearly level, poorly drained, organic soil. High water table and ponding, poor potential for community development – wetness is the major limitation
Lg – Liecester, Ridgebury, and Whitman soils, nearly level, very poorly drained soils, poor potential for community development – wetness is the major limitation, stoniness, slow permeability
Ps – Podunk fine sandy loam, nearly level soils on flood plains along major streams, poor potential for community development – wetness and flood hazard
Ru – Rumney fine sandy loam – nearly level soils on flood plains along major streams, poor potential for community development – wetness and flood hazard
Rv – Rumney Variant silt loam – nearly level soils on flood plains along major streams, poor potential for community development – wetness and flood hazard
Sb – Saco silt loam – nearly level, very poorly drained soils on low flood plains adjacent to streams and rivers – poor potential for community development – wetness and flood hazard
Sc – Scarboro mucky loam fine sand – nearly level, very poorly drained soil in depressions of broad glacial outwash terraces – poor potential for community development – high water table
Wd – Walpole sandy loam – nearly level, poorly drained soil in depressions of glacial outwash plains – poor potential for community development – high water table
We – Westbrook mucky peat – nearly level very poorly drained soil in tidal marshes – subject to tidal flooding – poor potential for community development – high water table, flooding
Wh – Westbrook mucky peat, low salt – nearly level, very poorly drained soil in tidal marshes – poor potential for community development – high water table, flooding
Wt – Wilbraham extremely stony silt sand – poorly drained soil in drainageways and depressions, seasonal high water table at a depth of about 8 inches – poor potential for community development – high water table, stoniness, slow permeability
Class E Soils – Severe limitations / very low potential, 14 inches or less to bedrock rock outcrop 0% Applied Area
HpE – Hollis-Charlton extremely stony fine sand, 15 to 40 percent slopes, moderately steep to very steep slopes, areas with bedrock outcrops, poor potential for community development – steep slopes, shallowness to bedrock, rock outcrops, and stoniness
HrC – Hollis Rock outcrop complex, 3 to 15 percent slopes, poor potential for community development – shallowness to bedrock, rock outcrops, and stoniness
HsE – Hollis – Rock outcrop complex, 15 to 40 percent slopes, moderately steep to steep and areas of rock outcrop
81
HuD – Holyoke-Cheshire very stony silt loams, 15 to 35 percent slopes, moderately steep to steep slopes with underlying bedrock – poor potential for community development – steep slopes, shallowness to bedrock, rock outcrops, and stoniness
HyC – Holyoke – Rock outcrop complex 3 to 15 percent slopes, areas of bare, exposed bedrock, poor potential for community development – shallowness to bedrock, rock outcrops, and stoniness
HzE – Holyoke-Rock outcrop complex, 15 to 40 percent slope, moderately steep to steep, exposed hard bedrock – poor potential for community development – steep slopes, shallowness to bedrock, rock outcrops, and stoniness
Rp – Rock outcrop – Hollis complex, areas of hard, exposed bedrock – poor potential for community development – steep slopes, shallowness to bedrock, rock outcrops, and stoniness

1
TOWN OF EAST HADDAM
INLAND WETLANDS AND WATERCOURSES
REGULATIONS
EFFECTIVE DATE – MAY 1ST, 2017
2
TOWN OF EAST HADDAM
INLAND WETLANDS AND WATERCOURSES REGULATIONS
Effective Date – May 1, 2017
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Section Page number
1 Title and Authority 2
2 Definitions 4
3 Inventory of Regulated Areas 10
4 Permitted and Nonregulated Uses 11
5 Activities Regulated by the State 13
6 Regulated Activities to be Licensed 14
7 Application Requirements 15
8 Application Procedures 22
9 Public Hearings 24
10 Considerations for Decision 25
11 Decision Process and Permit 29
12 Action by Duly Authorized Agent 31
13 Bond and Insurance 32
14 Enforcement 33
15 Amendments 35
16 Appeals 38
17 Conflict and Severance 38
18 Other Permits 38
19 Application Fees 39
20 Records Retention and Disposition 40
21 Effective Date of Regulations 41
APPENDICES
Appendix A Obligate Vernal Pool Species 42
Appendix B Criteria for Vernal Pool Identification 43
Appendix C Vernal Pool Inventory Worksheet 46
Appendix D Vernal Pool Impact Worksheet 48
Appendix E Fee Schedule 50
Appendix F Literature Cited 52
Appendix G Connecticut General Statute section 1-1(q) 54
Appendix H Connecticut General Statute section 8-7d 54
3
Section 1
Title and Authority
1.1 The inland wetlands and watercourses of the State of Connecticut are an indispensable and irreplaceable but fragile natural resource with which the citizens of the State have been endowed. The wetlands and watercourses are an interrelated web of nature essential to an adequate supply of surface and underground water; to hydrological stability and control of flooding and erosion; to the recharging and purification of groundwater; and to the existence of many forms of animal, aquatic and plant life. Many inland wetlands and watercourses have been destroyed or are in danger of destruction because of unregulated use by reason of the deposition, filling or removal of material, the diversion or obstruction of water flow, the erection of structures and other uses, all of which have despoiled, polluted and eliminated wetlands and watercourses. Such unregulated activity has had, and will continue to have, a significant, adverse impact on the environment and ecology of the state of Connecticut and has and will continue to imperil the quality of the environment thus adversely affecting the ecological, scenic, historic and recreational values and benefits of the state for its citizens now and forever more. The preservation and protection of the wetlands and watercourses from random, unnecessary, undesirable and unregulated uses, disturbance or destruction is in the public interest and is essential to the health, welfare and safety of the citizens of the State. It is, therefore, the purpose of these regulations to protect the citizens of the state by making provisions for the protection, preservation, maintenance and use of the inland wetlands and watercourses by minimizing their disturbance and pollution; maintaining and improving water quality in accordance with the highest standards set by federal, state or local authority; preventing damage from erosion, turbidity or siltation; preventing loss of fish and other beneficial aquatic organisms, wildlife and vegetation and the destruction of the natural habitats thereof; deterring and inhibiting the danger of flood and pollution; protecting the quality of wetlands and watercourses for their conservation, economic, aesthetic, recreational and other public and private uses and values; and protecting the state's potable fresh water supplies from the dangers of drought, overdraft, pollution, misuse and mismanagement by providing an orderly process to balance the need for the economic growth of the state and the use of its land with the need to protect its environment and ecology in order to forever guarantee to the people of the State, the safety of such natural resources for their benefit and enjoyment and for the benefit and enjoyment of generations yet unborn.
1.2 These regulations shall be known as the "Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations of the Town of East Haddam."
1.3 The Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Commission of the Town of East Haddam was established in accordance with an ordinance adopted October 17, 1974 and shall implement the purposes and provisions of these regulations and the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Act in the Town of East Haddam.
4
1.4 These regulations have been adopted and may be amended, from time to time, in accordance with the provisions of the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Act and these regulations.
1.5 The Commission shall enforce the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Act and shall issue, issue with terms, conditions, limitations or modifications, or deny permits for all regulated activities in the Town of East Haddam pursuant to sections 22a-36 to 22a-45, inclusive, of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
5
Section 2
Definitions
2.1 As used in these regulations:
"Act" means the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Act, sections 22a-36 through 22a-45, inclusive, of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
"Agency" means the East Haddam Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Commission of the Town of East Haddam.
"Bogs" are watercourses distinguished by evergreen trees and shrubs underlain by peat deposits,
poor or very poor drainage, and highly acidic conditions.
"Clear cutting" means the harvest of timber in a fashion, which removes all or substantially all trees equal to or greater than two-inch diameter at breast height.
"Commissioner of Environmental Protection" means the Commissioner of the State of Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection.
“Commission” means the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Commission of the Town of East Haddam
"Continual flow" means a flow of water which persists for an extended period of time; this flow may be interrupted during periods of drought or during the low flow period of the annual hydrological cycle, June through September, but it recurs in prolonged succession.
"Deposit" includes, but shall not be limited to fill, grade, dump, place, discharge or emit.
"Designated agent" means an individual(s) designated by the East Haddam Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Commission to carry out its functions and purposes.
"Discharge" means emission of any water, substance, or material into wetlands or watercourses whether or not such substance causes pollution.
"Disturb the natural and indigenous character of the wetland or watercourse" means to alter the inland wetlands and watercourses by reason of removal or deposition of material, clearing the land, altering or obstructing water flow, or pollution.
6
“Essential to the farming operation" means that the proposed activity is necessary
and indispensable to sustain farming activities on an existing farm.
"Farm" means property classified as "Farm Land" by the Assessor of the Town of East Haddam pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes Section 12-107c, (also known as Public Act 490), as amended.
"Farming" shall be consistent with the definition as noted in section 1-1(q) of the Connecticut General Statutes. (see Appendix G)
"Farm Pond" means a pond that is accessory to a Farm. A Farm Pond shall be defined as the minimum size and number of impoundment(s) of three acres or less, which is, or are reasonably required for the watering of livestock, the irrigation of crops, or other agricultural activities currently taking place on the subject property, as opposed to merely contemplated. This definition shall be construed so as to exclude from the meaning of "Farm Pond" impoundments which are essentially ornamental, or which are of such size, number, character, or location that their primary function is not the support of commercial agricultural operations.
“Feasible” means able to be constructed or implemented consistent with sound
engineering principles.
“First order stream” is a stream so small that it does not have any mappable tributaries.
“Habitats” mean areas or environments in which an organism or biological population normally lives or occurs.
“Hydrophytic vegetation” perennial vascular aquatic plant having it’s over wintering
buds underwater.
“Lateral distance”: means the distance from one point to another measured on a horizontal
plane.
“License” means the whole or any part of any permit, certification, or approval or similar form of permission that may be required of any person by the provisions of by the provision of Sections 22a-36 to 22a-45 inclusive.
"Management practice and Best Management Practices (BMP)" means a practice, procedure, activity, structure or facility designed to prevent or minimize pollution or other environmental damage or to maintain or enhance existing environmental quality. Such management practices include, but are not limited to: erosion and sedimentation controls; restrictions on land use or development; construction setbacks from wetlands or watercourses; proper disposal of waste materials; procedures for equipment maintenance to prevent fuel spillage; construction methods to prevent flooding or disturbance of wetlands and watercourses; procedures for maintaining continuous stream flows; confining
7
construction that must take place in watercourses to times when water flows are low and fish and wildlife will not be adversely affected.
*"Marshes" are areas with soils that exhibit aquitic moisture regimes and are distinguished by the absence of trees and shrubs and the dominance of soft stemmed herbaceous plants. The water table in marshes is at or above the ground surface throughout the year and areas of open water six inches or more in depth are common, but seasonal water table fluctuations are encountered.
"Material" means any substance, solid or liquid, organic or inorganic, including but not limited to: soil, sediment, aggregate, land, gravel, clay, bog, peat, mud, debris, sand, refuse or waste.
"Municipality" means the Town of East Haddam.
"Nurseries" means land used for propagating trees, shrubs or other plants for transplanting, sale, or experimentation.
"Permit" means the whole or any part of any license, certificate or approval or similar form of permission that may be required of any person by the provisions of these regulations and the Act or other municipal, state and federal law.
"Permittee" means the person to whom a permit has been issued.
"Person" means any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, limited liability company, organization or legal entity of any kind, including municipal corporations, governmental agencies or subdivisions thereof.
"Pollution" means harmful thermal effect or the contamination or rendering unclean or impure of any waters of the state by reason of any waste or other materials discharged or deposited therein by any public or private sewer or otherwise so as directly or indirectly to come in contact with any waters. This includes, but is not limited to, erosion and sedimentation resulting from any filling, runoff, land clearing, or excavation activity.
“Prudent” means economically and otherwise reasonable in light of the social benefits to be derived from the proposed regulated activity provided cost may be considered in deciding what is prudent and further provided a mere showing of expense will not necessarily mean an alternative is imprudent.
“Regulated activity” means any operation within or use of a wetland or watercourse involving removal or deposition of material, or any obstruction, construction, alteration or pollution, of such wetlands or watercourses, but shall not include the specified activities in Section 22a - 40 of the Connecticut General Statutes. Furthermore, any clearing, grubbing, filling, grading, paving, excavating, constructing, depositing or removing of material and discharging of storm water on the land within 100 feet measured horizontally from the boundary of any wetlands or watercourse is a regulated activity. Any clearing, grubbing,
8
filling, grading, paving, excavating, constructing, depositing or removing of material and discharging of storm water on the land within 400 feet measured horizontally from the boundary of any vernal pool is also a regulated activity. The Commission may rule that any activity that alters the existing rate, or quality, of any stormwater discharge or sheet flow conveyed to a regulated area, or alters the hydrology or flow dynamics of a regulated area and is likely to impact or affect wetlands or watercourses is a regulated activity.
“Regulated area” means inland wetlands and watercourses as defined by these Regulations.
"Remove" includes, but shall not be limited to, drain, excavate, mine, dig, dredge, suck, grub, clear cut timber, bulldoze, dragline or blast.
"Rendering unclean or impure” means any alteration of the physical, chemical or biological properties of any waters of the state, including, but not limited to, change in odor, color, turbidity or taste.
“Second order stream” means any stream formed by the confluence or joining of two first order streams.
"Significant impact activity" means any activity, including, but not limited to, the
following activities that may have a major effect or significant impact.
1. Any activity involving deposition or removal of material, which will or may have a major effect or significant impact on the regulated area or on another part of the inland wetland or watercourse system.
2. Any activity, which substantially changes the natural channel or may inhibit the natural dynamics of a watercourse system.
3. Any activity which substantially diminishes the natural capacity of an inland wetland or watercourse to: support desirable fisheries, wildlife, or other biological life; prevent flooding; supply water; assimilate waste; facilitate drainage; provide recreation or open space; or perform other functions.
4. Any activity that is likely to cause or has the potential to cause substantial turbidity, siltation or sedimentation in a wetland or watercourse.
5. Any activity that causes a substantial diminution of flow of a natural watercourse or groundwater levels of the regulated area.
6. Any activity that is likely to cause or has the potential to cause pollution of a wetland or watercourse.
7. Any activity which damages or destroys unique wetland or watercourse areas
or such areas having demonstrable scientific, ecological, or educational value.
9
8. The creation of conditions which may adversely affect the health, welfare and safety of the individual or the community, which may be incurred when unsuitable development occurs in swamps, marshes, along watercourses, or in areas subject to flooding.
9. Any activity that places the wetland activity in a Category II (5,000 sq. ft. to 1.0 acre) or Individual Permit (1.0+ acre) type wetland as defined by the Connecticut Programmatic General Permit as amended.
"Soil scientist" means an individual duly qualified in accordance with standards set by the federal Office of Personnel Management.
*"Swamps" are watercourses with soils that exhibit aquic moisture regimes and are distinguished by the dominance of wet tolerant trees and shrubs.
"Submerged lands" means those lands that are inundated by water on a seasonal or more frequent basis.
“Town” means Town of East Haddam
“Upland Review Area” means any area one hundred (100) feet (lateral distance) from wetlands or watercourses, or within four hundred (400) feet (lateral distance) from a vernal pool as defined in these regulations, or any activity which alters the natural hydrology of a site thereby impacting a regulated area.
“Vernal Pool” means a seasonal or permanent body of standing water with the following characteristics: 1) occurs within a confined, natural or manmade depression or basin;
2) contains water for at least two consecutive months during the growing season,
3) typically lacks a fish population; and 4) supports or has the capability of supporting populations of vernal pool obligate species. The existence of a vernal pool shall be determined in the accordance with the criteria for identification set forth in the draft Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection, Bureau of Water Management document entitled, “Guidance to Connecticut’s Municipal Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Agencies Vernal Pool Definitions / Indicators”. See Appendix B . Note: all potential vernal pools that cannot be properly evaluated for confirmation as vernal pools (for reasons associated with season, etc.) are to be considered to be vernal pools for regulatory purposes, until such time as a proper determination can be made.
“Vernal Pool Obligate Species” means species that can only reproduce successfully in vernal pool habitats, they include those species set forth in Appendix A.
"Waste" means sewage or any substance, liquid, gaseous, solid or radioactive, which may pollute or tend to pollute any of the wetlands or watercourses of the Town.
"Watercourses” means rivers, streams, brooks, waterways, lakes, ponds, marshes, swamps, bogs, and all other bodies of water, natural or artificial, vernal or intermittent, public or
1 0
private, which are contained within, flow through or border upon the Town or any portion thereof not regulated pursuant to sections 22a-28 through 22a-35, inclusive, of the Connecticut General Statutes. Intermittent watercourses shall be delineated by a defined permanent channel and bank and the occurrence of two or more of the following characteristics: (a) evidence of scour or deposits of recent alluvium or detritus, (b) the presence of standing or flowing water for a duration longer than a particular storm incident, and (c) the presence of hydrophytic vegetation. “Watercourses” include aquatic, plant or animal life and habitats in wetlands or watercourses.
"Wetlands" means land, including submerged land as defined in this section, not regulated pursuant to sections 22a-28 through 22a-35, inclusive, of the Connecticut General Statutes, which consists of any of the soil types designated as poorly drained, very poorly drained, alluvial and flood plain by the National Cooperative Soils Survey, as it may be amended from time to time, of the Natural Resources Conservation Service of the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) Such areas may include filled, graded, or excavated sites that possess an aquic (saturated) soil moisture regime as defined by the USDA Cooperative Soil Survey. “Wetlands” includes aquatic, plant or animal life and habitats in wetlands or watercourses.
* Typical examples of Swamp, Marsh and Bog Species are listed in the booklet titled, “Inland Wetland Plants of Connecticut, Wm. A. Neiring and R.H. Goodwin, for the Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection, May 1973.
1 1
Section 3
Inventory of Regulated Areas
3.1 The map of regulated areas entitled "Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Map, East Haddam, Connecticut" delineates the general location and boundaries of inland wetlands and the general location of watercourses. Copies of this map are available for inspection at the office of the Town Clerk or the Commission. In all cases, the precise location of regulated areas shall be determined by the actual character of the land and the distribution of wetland soil types and location of watercourses, including vernal pools. The Commission may use aerial photography, remote sensing imagery, resource mapping, soils maps, site inspection observations or other information in determining the location of the boundaries of wetlands and watercourses.
3.2 Any owner who disputes the designation of any part of his or her land as a regulated area on the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Map, may petition the Commission to change the designation in accordance with Section 15 of these regulations. All petitions for a map change shall be submitted in writing and shall include all relevant facts and circumstances that support the change. The petitioner shall provide proof that the designation is inapplicable. The Commission may require such an owner to provide an accurate delineation of regulated areas in accordance with Section 15 of these regulations
3.3 The Commission or its designated agent(s) shall maintain a current inventory of inland wetlands and watercourses, including vernal pools, and update the official map delineating said wetlands, and watercourses to be regulated in the Town of East Haddam. The Commission may amend its map as more accurate information becomes available. Any person may petition for an amendment to the map. Petitioners shall bear the burden of proof for all requested map amendments. Such proof may include, but not be limited to, aerial photography, remote sensing imagery, resource mapping or other available information. Such map amendments are subject to the public hearing process outlined in section 15 of these regulations.
3.4 When wetlands or watercourse boundaries are in dispute as the Official Inland
Wetlands and Watercourses Map is being considered and amended, the Commission may temporarily prohibit any person from conducting any activity or maintaining any facility without first obtaining a permit.
1 2
Section 4
Permitted Uses as of Right & Nonregulated Uses
4.1 The following operations and uses shall be permitted in inland wetlands and
watercourses, as of right:
a. grazing, farming, nurseries, gardening, harvesting of crops and farm ponds of three acres or less essential to the farming operation. The provisions of this subdivision shall not be construed to include road construction or the erection of buildings not directly related to the farming operation, relocation of watercourses with continual flow, filling or reclamation of wetlands or watercourses with continual flow, clear cutting of timber except for the of agricultural crop land, the mining of top soil, peat, sand, gravel or similar from wetlands or watercourses for the purposes of sale;
b. a residential home (i) for which a building permit has been issued or (ii) on a subdivision lot, provided the permit has been issued or the subdivision has been approved by a municipal planning, zoning or planning and zoning commission as of the effective date of promulgation of the municipal regulations pursuant to subsection (b) of section 22a-42a, or as of July 1, 1974, which ever is earlier, and further provided no residential home shall be permitted as of right pursuant to this subdivision unless the building permit was obtained on or before July 1, 1987. Any person claiming a use of wetlands permitted as a right under this subdivision shall document the validity of said right by providing a certified copy of the building permit and a site plan showing proposed and existing topographic contours, house and well locations, septic system, driveway, approval dates or other necessary information to document his or her right hereunder.
c. boat anchorage or mooring, not to include dredging or dock construction
d. uses incidental to the enjoyment or maintenance of residential property, such
property defined as equal to or smaller than the largest minimum residential lot site permitted anywhere in the municipality (provided that in any town where there are no zoning regulations establishing minimum residential lot sites, the largest minimum lot site shall be two acres) and containing a residence. Such incidental uses shall include maintenance of existing structures and landscaping, but shall not include removal or deposition of significant amounts of material from or into a wetland or watercourse, or diversion or alteration of a watercourse.
e. construction and operation, by water companies as defined by section 16-1 of
the Connecticut General Statutes or by municipal water supply systems as provided for in Chapter 102, of the Connecticut General Statutes, of dams, reservoirs and other facilities necessary to the impounding, storage and withdrawal of water in connection with public water supplies except as provided in sections 22a-401and 22a-403 of the Connecticut General Statutes ; and
1 3
f. maintenance relating to any drainage pipe which existed before the effective date of any municipal regulations adopted pursuant to section 22a-42a of the Connecticut General Statutes or July 1, 1974, which ever is earlier, provided such pipe is on property which is zoned as residential but which does not contain hydrophytic vegetation. For purposes of this subdivision, “maintenance” means the removal of accumulated leaves, soil, and other debris whether by hand or machine, while the pipe remains in place; and
g. Withdrawal of water for fire emergency purposes.
The following operations and uses shall be permitted as nonregulated uses in
wetlands and watercourses, provided they do not disturb the natural and indigenous character of the wetland or watercourse by removal or deposition of material, alteration or obstruction of water flow or pollution of the wetland or watercourse:
a. conservation of soil, vegetation, water, fish, shellfish, and wildlife. Such
operation or use may include, but is not limited to, minor work to control erosion, or to encourage proper fish, wildlife, silviculture management practices, and removal of invasive species.
b. outdoor recreation including the use of play and sporting areas, golf courses,
field trials, nature study, hiking, horseback riding, swimming, skin and scuba diving, camping, boating, water skiing, trapping, hunting, fishing and shell fishing and cross-country skiing where otherwise legally permitted and regulated; and
c. The installation of a dry hydrant by or under the authority of a municipal fire department, provided such dry hydrant is only used for firefighting purposes and there is no alternative access to a public water supply. For purposes of this section, “dry hydrant” means a non-pressurized pipe system that (A) is ready accessible to fire department apparatus from a proximate public road, (B) provides for the withdrawal of water by suction to such fire department apparatus, and (C) is permanently installed into an existing lake, pond or stream that is a dependable source of water.
4.3 All activities in wetlands or watercourses, or within the upland review area involving filling, excavating, dredging, clear cutting, clearing, or grading or any other alteration or use of a wetland or watercourse not specifically permitted by this section and otherwise defined as a regulated activity by these regulations shall require a permit from the Commission in accordance with Section 6 of these regulations.
4.4 Declaratory Ruling - To carry out the purposes of this section, any person proposing to carry out a permitted or nonregulated operation or use of a wetland, watercourse, or upland review area that may disturb the natural and indigenous character of the wetland or watercourse shall, prior to commencement of such operation or use, notify the Commission on a form provided by it, and provide the Commission with sufficient information to enable it to properly determine that the proposed operation and use is a permitted or nonregulated use of the wetland or watercourse. The Commission or its designated agent shall rule that the proposed operation or use is a permitted or a nonregulated use or operation or that a permit is required. Such ruling shall be in writing and shall be made no later than the next
1 4
regularly scheduled meeting of the Agency following the meeting at which the request was received. The designated agent, as authorized by the Commission, may make such ruling on behalf of the Commission at any time.
Section 5
Activities Regulated Exclusively by the Commissioner of Environmental Protection
5.1 In addition to any permit or approval required by the Commission the Commissioner of Environmental Protection shall regulate activities in or affecting wetlands or watercourses subject to the following jurisdiction.
a. Construction or modification of any dam pursuant to sections 22a-401 through
22a-411 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
b. Construction, encroachment or placement of any obstruction within stream channel encroachment lines pursuant to sections 22a-342 through 22a-349a of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
c. Construction or placement of any structure or obstruction within the tidal, coastal or navigable waters of the state pursuant to sections 22a-359 through 22a-363 or in designated tidal wetlands pursuant to sections 22a-28 through 22a-35 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
d. Diversion of water, including withdrawals of surface or groundwater in excess of fifty thousand (50,000) gallons per day or any piping, culverting, channelization, relocation, damming or other alteration of the location of flow of any surface waters of the state where the tributary watershed area above the point of such alteration is 100 acres or larger, pursuant to sections 22a-365 through 22a-378a of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
e. Discharges into the waters of the state pursuant to section 22a-430 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
f. Discharge of fill or dredged materials into the wetlands and watercourses of the state pursuant to section 401 of the Federal Clean Water Act, as amended, for activities regulated by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers under section 404 of the Federal Clean Water Act.
5.2 The Commissioner of Environmental Protection shall have exclusive jurisdiction over regulated activities in or affecting wetlands or watercourses, undertaken by any department, agency or instrumentality of the State of Connecticut, except any local or regional board of education, pursuant to sections 22a-39 or 22a-45a of the Connecticut General Statues.
5.3 The Commissioner of Environmental Protection shall have exclusive jurisdiction over tidal wetlands designated and regulated pursuant to sections 22a-28 through 22a-35 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
5.4 The Commissioner of Environmental Protection shall have exclusive jurisdiction over activities authorized under a dam repair or removal order issued by the Commissioner of Environmental Protection under section 22a-402 of the Connecticut General Statutes or a permit issued by the Commissioner of Environmental Protection under sections 22a-403 of the Connecticut General Statutes. Any person receiving such dam repair or removal order or
1 5
permit shall not be required to obtain a permit from a municipal wetlands agency for any action necessary to comply with said dam order or to carry out the activities authorized by said permit.
5.5 The Commissioner of Environmental Protection shall have exclusive jurisdiction over the discharge of fill or dredged materials into the wetlands and watercourses of the state pursuant to section 401 of the Federal Clean Water Act, as amended, for activities regulated by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers under section 404 of the Federal Clean Water Act.
Section 6
Regulated Activities Requiring a Permit
6.1 No person shall conduct or maintain a regulated activity without first obtaining a permit for such activity from the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Commission of the Town of East Haddam.
6.2 The map of regulated areas, entitled, "Official Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Map, East Haddam, Connecticut", shall serve as a guide to the wetlands and watercourses boundaries and shall be considered a part of these regulations, and copies of said map shall be available for inspection in the Office of the Town Clerk. Said map is generated for guidance and can not supercede on site field designation by a certified soil scientist, or in the case of vernal pool identification, a qualified individual.
6.3 The Commission and its agent or any specialists hired by the Commission to evaluate permit applications under these regulations have the right of free access, at reasonable times, to the property under consideration. The property owner may require that such persons have a letter of authorization from the Chairman or Secretary of the Commission prior to permitting such access. (See Section 8.9)
6.4 Changes in regulations, including boundaries, shall be made pursuant to Section 22a-42a(b) of the General Statutes and as described in Section 15 of these regulations.
6.5 No person shall conduct any activity within one hundred (100) feet (lateral distance) of any watercourse or mapped wetland boundary or within four hundred (400) feet (lateral distance), of a vernal pool which activity would constitute a regulated activity if it were conducted within, or involved the use of, a wetland or watercourse, including a vernal pool, without first obtaining a determination from the Inland Wetland and Watercourses Enforcement Officer or the Commission that such activity does not constitute a regulated activity.
6.6 Any person found to be conducting or maintaining a regulated activity without the prior authorization of the Commission or violating any other provision of these regulations, shall be subject to the enforcement proceedings and penalties prescribed in Section 14 of these regulations and any other remedies as provided by law.
1 6
Section 7
Application Requirements
7.1.a The Commission and the application may hold a pre-application meeting to discuss a proposed application. A pre-application meeting is recommended to facilitate the general consideration of factors and problems affecting the land before the application proceeds with an official application and the preparation of the final maps, plans and documents required for formal consideration by the Commission. The purpose of the pre-application meeting is purely to provide preliminary guidance to the applicant, and to identify areas of concern or further study, so as to minimize delay, expense and inconvenience to the public, the applicant, and the Commission upon the receipt, if any, of a formal application. Neither the applicant nor the Commission shall be in any way bound by any statement made during the pre-application meeting, nor shall the statement of any Commission member be deemed to be an indication of prejudgment or prejudice, it being acknowledged by the applicant that the Commission’s responses, like the request itself, are preliminary and subject to further change and refinement. There shall be no vote or other formal action at any pre-application meeting, other than (1) referrals to other municipal, State, or Federal agencies for review and comment if deemed advisable by the Commission and (2) whenever possible, a determination as to whether the proposed activity is a significant activity should be made at the pre-application meeting. The Commission should state the reasons why the activity was deemed significant in writing.
7.1.b Any person intending to conduct a regulated activity or to renew or amend a permit to conduct such activity, shall apply for a permit on a form provided by the Commission. The application shall contain the information described in this section and any other information the Commission may reasonably require. Application forms may be obtained in the offices of the East Haddam Town Clerk or the Commission.
7.1.c For any permit involving property subject to a conservation restriction or preservation restriction, the following shall apply:
7.1.c.1 for purposes of this section, “conservation restriction” means a limitation, whether or not stated in the form of a restriction, easement, covenant or condition, in any deed, will or other instrument executed by or on behalf of the owner of the land described therein, including but not limited to, the state or any political subdivision of the state, or in any order of taking such land whose purpose is to retain land or water areas predominantly in their natural, scenic or open condition or in agricultural, farming, forest or open space use.
7.1.c.2 for purposes of this section, “preservation restriction” means a limitation, whether or not stated in the form of a restriction, easement, covenant or condition, in any deed, will or other instrument executed by or on behalf of the owner of land, including, but not limited to, the state or any political subdivision of the state, or in any order of taking of such land whose purpose is to preserve historically significant structures or sites.
7.1.c.3 no person shall file a permit application, other than for interior work in an existing building or for exterior work on an existing building that does not expand or alter the footprint of
1 7
[an]such existing building, relating to property that is subject to a conservation restriction or a preservation restriction unless the applicant provides proof that the applicant has provided written notice of such application, by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the party holding such restriction, including, but not limited to, any state agency that holds such restriction, not later than sixty days prior to the filing of the permit application.
7.1.c.4 in lieu of such notice pursuant to subsection 7.1.c.3, the applicant may submit a letter from the holder of such restriction or from the holder’s authorized agent, verifying that the application is in compliance with the terms of the restriction.
7.2 If an application to the Town of East Haddam Planning and Zoning Commission for subdivision or resubdivision of land involves land containing a wetland, watercourse, or regulated area, the applicant shall, in accordance with Section 8-3(g), 8-3c, or 8-26, as applicable, of the Connecticut General Statutes, submit an application for a permit to the Commission in accordance with this section, no later than the day the application is filed with such planning, zoning, or planning and zoning commission.
7.3 The application shall contain such information as is necessary for a fair and
informed determination thereon by the Commission.
7.4 A prospective applicant may request the Commission to determine whether or not a proposed activity involves a significant impact activity.
7.5. The information required by the Commission shall be furnished in sufficient
Copies to permit the Commission to carry out its duties under these regulations. At least ten (10) copies of a subdivision map and/or site plan map must be submitted for a final review of an application proposal, unless submission of fewer copies is approved by the Inland/Wetlands and Watercourses Commission Enforcement Officer. Also, the Commission may request that all proposed roadway centerlines, wetland borders, watercourses including vernal pool borders, location of all drainage facilities, septic area test pits, and proposed house sites be staked in the field by the developer's engineer or surveyor to permit the Commission to view the proposed locations. The centerline shall be staked every one hundred (100) feet and the stakes shall show the roadway stations. The Commission may require that any documents submitted in accordance with these Regulations shall be provided in a specified digital format.
7.6. The Commission may require submission of the complete application ten (10) days prior to its regular meeting in order for the application to be included on the agenda and allow time for field inspection by the Commission, weather and time permitting.
7.7 All applications shall include the following information in writing or on maps
or drawings:
a. the applicant’s name, home and business mailing addresses, email address, and telephone numbers; if the applicant is a Limited Liability Corporation or a Corporation the managing member’s or responsible corporate officer’s name, address, email address, and telephone number;
1 8
b. the owner's name, mailing address and telephone number and written consent of the land owner if the applicant is not the owner of the land upon which the subject activity is proposed;
c. the applicant's interest in the land;
d. the geographical location of the land which is the subject of the proposed activity and a description of the land in sufficient detail to allow identification of the inland wetlands and watercourses, the area(s) (in acres or square feet) of wetlands or watercourses to be disturbed, soil type(s), and wetland vegetation;
e. the purpose and a description of the proposed activity and proposed erosion and sedimentation controls and other management practices and mitigation measures which may be considered as a condition of issuing a permit for the proposed regulated activity including, but not limited to, measures to (1) prevent or minimize pollution or other environmental damage, (2) maintain or enhance existing environmental quality, or (3) in the following order of priority: restore, enhance and create productive wetland or watercourse resources;
f. alternative which would cause less or no environmental impact to wetlands or watercourses and why the alternative as set forth in the application was chosen; all such alternatives shall be depicted on a site plan or drawing;
g. site plans showing the existing condition and the proposed activity in relation to wetlands and watercourses and identifying any further activities associated with, or reasonably related to, the proposed regulated activity which are made inevitable by the proposed regulated activity and which may have an impact on wetlands or watercourses;
h. A description of the proposed construction or the erection of structures on the affected property, including blueprints, engineering and architectural plans or designs, where available or reasonably attainable. Such descriptions shall include the purposes of such construction or activity.
i. names and mailing addresses of adjacent landowners within 100 feet of all property lines.
j. statement by the applicant that the applicant is familiar with all the information provided in the application and is aware of the penalties for obtaining a permit through deception or through inaccurate or misleading information. All information submitted in the application shall be considered factual, or in the case of anticipated activity, binding. A knowing failure on the part of the applicant or any of his agents to provide correct information or performance exceeding the levels of anticipated activity shall be sufficient grounds for the revocation of any permit issued under these regulations and/or for penalties to be imposed;
1 9
k authorization for the members and agents of the Commission to inspect the subject land, at reasonable times, during the pendency of an application and for the life of the permit;
l. a completed DEP reporting form; the Commission shall revise or correct the information provided by the applicant and submit the form to the Commissioner of Environmental Protection in accordance with section 22a-39-14 of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies;
m. any other information the Commission deems necessary to the understanding of what the
applicant is proposing; and
n. submission of the appropriate filing fee based on the fee schedule established in the
Town of East Haddam Ordinance Book and listed in Appendix F of these regulations;
o. For subdivision and resubdivision applications, the applicant shall submit an
application that includes all of the criteria for a complete Planning and Zoning application, including the mapping and narrative in the Four Step Process to create a Subdivision required in Section 3 of the East Haddam Subdivision Regulations.
p. For applications that include activities involving stream crossings, the applicant shall incorporate, to the maximum feasible extent, standards and practices recommended in the Connecticut Stream Crossing Guidelines as published by the Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection and the Massachusetts River and Stream Crossing Standards: Technical Guidelines as published by the Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection. Copies are available in the Land Use Office or can be found the Connecticut and Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection web sites.
q. For applications that contain over five thousand square feet of disturbance, the applicant’s design engineer shall design the plans so as to conform, to maximum feasible extent, to the Connecticut Stormwater Quality Manual as amended and published by the Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection. All stormwater management plans shall include measures to capture and treat stormwater runoff in accordance with the guidelines outlined in the most recent version of the CT Connecticut Stormwater Quality Manual and to incorporate low impact development design elements to the extent that is practical. No application involving any site development plan will be approved by the Commission unless it includes a stormwater management plan detailing how the stormwater runoff and associated water quality impacts resulting from the development will be controlled and managed during and after construction. The plan must be prepared by an appropriate design professional. The Commission may impose additional requirements deemed reasonable and necessary to control the volume, timing, rate, and/or quality of run-off if the hydrologic, geologic, topographic, or land use conditions warrant greater control than provided by the applicant. Further the
2 0
Commission may restrict the use of certain Best Management Practices, and may require pretreatment to exceed the minimum standards established in the most recent version of the CT Stormwater Quality Manual.
7.8 Summary Ruling: If the Commission finds that a proposed activity is a regulated
activity not involving significant impact or major effect on the inland wetlands or
watercourse, as defined in Section 2 of these regulations, it may allow the activity
with or without conditions after initial review. In order to grant a permit at this stage, the Commission (after full review of the considerations set forth in Section 7 and 1.5 of these regulations and other pertinent factors) shall issue an opinion presenting the reasons for granting the permit with or without conditions.
7.9 Plenary Ruling If the proposed activity does or may involves a significant
impact activity on the inland wetlands, or watercourses, including vernal pools, as
determined by the Commission additional information, based on the nature and anticipated effects of the activity, including but not limited to the following, is required:
a. site plans for the existing conditions and the proposed activity and the land which will be affected thereby which show existing and proposed conditions, wetland and watercourse boundaries, including vernal pools, land contours, boundaries of land ownership, proposed alterations and uses of wetlands and watercourses, and other pertinent features of the land and the proposed activity, prepared by a professional engineer, land surveyor, architect or landscape architect licensed by the state, or by such other qualified person.
b. engineering reports and analyses and additional drawings to fully describe the
proposed activity including any filling, excavation, drainage or hydraulic modifications to regulated area and upland review area and the proposed erosion and sedimentation control plan;
c. mapping of soil types consistent with the categories established by the National
Cooperative Soil Survey of the U.S. Natural Resources Conservation Service; the wetlands and watercourses, including vernal pools, shall be delineated in the field by a soil scientist and the soil scientist’s field delineation shall be depicted on the site plans;
d. a description of the ecological communities (wildlife, fisheries, invertebrate and plant species inventories) and functions of the wetlands, watercourses, and upland review areas involved with the application and the effects of the proposed activity on these communities and wetland functions;
e. a description of how the applicant will change, diminish, or enhance the ecological
communities and functions of the wetlands, watercourses, or upland review areas involved in the application and each alternative, and a description of why each alternative considered was deemed neither feasible nor prudent;
2 1
f. analysis of chemical or physical characteristics of any fill material; and
g. management practices and other measures designed to mitigate the impact of the
proposed activity.
h. if an area exists that does or may have vernal pool characteristics, a Vernal Pool
Inventory and Impact Worksheets shall be submitted. (See Appendix C & D).
7.10 The applicant shall certify whether:
a. any portion of the property on which the regulated activity is proposed is located
within 500 feet of the boundary of an adjoining municipality,
b. traffic attributable to the completed project on the site will use streets within the
adjoining municipality to enter or exit the site,
c. sewer or water drainage from the project site will flow through and impact the
sewage or drainage system within the adjoining municipality; or,
water run-off from the improved site will impact streets or other municipal or
private property within the adjoining municipality.
7.11 Any application to renew or amend an existing permit shall be filed with the Commission in accordance with Section 8 of these regulations at least sixty-five (65) days prior to the expiration date of the permit. Any application to renew or amend such an existing permit shall contain the information required under section 7 of these regulations provided:
a. the application may incorporate the documentation and record of the prior
application.
b. the application shall describe the extent of work completed at the time of filing and
the schedule for completing the activities authorized in the permit.
c. the application shall state the reason why the authorized activity was not initiated or
completed within the time specified in the permit.
d. the application shall describe any changes in facts or circumstances involved with
or affecting wetlands or watercourses or use of the land for which the permit was issued.
e. The Commission may, prior to the expiration of a permit, accept an untimely application to renew such permit if the authorized activity is ongoing and allow the continuation of work beyond the expiration date if, in its judgment, the permit is likely to be renewed and the public interest or environment will be best served by not interrupting the activity.
7.12 Any application to renew a permit shall be granted upon request of the permit
2 2
holder unless the Commission finds that there has been a substantial change in
circumstances which requires a new permit application or an enforcement action has
been undertaken with regard to the regulated activity for which the permit was issued provided no permit shall be valid for more than ten years; and further provided that any permit issued prior to July 1, 2011 that did not expire prior to May 9, 2011 shall be valid for no more than fourteen years.
2 3
Section 8
Application Procedures
8.1 All applications, petitions, request, or appeals shall be submitted to the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Commission of the Town of East Haddam.
8.2 When an application to conduct or cause to be conducted a regulated activity
upon an inland wetland or watercourse is filed and any portion of such wetland or
watercourse is within five hundred feet of the boundary of another municipality, the
applicant shall give written notice of the application by certified mail, return receipt
requested, on the same day to the inland wetlands agency of such other municipality.
8.3 The Commission shall, in accordance with Connecticut General Statutes Section 8-7d(f) and 22a-42b, notify the Clerk of any adjoining municipality of the pendency of any application, petition, appeal, request, or plan concerning any project on any site in which
a. any portion of the property on which the regulated activity is proposed is located
within 500 feet of the boundary of an adjoining municipality,
b. a significant portion of the traffic to the completed project on the site will use
streets within the adjoining municipality to enter or exit the site,
c. a significant portion of the sewer or water drainage from the project site will
flow through and significantly impact the sewage or drainage system within the adjoining municipality,
d. water run-off from the improved site will impact streets or other municipal or
private property within the adjoining municipality.
Notice of the pendency of such application shall be made by certified mail, return receipt requested and shall be mailed within seven (7) days of the date of receipt of the application, petition, appeal, request, or plan.
8.4 When an application is filed to conduct or cause to be conducted a regulated activity upon an inland wetland or watercourse, any portion of which is within the watershed of a water company as defined in section 16-1 of the Connecticut General Statutes, the applicant shall provide written notice of the application to the water company provided such water company has filed a map showing the boundaries of the watershed on the land records of the municipality in which the application is made and with the inland wetlands agency of such municipality. Such notice shall be made by certified mail, return receipt requested, and shall be mailed within seven days of the date of the application. The water company, through a representative, may appear and be heard at any hearing on the application. Documentation of such notice shall be provided to the Commission.
2 4
8.5 The date of receipt of any application, petition, request, or appeal shall be the day of the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Commission immediately following the day of submission to the Commission, or thirty-five days after such submission, whichever is sooner.
8.6 At any time during the review period, the applicant shall provide such additional
information as the Commission may reasonably require. Requests for such additional information shall not stay the time limitations as set forth in subsection 11.2 of these regulations.
8.7 All applications shall be open for public inspection.
8.8 It is the burden of the applicant to submit a complete application, and to demonstrate compliance with all criteria and requirement of the Regulations and, accordingly, the applicant may submit such additional reports or information as may be required to satisfy that burden. Any application found to be incomplete may be denied without prejudice to a future complete application.
8.9 The filling of an application with the Commission shall be deemed to constitute permission by the applicant for the Commission or its agents to enter onto the subject property for the purpose of inspections and tests, and, if the Commission designates a formal site walk during the public hearing process, such permission shall allow the general public, in company with the Commission only, to inspect such property. The property owner shall be sent notification prior to any scheduled field walk of the Commission.
2 5
Section 9
Public Hearings
9.1 The Commission shall not hold a public hearing on an application unless the Commission determines that the proposed activity may have a significant impact on wetlands or watercourses or a petition signed by at least twenty-five persons who are eighteen years of age or older and who reside in the municipality in which the regulated activity is proposed, requesting a hearing is filed with the Commission not later than fourteen days after the date of receipt of such application or the Commission finds that a public hearing regarding such application would be in the public interest. The Commission may issue a permit without a public hearing provided no petition provided for in this section is filed with the agency on or before the fourteenth day after the date of receipt of the application. Such hearing shall be held no later than sixty-five days after the receipt of such application as in accordance with the provisions of Section 8-7d of the Connecticut General Statutes. All applications and maps and documents relating thereto shall be open for public inspection. At such hearing any person or persons may appear and be heard and may be represented by agent or by attorney.
9.2 Notice of the public hearing shall be published at least twice at intervals of not less
than two days, the first not more than fifteen days and not fewer than ten days, and the last not less than two days before the date set for the hearing in a newspaper having a general circulation in each town where the affected wetland and watercourse is located.
9.3 Notice of the public hearing shall be mailed to the owner(s) of record of
abutting land within 100 feet of the property no less than fourteen days prior to the day of the hearing. Mailings shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt required by the applicant.
9.4 In the case of any application which is subject to the notification provisions of
subsection 8.3 of these regulations, a public hearing shall not be conducted until the clerk of the adjoining municipality(ies) has received notice of the pendency of the application. Proof of such notification shall be entered into the hearing record.
2 6
Section 10
Considerations for Decision
10.1 The Commission may consider the following in making its decision on an application:
a. the application and its supporting documentation;
b. public comments, evidence and testimony;
c. reports from other agencies and commissions including but not limited to the Town
of East Haddam:
1. Conservation Commission
2. Planning and Zoning Commission
3. Building Official
4. Chatham Health District
Other staff, consultants, and agencies hired by the Town of East Haddam
d. The Commission may also consider comments on any application from the Connecticut River Coastal Conservation District, the Midstate Regional Planning Agency or other regional organizations (i.e. Council of Elected Officials); agencies in adjacent municipalities which may be affected by the proposed activity, or other technical agencies or organizations which may undertake additional studies or investigations.
e. For applications that include activities involving stream crossings, the Commission shall apply the standards and practices recommended in the Connecticut Stream Crossing Guidelines as published by the Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection and the Massachusetts River and Stream Crossing Standards: Technical Guidelines as published by the Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection as guidance documents in best management practices for stream crossings. Copies are available in the Land Use Office or can be found the Connecticut and Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection web sites.
f. Non-receipt of comments from agencies and commissions listed in subdivisions
10.1.c. and d. above within the prescribed time shall neither delay nor prejudice the decision of the Agency.
10.2 Criteria for Decision. In carrying out the purposes and policies of sections
22a-36 to 22a-45, inclusive, of the Connecticut General Statutes, including matters relating to regulating, licensing and enforcing of the provisions thereof, the Agency shall take into consideration all relevant facts and circumstances as they affect inland wetlands and watercourses (including vernal pools), including but not limited to:
a. the environmental impact of the proposed regulated activity on wetlands or
watercourses;
2 7
the applicant’s purpose for, and any feasible and prudent alternatives to, the
proposed regulated activity which alternatives would cause less or no environmental impact to wetlands or watercourses;
the relationship between the short term and long-term impacts of the proposed
regulated activity on wetlands or watercourses and the maintenance and enhancement of long-term productivity of such wetlands or watercourses;
irreversible and irretrievable loss of wetland or watercourse resources which
would be caused by the proposed regulated activity, including the extent to which such activity would foreclose a future ability to protect, enhance or restore such resources, and any mitigation measures which may be considered as a condition of issuing a permit for such activity including, but not limited to, measures to (1) prevent or minimize pollution or other environmental damage, (2) maintain or enhance existing environmental quality, or (3) in the following order of priority: restore, enhance and create productive wetland or watercourse resources;
the character and degree of injury to, or interference with, safety, health or the
reasonable use of property which is caused or threatened by the proposed regulated activity;
f. impacts on the aquatic, plant or animal life and in habitats in wetlands or watercourses, proved that the Commission shall not deny or condition an application for a regulated activity in area outside wetlands or watercourses on the basis of an impact or effect on aquatic, plants, or animal life unless such activity will likely impact or affect the physical characteristics of such wetlands or watercourses;
g. impacts of the proposed regulated activity on wetlands or watercourses outside
the area for which the activity is proposed and future activities associated with or reasonably related to, the proposed regulated activity which are made inevitable by the proposed regulated activity and which may have an impact on wetlands or watercourses;
h. the suitability of such action for the area for which it is proposed. This requires
the Commission to balance the need for economic growth of the Town and the use of its land, with the need to protect its environment for the people of the Town and for the benefit of generations yet unborn;
10.3 In the case of an application which received a public hearing pursuant to a
finding by the Commission that the proposed activity may have a significant impact on wetlands or watercourses, a permit shall not be issued unless the Commission finds on the basis of the record that a feasible and prudent alternative does not exist. In making this finding the Commission shall consider the facts and circumstances set forth in
subsection 10.2 of this section. The finding and the reasons therefore shall be stated on
the record in writing.
10.4 In the case of an application which is denied on the basis of a finding that there
2 8
may be feasible and prudent alternatives to the proposed regulated activity which have less adverse impact on wetlands or watercourses, the Commission shall propose on the record in writing the types of alternatives which the applicant may investigate provided this subsection shall not be construed to shift the burden from the applicant to prove that he is entitled to the permit or to present alternatives to the proposed regulated activity.
10.5 In reaching its decision on any application after a public hearing, the Commission shall base its decision on the record of that hearing. Documentary evidence or other material not in the hearing record shall not be considered by the Commission in its decision. A conclusion that a feasible and prudent alternative does not exist does not create a presumption that a permit should be issued. The applicant has the burden of demonstrating that his application is consistent with the purposes and policies of these regulations and sections 22a-36 to 22a-45, inclusive, of the Connecticut General Statutes.
10.6 For purposes of this section, (1) “wetlands and watercourses” includes aquatic, plant or animal life and habitats in wetlands or watercourses, and (2) “habitats” means areas or environments in which an organism or biological population normally lives or occurs.
10.7 A Commission shall not deny or condition an application for a regulated activity in an area outside wetlands or watercourses on the basis of an impact or effect on aquatic, plant, or animal life unless such activity will likely impact or affect the physical characteristics of such wetlands or watercourses.
10.8 In the case of an application where the applicant has provided written notice pursuant to subsection7.1.c.3 of these regulations, the holder of the restriction may provide proof to the inland wetlands agency that granting of the permit application will violate the terms of the restriction. Upon a finding that the requested land use violates the terms of such restriction, the inland wetlands agency shall not grant the permit approval.
10.9 In the case of an application where the applicant fails to comply with the provisions of subsections 7.1.c.3 or 7.1.c.4 of these regulations, (1) the party holding the conservation or preservation restriction, other than a state agency that holds such restriction, may, not later than fifteen days after receipt of actual notice of permit approval, file an appeal with the inland wetlands agency, subject to the rules and regulations of such agency relating to appeals. The inland wetlands agency shall reverse the permit approval upon a finding that the requested land use violates the terms of such restriction [.]; or (2) the state agency that holds such restriction may, not later than thirty days after receipt of actual notice of permit approval, file an appeal with the inland wetlands agency, subject to the rules and regulations of such agency relating to appeals. The inland wetlands agency shall immediately reverse such permit approval if the commissioner of the state agency that holds such restriction certifies that the land use authorized in such permit violates the terms of such conservation or preservation restriction.
10.10 Nothing in subsections 7.1.c.3 or 7.1c.4 of these regulations shall be construed to prohibit the filing of a permit application or to require such written notice when the activity that is the subject of such permit application will occur on a portion of property that is not restricted under the terms of such conservation or preservation restriction.
2 9
Section 11
Decision Process and Permit
11.1 The Commission or its duly authorized agent acting pursuant to Section 12 of
these Regulations, may, in accordance with Section 10 of these regulations, grant the application as filed or grant it upon other terms, conditions, limitations or modifications of the regulated activity designed to carry out the purposes and policies of the Act, or deny the application. Such terms may include any reasonable measures which would mitigate the impacts of the regulated activity and which would (a) prevent or minimize pollution or other environmental damage, (b) maintain or enhance existing environmental quality, or (c) in the following order of priority: restore, enhance and create productive wetland or watercourse resources.
11.2 No later than sixty-five (65) days after receipt of an application, the Commission may hold a public hearing on such application. The hearing shall be completed within thirty-five (35) days of its commencement. Action shall be taken on applications within sixty-five (65) days after completion of a public hearing. In the absence of a public hearing, action shall be taken on applications within sixty-five (65) days from the date of receipt of the application. The applicant may consent to one or more extensions of the periods specified in this subsection for the holding of the hearing and for action on such application, provided the total extension of any such period shall not be for longer than a total of sixty-five (65) days, or may withdraw such application. The failure of the Commission to act within any time period specified in this subsection, or any extension thereof, shall not be deemed to constitute approval of the application. An application deemed incomplete by the Agency shall be withdrawn by the applicant or denied by the Commission.
11.3 The Commission shall state upon its record the reasons and bases for its decision and, in the case of any public hearing, such decision shall be based fully on the record of such hearing and shall be in writing and shall, as applicable and in accordance with Section 10 of these regulations incorporate a statement relative to the consideration of feasible and prudent alternatives.
11.4 The Commission shall notify the applicant and any person entitled to such notice of its decision within fifteen (15) days of the date of the decision by certified mail, return receipt requested, and the Commission shall cause notice of its order in the issuance or denial of the permit, to be published in a newspaper having general circulation in the town wherein the inland wetlands or watercourse lies. In any case in which such notice is not published within such fifteen day period, the applicant may provide for the publication of such notice within ten days thereafter.
11.5 If an activity authorized by an inland wetland permit also involves an activity which requires a zoning or subdivision approval, special zoning permit, or variance or special exception, under sections 8-3(g), 8-3c, or 8-26 of the Connecticut General Statues, the Commission shall file a copy of the decision and report on the application with the Town of East Haddam Planning and Zoning Commission within fifteen days of the date of the decision thereon.
3 0
11.6 Any permit issued by the Commission [prior to July 1, 2006 or after July 1, 2009] for the development of land for which an approval is required under section 8-3, 8-25 or 8-26 of the Connecticut General Statutes shall be valid for five years provided the Commission may establish a specific time period within which any regulated activity shall be conducted. Any permit issued by the Commission for any other activity shall be valid for not less than two years and not more than five years. Any permit issued by the Commission prior to July 1, 2011 that was in effect and did not expire prior to May 9, 2011 shall be valid for a period not less than nine years after the date of such approval.
11.7 No permit issued by the Commission shall be assigned or transferred without the written permission of the Commission.
11.8 If a bond or insurance is required in accordance with Section 13 of these Regulations,
the Agency may withhold issuing the permit until such bond or insurance is provided.
11.9 General provisions in the issuance of all permits:
a. the Commission has relied in whole or in part on information provided by the applicant and if such information subsequently proves to be false, deceptive, incomplete or inaccurate, the permit may be modified, suspended or revoked.
b. All permits issued by the Commission are subject to and do not derogate any present or future rights or powers of the Commission or the Town of East Haddam , and convey no rights in real estate or material nor any exclusive privileges, and are further subject to any and all public and private rights and to any federal, state, and municipal laws or regulations pertinent to the subject land or activity.
c. if the activity authorized by the Commission’s permit also involves an activity which requires zoning or subdivision approval, special permit, variance or special exception under sections 8.3(g), 8-3c, or 8-26 of the Connecticut General Statutes, no work pursuant to the wetland permit may begin until such approval is obtained.
d. in constructing the authorized activities, the permittee shall implement such
management practices consistent with the terms and conditions of the permit as needed to control storm water discharges and to prevent erosion and sedimentation and to otherwise prevent pollution of wetlands and watercourses.
3 1
Section 12
Action by Duly Authorized Agent
12 .1 The Commission may delegate to its duly authorized agent the authority to approve
or extend a licensed activity that is not located in a wetland or watercourse when such agent finds that the conduct of such activity would result in no greater than a minimal impact on any wetlands or watercourses provided such agent has completed the comprehensive training program developed by the Commissioner of Environmental Protection pursuant to section 22a-39 of the Connecticut General Statutes. Requests for such approval shall be made on a form provided by the Commission and shall contain the information listed under Section 7.5 of these regulations and any other information the Commission may reasonably require. At the time of the filing such request, the applicant shall be responsible for notification of the property owners within one hundred feet of the subject property lines as per the Town notice ordinance.
12.2 Notwithstanding the provisions for receipt and processing applications prescribed in
Sections 8, 9 and 11 of these regulations, such agent may approve or extend such an activity at any time.
12.3 Any person receiving such approval from such agent shall, within ten days of
the date of such approval, publish, at the applicant’s expense, notice of the approval in a newspaper having a general circulation in the town wherein the activity is located or will have an effect. Any person may appeal such decision of such agent to the Commission within fifteen days after the publication date of the notice and the Commission shall consider such appeal at its next regularly scheduled meeting provided such meeting is no earlier than three business days after receipt by such Commission or its agent of such appeal. Any person may appear and be heard at the meeting held by the Commission to consider the subject appeal. The Commission shall, at its discretion, sustain, alter, or reject the decision of its agent or require an application for a permit in accordance with Section 7 of these regulations.
3 2
Section 13
Bond and Insurance
13.1 Upon approval of the application and prior to issuance of a permit, the
applicant may, at the discretion of the Commission be required to file a bond with such surety in such amount and in a form approved by the Commission.
13.2 The bond or surety shall be conditioned on compliance with all provisions of these regulations and the terms, conditions and limitations established in the permit.
13.3 The applicant may be required to certify public liability insurance against liability which might result from proposed operation or use covering any and all damage which might occur within two (2) years of completion of such operations, in an amount to be determined by the Commission commensurate with the projected operation.
3 3
Section 14
Enforcement
14.1 The Commission may appoint an agent or agents to act in its behalf with
the authority to inspect property, except a private residence, and issue notices of violation or cease and desist orders and carries out other actions or investigations necessary for the enforcement of these regulations. In carrying out the purposes of this section, the Commission or its duly authorized agent shall take into consideration the criteria for decision under section 10.2 of these regulations.
14.2 The Commission or its agent may make regular inspections, at reasonable hours, during the life of the permit, of all regulated activities for which permits have been issued under these regulations. The consent form for such inspections is part of the permit application.
14.3 If the Commission or its designated agent finds that any person is conducting or maintaining any activity, facility or condition which is in violation of the Act or these regulations, the Commission or its duly authorized agent may:
a. issue a written order by certified mail, return receipt requested, to such
person conducting such activity or maintaining such facility or condition to
immediately cease such activity or to correct such facility or condition. Within ten
(10) calendar days of the issuance of such order the Commission shall hold a hearing to provide the person an opportunity to be heard and show cause why the order should not remain in effect. The Commission shall consider the facts presented at the hearing and within ten (10) days of the completion of the hearing notify the person by certified mail that the original order remains in effect, that a revised order is in effect, or that the order has been withdrawn. The Commission shall publish notice of its decision in a newspaper having general circulation in the municipality. The original order shall be effective upon issuance and shall remain in effect until the Commission affirms, revises or withdraws the order. The issuance of an order pursuant to this subsection shall not delay or bar an action pursuant to section 22a44(b) of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
b. suspend or revoke a permit if it finds that the permittee has not complied
with the terms, conditions or limitations set forth in the permit or has exceeded the scope of the work as set forth in the application including application plans. Prior to revoking or suspending any permit, the Commission shall issue notice to the permittee, personally or by certified mail, return receipt requested, setting forth the facts or conduct that warrants the intended action. The Commission shall hold a hearing to provide the permittee an opportunity to show that it is in compliance with its permit and any and all requirements for retention of the permit. The permittee shall be notified of the Commission’s decision to suspend, revoke, or maintain a permit by certified mail within fifteen (15) days of the date of its decision. The
3 4
Commission shall publish notice of the suspension or revocation in a newspaper having general circulation in the municipality.
c. issue a notice of violation to such person conducting such activity or
maintaining such facility or condition, stating the nature of the violation, the
jurisdiction of the Commission, and prescribing the necessary action and steps to correct the violation including, without limitation, halting work in wetlands or watercourses. The Commission [may request that the individual appear at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Commission to discuss the unauthorized activity, and/or provide a written reply to the notice or file an application for the necessary permit. Failure to carry out the action(s) directed in a notice of violation may result in issuance of the order provided in subdivision 14.3.a or other enforcement proceedings as provided by law.
3 5
Section 15
Amendments
15.1 These regulations and the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Map for the Town of
East Haddam may be amended, from time to time, by the Agency in accordance with
changes in the Connecticut General Statutes or regulations of the Connecticut Department
of Environmental Protection, or as new information regarding soils, hydrology or obligate
botanical species peculiar to inland wetlands and watercourses, including vernal pools,
becomes available.
15.2 An application filed with the Commission which is in conformance with the
applicable inland wetlands regulations as of the date of the receipt of such application shall not be required thereafter to comply with any change in inland wetland regulations, including changes to setbacks and buffers, taking effect on or after the date of such receipt and any appeal from the decision of such Commission with respect to such application shall not be dismissed by the Superior Court on the grounds that such a change has taken effect on or after the date of such receipt. The provisions of this section shall not be construed to apply (1) to the establishment, amendment or change of boundaries of inland wetlands or watercourses or (2) to any change in regulations necessary to make such regulations consistent with the provisions of the Act as of the date of such receipt.
15.3 These regulations and the Town of East Haddam Inland Wetlands and
Watercourses Map shall be amended in the manner specified in section 22a-42a of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended. The Commission shall provide the Commissioner of Environmental Protection with a copy of any proposed regulations and notice of the public hearing to consider any proposed regulations or amendments thereto, except map amendments, at least thirty-five days before the public hearing on their adoption.
15.4 Petitions requesting changes or amendments to the "Inland Wetlands and
Watercourses Map, East Haddam, Connecticut”, shall contain at least the following information:
a. the petitioner's name, mailing address, email address, and telephone number;
b. the address, or location, of the land affected by the petition,
c. the petitioner's interest in the land affected by the petition
d. map(s) showing the geographic location of the land affected by the petition and the existing and the proposed wetland(s) and watercourse(s) boundaries, including vernal pools, on such land in accurate detail together with the documentation supporting such proposed boundary locations; and
e. the reasons for the requested action.
3 6
15.5 Any person who submits a petition to amend the Inland Wetlands and
Watercourses Map, East Haddam, Connecticut, shall bear the burden of proof for all
requested map amendments. Such proof may include, but is not limited to, professional interpretation of aerial photography and remote sensing imagery, resource mapping, soils mapping, or other information acceptable to the Commission. If such person is the owner, developer or contract purchaser of the land that is the subject of the petition, or if such person is representing the interests of such an owner, developer or purchaser, in addition to the information required in subsection 15.4, the petition shall include:
a. the name, mailing address, email address, and telephone number of the owner(s) of such land and owner(s) agent or other representative;
b. the names and mailing addresses of the owners of abutting land;
c. documentation by a soil scientist of the distribution of wetland soils on said land.
Such documentation shall at a minimum include the report of the soil scientist documenting the location of wetland soils on the land and a map of the said land indicating the flag locations set by the soil scientist and defining the boundaries of wetland soil types; and map(s) showing any proposed development of the land in relation to existing and proposed wetland and watercourse boundaries.
15.6 The Inland Wetlands soils and Watercourses shall be delineated by a soil scientist, geologist, ecologist or other qualified individual.
15.7 A public hearing shall be held on petitions to amend the Inland Wetlands and
Watercourses Map. Notice of the hearing shall be published in a newspaper having substantial circulation in the municipality at least twice at intervals of not less than two days, the first not more than fifteen days nor less than ten days, and the last not less than two days, before such hearing. A copy of such proposed boundary change shall be filed in the office of the town clerk for public inspection at least ten days before such hearing.
15.8 The Commission shall hold a public hearing on a petition to amend the regulations and the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Map within sixty-five (65) days after receipt of such petition. The hearing shall be completed within thirty-five (35) days after commencement. The Agency shall act upon the changes requested in such petition within sixty-five (65) days after completion of the hearing. At such hearing, any person or persons may appear and be heard and may be represented by agent or attorney. The petitioner may consent to one or more extensions of any period specified in this subsection provided the total extension of all such periods shall not be for longer than sixty-five days (65) days or may withdraw such petition. Failure of the agency to act within any time period specified in this subsection or any extension thereof, shall not be deemed to constitute approval of the petition.
15.9 The Commission shall make its decision and state, in writing, the reasons why the change in the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Map was made.
3 7
15.10 These regulations shall become effective upon filing in the Office of the Town
Clerk of East Haddam, Connecticut, and publications of legal notice of promulgation in a
newspaper having general circulation in the Town.
15.11 All regulations, including regulated area boundary maps, promulgated or
amended by the Commission, pursuant to the Act, shall be submitted to the Commissioner of the Department of Environmental Protection not later than ten (10) days after their adoption.
15.12.a In the event that the Commissioner shall find any part of the Commission's
regulation not in conformity, the Commissioner shall issue a notice of nonconformance that shall include:
i. the reasons for holding any part to be nonconforming;
ii. the section or sections whose operation and effect shall be suspended until they shall be amended and resubmitted;
iii. the extent to which the Commissioner shall exercise jurisdiction over the municipal wetlands watercourses, for their protection, in the interval between the issuance of a notice of nonconformance and the resubmission of amended regulations, including boundary maps.
15.12b The Commission shall, pursuant to the provisions for adopting and amending
Regulations contained in the Act, initiate proceedings to amend such nonconforming regulations within twenty (20) days of the receipt of a notice of nonconformance.
15.12c Upon disapproval of any regulations, the Commissioner shall assume
jurisdiction over those portions of the regulations as may be necessary to assure
continuity of the wetland and watercourse regulation in the Town. This jurisdiction shall cease upon approval of the regulations by the Commissioner.
15.12d Failure of the Commissioner to issue a notice of nonconformance within sixty
(60) days of the receipt of such regulations, maps, or amendments shall be taken as approval of such regulations.
15.12e If municipal regulations were not submitted to and granted approval by the
Commissioner in a preliminary form prior to adoption, they shall not become effective until granted final written approval by the Commissioner.
15.13 All enforcement activities undertaken by the Town and all appeals which pertain
to the wetlands and watercourses of the State shall be reported, on a form supplied by the Commissioner within fifteen (15) days of the commencement of such action.
3 8
Section 16
Appeals
16.1 Appeal on actions of the Commission shall be made in accordance with the provisions of section 22a-43 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
16.2 Notice of such appeal shall be served upon the Commission and the Commissioner of Environmental Protection.
16.3 If upon appeal pursuant to Section 16.1 of these regulations, the court finds that
the action appealed from constitutes the equivalent of taking without compensation, it shall set aside the action or it may modify the action so that it does not constitute a taking. In both instances the court shall remand the order to the Commission for action not inconsistent with its decision.
Section 17
Conflict and Severance
17.1 If there is a conflict among the provisions of these regulations, the provision which
imposes the most stringent standards for the use of wetlands and watercourses shall govern. The invalidity of any word, clause, sentence, section, part, subsection, subdivision or provision of these regulations shall not affect the validity of any other part, which can be given effect without such invalid part or parts.
If there is a conflict between the provisions of these regulations and the provisions
of the Act, the provisions of the Act shall govern.
Section 18
Other Permits
18.1 Nothing in these regulations shall obviate the requirements for the applicant to
obtain any other assents, permits or licenses required by law or regulation by the Town of East Haddam, the State of Connecticut or the Government of the United States including any approval(s) required by the Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. Obtaining such assents, permits or licenses are the sole responsibility of the applicant.
18.2 No person shall conduct any regulated activity within an inland wetland or
watercourse, including vernal pool, nor within one hundred (100’) feet (lateral distance) of the mapped boundary of a wetland or watercourses or within four hundred (400) feet (lateral distance) of a vernal pool thereof, in accordance with Section 5.5 hereinabove, if such regulated activity requires zoning or subdivision approval, without first having obtained a valid certificate of zoning or subdivision approval, special exception, site plan approval, certificate of zoning compliance, variance, or other documentation required by the East Haddam Zoning or Subdivision Regulations establishing that the proposal complies with the said Zoning or Subdivision Regulations.
3 9
Section 19
Application Fees
19.1 Method of Payment. All fees required by these regulations shall be submitted to the
Commission by certified check or money order payable to the Town of East Haddam at the time the application is filed with the Agency.
19.2 No application shall be accepted or approved by the Agency unless the correct application fee is paid in full or unless a waiver has been granted by the Agency pursuant to subsection 19.7 of these regulations.
19.3 The application fee is not refundable except under the conditions of 19.2 and 19.7.
19.4 Definitions. As used in this section:
"Residential Uses" means activities carried out on property developed for permanent
housing or being developed to be occupied by permanent housing.
"Commercial uses" means activities carried out on property developed for industry,
commerce, trade, recreation, or business or being developed to be occupied for such purposes, for profit or nonprofit.
"Other uses" means activities other than residential uses or commercial uses.
19.5 Fee Schedule. Fees are to be set by Town meeting as required by Town ordinance.
See Appendix E
19.6 Exemption. Boards, commissions, councils and departments of the Town of East Haddam
are exempt from all fee requirements.
19.7 Waiver. The applicant may petition the Agency to waive, reduce or allow delayed payment
of the fee. Such petitions shall be in writing and shall state fully the facts and circumstances the Commission should consider in its determination under this subsection. The Commission may waive all or part of the application fee if the Commission determines that:
a. the activity applied for would clearly result in a substantial public benefit to the environment or to the public health and safety and the applicant would reasonably be deterred from initiating the activity solely or primarily as a result of the amount of the application fee, or
the amount of the application fee is clearly excessive in relation to the cost to the
Town for reviewing and processing the application.
The Commission shall state upon its record the basis for all actions under this subsection.
4 0
Section 20
Records Retention and Disposition
The Commission and the Town Clerk for the Town of East Haddam shall retain complete
administrative records of Agency actions and dispose of such records in accordance with the retention/disposition schedules set for in subsection 20.2.
The public records administrator of the Connecticut State Library established the following
new records retention/disposition schedules for municipal Inland Wetlands Agencies effective April 24, 1989:
RECORD TITLE MINIMUM RETENTION TOWN CLERK
REQUIRED IN AGENCY
Applications (inc. 10 years -
supporting materials)
Decision Letters 10 years Permanent
Approved Site Plans 10 years -
Legal Notices 10 years Permanent
Staff and Public Written 10 years -
Testimony (hearing
records)
Minutes of Meetings & 15 years Permanent
Public Hearings
Tapes, Audio-Inland 4 years -
Wetland Matters
Notices of Violation 10 years -
& Orders
Text of Changes Adopted Continuous Update/ -
In Regulations Permanent
General Correspondence 5 years -
Issued or Received
4 1
Section 21
Effective Date of Regulations
These regulations are effective upon filing in the Office of the Town Clerk and publication
of a notice of such filing in a newspaper having general circulation in the Town of East Haddam.
Effective date:
Revised April 20, 2011 – incorporate State statute changes from 2004 to 2010 and included stream crossing guidelines.
Revised October 1, 2004 Amendments pertaining to the passage of Public Act 03-177 and Public Act 03-276 of CGS 22a-42a and the fee ordinance.
Revised - October 6, 2003.
4 2
Appendix A - Obligate Vernal Pool Species
1. Vertebrates
a) Spotted salamander (Ambystoma maculatum)
b) Jefferson salamander (Ambystoma jeffersonianum x laterale hybrid)
c) Marbled salamander (Ambystoma opacum)
d) Wood frog (Rana sylvatica)
e) Eastern Spadefoot Toad (Scaphiopus h. holbrookii)
2. Invertebrates
a) Fairy Shrimp (Anostraca sp.)
4 3
Appendix B - Criteria for Vernal Pool Identification 1
Bureau of Water Management
Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection
GUIDE TO CONNECTICUT’S MUNICIPAL INLAND WETLANDS AND WATERCOURSES AGENCIES
(DRAFT)
VERNAL POOL DEFINITION / INDICATORS
“Vernal Pool”1 means a seasonal or permanent2 watercourse3 in a defined depression or basin4, that lacks a fish population5 and supports or is capable of supporting6 breeding and development7 of amphibian or invertebrate species recognized as obligate to such watercourses.
1 Because the term “vernal pool” is not entirely accurate, some have proposed the use of such terms such as “intermittent waterbody,” ephermeral Pool,” or “temporary pool” to describe this landscape feature. The term “vernal pool” is used here because “vernal” means “pertaining to spring” and it is in the spring that many of the ecologically significant activities take place in vernal pools.
2 Most vernal pools are seasonal, drying out during the hotter summer months, but some have been found that remain filled with water all year round, or for a set of particularly wet years.
3 The term, “watercourse” is used here as it is defined in the Connecticut Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Act (CGS 22a-38) as “…rivers, streams, brooks, waterways, lakes, ponds, marshes, swamps, bogs and all other bodies of water, natural or artificial, vernal or intermittent…”
4 Some vernal pool definitions further describe “depression” and “basin” as being “small” as most of the isolated woodland vernal pools are (usually less than 100 feet in diameter). The word “small” was excluded here because using this descriptor alone is too vague and including a minimum size may exclude valuable vernal pool habitats found within larger waterbodies. Additionally, a minimum time period for the presence of ponding was not included in this definition due to the difficulty in proving this requirement for regulatory purposes. It is assumed that if there is sufficient development of obligate species then the required inundation of water has occurred. Hydrologic indicators listed in the “indirect indicators” section can also be used to judge period of inundation based on indicated depths.
5 “Population” here is to mean a self-sustaining number of native fish.
6 The need to include the phrase”…capable of supporting…” reflects the highly variable nature of vernal pools. A limited sampling of vernal pool hydrologic and biological characteristics may not reveal its “true identity” as a vernal pool due to its seasonal variability, short-term climatic variations, or natural population cycles. For example, it has been observed that particular vernal pools may support viable populations only periodically in a given set of years due to natural population dynamics. This capability would have to be determined through professional judgment.
7 This definition necessitates that the obligate species reach a development stage more advanced than simply successful breeding (i.e. egg laying). This includes reaching the tadpole, larval stage, or the more advanced juvenile stages of their lifecycle. Using the word “development” serves to preclude those situations where prolific and successful breeding takes place in less than ideal habitat (i.e. puddles, ruts, the “root ball” and depressions of toppled trees) wherein the eggs soon perish due to insufficient hydrology, predation, temperature, or other environmental parameters. However, as mentioned above, in very dry years even “true” vernal pools may become dry before amphibian development is completed.
4 4
A. Direct Indicators: The species listed under categories 1 and 2 require vernal pools for successful reproduction. They are recognized as obligate vernal pool species. They serve as direct indicators for the existence of a vernal pool ecosystem. Documentation of vernal pool utilization by these species is the most reliable method of identifying vernal pool ecosystems.
Either one of the following categories will confirm the existence of a vernal pool ecosystem:
Category I - Vertebrates
Existence of a seasonal or permanent watercourse in a defined depression or basin that lacks a fish population, and shows evidence of breeding and/or development8 by any of the following obligate vernal pool breeding species:
a. Spotted salamander (Ambystoma maculatum)
b. Jefferson salamander complex (Ambystoma Jeffersonianum x laterale hybrid9)
c. Marbled salamander (Ambystoma opacum)
d. Wood frog (Rana sylvatica)
As required by this method of identification, evidence of breeding and/or development for these obligate species include one or more of the following:
BREEDING
1. Presence of breeding adults
a. Wood frog - breeding chorus and/or mated pairs
b. Obligate salamander - courting individuals and/or spermatophores
2. Two or more egg masses of any of the above-named species
DEVELOPMENT
3. Presence of tadpoles or larvae of the above species
4. Presence of transforming larvae and/or juveniles
a. Wood frog - tail stub event
b. Obligate salamanders - gill remnants evident
Category 2 - Invertebrates
Existence of a seasonal or permanent watercourse in a defined depression or basin that lacks a fish population and contains fairy shrimp (Anostraca sp.) or their eggs therein.
8 Evidence of breeding alone could be used to confirm the existence of a vernal pool if, through professional judgment, it is determined that the pool would be capable of supporting successful development.
9 The hybridization of A. jeffersonianum (Jefferson salamander) and A. laterale (blue spotted salamander) provides a particular challenge when applied to the identification of vernal pools. For more information on this hybridization phenomenon, refer to Amphibians and Reptiles of Connecticut and Adjacent Regions, by Michael W. Klemens. A. laterale is not included as an obligate species here, as in other cases, because their breeding habitat requirements are markedly different than A. jeffersonianum, A. maculatum and A. opacum. Klemens points out that A. jeffersonianum / A. laterale hybrids are “…far more abundant than either parental species” in Connecticut.
4 5
B. Indirect Indicators10: In the absence of direct indicators (typically when the pool may be dry from late summer through early fall, during the winter, or when climatic or landscape conditions inhibit the presence of direct indicators), the following indirect indicators may be used to gauge the likelihood that a watercourse is capable of supporting obligate vernal pool species. To be clear, it is intended that these indicators can be used to conclude, for regulatory purposes, that a particular watercourse is a vernal pool, but they cannot be used to absolutely confirm its presence, as a developing obligate vernal pool species would. The more indirect indicators present (especially indirect indicators “a” through “d”), the greater the likelihood that a particular watercourse is a vernal pool capable of supporting obligate vernal pool species.
Existence of a defined depression or basin that exhibits:
a. Fingernail clam shells, snail shells, caddisfly cases, diving beetles or evidence of other
aquatic invertebrates, among the leaf litter.
b. Presence of algal strands hanging over branches, or silt-stained leaves attached to overhanging branches, at or below the historic high-water mark of the dry basin
c. Dense wetland plant growth (e.g. buttonbush, bur-reed, etc.) in the interior of the basin or depression
d. A distinct waterline on the base of tree trunks or shrubs in the basin
e. Discolored water-stained “gray” leaf letter within the basin as distinguished from the “brown” leaves on the adjacent upland floor
f. Hummocks supporting moss, grass, sedges or woody growth along the edge of the basin or depression
g. Unvegetated, low-lying area or areas in the basin interior
h. Standing water or ice in the winter
Items “a” through “d” are to be considered strong indicators that show a higher probability for the existence of a vernal pool that holds water for a long enough period to support breeding and development of obligate species. Items “e” through “h” are indicators that might signify the presence of a vernal pool but do not provide sufficient evidence that the pool holds water long enough to support breeding and development of obligate species.
10 These indirect indicators are basically “clues” that one can use when the direct indicators are absent (perhaps due to seasonal constraints, short-term climactic conditions or variations in natural population fluctuations) to establish a certain probability that the landscape feature being inspected is a vernal pool. The weight that these “indirect indicators” can receive as evidence to the presence of a vernal pool during the permit process may vary according to the circumstances. For instance, if it is winter and direct indicators are not present, but there are enough indirect indicators present so that the wetlands agency and / or their consultants feel that it is more likely to offer vernal pool habitat during the breeding season, the applicant may want to agree with this opinion so that he or she can move forward with the permit process under the assumption that a vernal pool exists. Otherwise, the permit decision may have to be postponed until the breeding season to confirm the presence of obligate species.
4 6
Appendix C - Vernal Pool Inventory Worksheet - please supply one sheet per vernal pool
Applicant name ___________________________
Property address ___________________________
Approximate location of the vernal pool ___________________________
Physical Characteristics
Size of Vernal Pool - Surface area measured from the perimeter of the high water line.
Greater than 2,500 ft² _____
1,000 – 2,500 ft² _____
Less than 1,000 ft² _____
Size of Upland Habitat - Amount of undisturbed forest adjacent to the pool or system.
(Intact canopy and natural ground cover)
Greater than 30 acres _____
20 – 30 acres _____
15 – 20 acres _____
Less than 15 acres _____
Road Proximity - Distance to closest road.
Less than 500 feet _____
Greater than 500 feet _____
Greater than 1,000 feet _____
Closest Road Composition
Road is paved _____
Road has curbs _____
Connectivity to other Vernal Pools - Distance to next closest vernal pool.
Less than 500 feet to one other pool ____
Less than 1,000 feet to two or more pools _____
4 7
Biological Characteristics
Observation (Presence of)
Obligate Vertebrate Vernal Pool Species Eggs Larvae Adults
Spotted salamander (Ambystoma maculatum) ____ ____ ____
Jefferson salamander (Ambystoma jeffersonianum) ____ ____ ____
Marbled salamander (Ambystoma opacum) ____ ____ ____
Wood frog (Rana sylvatica) ____ _____ ____
Eastern Spadefoot Toad (Scaphiopus h. holbrookii) _____ _____ ____
Invertebrate Vernal Pool Species
Fairy Shrimp (Anostraca sp.) _____ ______ _____
Briefly describe all of the methods used to survey the vernal pool:
List date(s) of field visit(s):
Name: ___________________________________
Signature: ___________________________________
Date: ___________________
4 8
Appendix D - Vernal Pool Impact Worksheet
(please supply one per vernal pool)
Applicant name: ______________________________________________________
Property address: ______________________________________________________
Approximate location of vernal pool: ______________________________________
1. Does the proposed plan involve disturbance within 100 ft of a vernal pool? ________
a) If so, what is/are the type(s) of disturbance(s) proposed within this area?
2. Does the proposed plan involve disturbance within 400 ft of a vernal pool? ________
a) If so, what is/are the type(s) of disturbance(s) proposed within this area?
Review areas versus proposed disturbed areas.
a) What is the area, calculated in square feet, measured from the edge of the pool extending one hundred (100) feet from the edge of the pool? _________ sq. ft.
What is the area that is proposed to be disturbed within the above measured area? _________ sq. ft.
What is the area, calculated in square feet, measured from one hundred (100) feet from the edge of the pool to four hundred (400) feet from the edge of the pool? _________ sq. ft.
What is the area that is proposed to be disturbed within the above measured area?
_________ sq. ft.
4. Does the proposed plan involve new road construction within 400 ft. of a vernal pool? ______
a) If so, will the new road(s) be paved? _______
b) Will the new road(s) be curbed? __________
c) What is the estimated daily traffic volume from 6 p.m. to 12 a.m.? ___cars/hr
5. Does the proposed plan involve the installation of erosion and sedimentation control measures within 400 ft of a vernal pool? _________________________
4 9
6. Will the proposed project result in an increase or decrease in the surface or subsurface water flow to the vernal pool? _______________________________
a) If so, by how much per 10 year storm event? ___________cu ft/sec
Name: _____________________________
Signature: _____________________________
Date: _____________________________
5 0
Appendix E Fee Schedule
A. PERMITS
1. Residential additions, accessory buildings, and uses
a. Declaratory Ruling – permitted uses………… 0
b. Summary Ruling……(application)………… $75
c. Plenary Ruling (when a public hearing is involved) $200
Also, per every 100 square feet of proposed disturbed
Wetlands and watercourses area in which an
activity is proposed. $50
2. Residential New house or major reconstruction
Major reconstruction is considered work valued at 50% or
greater of the present structure.
a. Declaratory Ruling – permitted uses………………… 0
b. Summary Ruling……(application)…………………… $75
c. Plenary Ruling (when a public hearing is involved) $200
Also, per every 100 square feet of proposed disturbance in the 100 foot upland
review area in which the activity is proposed. . $25
Per every 100 square feet of disturbance in the regulated area
in which the activity is proposed.
$50
3. Commercial Use
a. Declaratory Ruling – permitted uses……………… 0
b. Summary Ruling … ……………………………. $200
c. Plenary Ruling……………………………………. $300
Also, per every 100 square feet of proposed disturbance in the100 foot upland
review area in which the activity is proposed. $50
Per every 100 square feet of proposed disturbance of the regulated area in which an activity is proposed. $100
4. Modification of a previous approval…………………………… $75
5. Wetlands Map Amendments…………………………………… $200
5 1
Appendix E Continued
B. Subdivision Review and permit fee
1. Per Lot Fee
a. 2-5 lots…...……………………………………… $100/per lot
b. 6-10 lots……………………………………………… $200/per lot
c. 11 or more lots………………………………………… $300/per lot
2. Any activity(ies) requiring permitting will include the following fees.
a. Per every 100 square feet of proposed disturbance in the
100 foot upland review area in which the activity is proposed. $50
b. Per every 100 square feet of proposed disturbance of the
regulated area in which an activity is proposed… $100
Resubmitted Plans Each time plans are resubmitted with substantial new and revised information there shall be charged a flat fee charge of $50 per lot re-submittal fee. This flat fee is for the entire proposal and not just for the lots affected.
The Applicant or the agent shall submit calculations of the area for the amount of proposed work in the upland review area and the regulated area. The Inland Wetlands Enforcement Officer or the Town Engineer will review the calculation.
D. Public Act 235 – per application $60
Complex Application Fee………..….….The Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Commission may charge an additional fee sufficient to cover the cost of reviewing and acting on complex applications. Such fee may include, but not be limited to, the cost of retaining experts to analyze, review, and report on issues requiring such experts. The Agency or the duly authorized agent shall estimate the complex application fee which shall be paid pursuant to section 19.1 of these regulations within 10 days of the applicant’s receipt or notice of such estimate. Any portion of the
complex application fee in excess of the actual cost shall be refunded to the applicant no later than 30 days after publication of the agency’s decision. Any portion of the cost in reviewing and acting on a complex application fee that is owed to the Agency shall be paid within 30 days after publication of the agency’s decision. If the fee is not paid in said time period then the permit shall become null and void.
5 2
Appendix F - Literature Cited
Calhoun, J.K., Aram and Klemens, W., Michael. “Best Development Practices (BDPs) For conserving pool-breeding amphibians in Residential and Commercial Developments in Northeast U.S. (2002)
Connecticut Conference of Municipalities. “Regulation Authority for Inland Wetlands Commissions”. January 2003 issue of the “Habitat” published by Connecticut Association of Conservation and Inland Wetlands Commissions, Inc.
Deymaynadier, G., Phillip. and Malcolm L. Hunter Jr. “Effects of Silvicultural Edges on the
Distribution and Abundance of Amphibians in Maine.” Conservation Biology.
12: 340-351,1997.
Harris, L. Sandra. “Connecticut Wetland Resources” National Water Summary – Wetland Resources published by the U.S. Geological Survey
Hoskins, Douglas. “Connecticut’s Regulation of Vernal Pools”
Vernal Pools Proceedings Workgroup Organized by the CT DEP and CACIWC.
49-50,1998.
Jackson, Scott. “Vernal Pools Protecting Hidden Resources”
Vernal Pools Proceedings Workgroup Organized by the CT DEP and CACIWC.
45-48,1998.
Klemens, W., Michael. “Ephemeral Wetlands – Ephemeral Protection”.
Vernal Pools Proceedings Workgroup Organized by the CT DEP and CACIWC.
15-17,1998.
MacBroom, G. James. “Inland Wetlands and Watercourse Review Areas”
published by Connecticut Association of Conservation and Inland Wetlands Commissions, Inc. 3-16,1998
MacBroom, James. “Evaluation of Upland Areas – A Five-Step Process”. January 2003 issue of the “Habitat” published by Connecticut Association of Conservation and Inland Wetlands Commissions, Inc.
Pawlak, M., Edward. “Remote Sensing and Vernal Pools”
Vernal Pools Proceedings Workgroup Organized by the CT DEP and CACIWC.
20-21,1998.
Pedevillano, Cathy. “Habitat Values of New England Wetlands” published in May of 1995 by the U.S Fish & Wildlife Service in cooperation with the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
Preston, Judy. “The Science Supporting Queach”. January 2003 issue of the “Habitat” published by Connecticut Association of Conservation and Inland Wetlands Commissions, Inc.
Roznoy, Richard. “Wetlands “Buffers” Get New Life, Refuse to Die”
April 1999 issue of the Connecticut Lawyer
Semlitsch, D., Raymond. “Biological Delineation of Terrestrial Buffer Zones for Pond-Breeding
Salamanders.”Conservation Biology. 12: 1113-1119,1998.
5 3
Sharp, Gregory. “Vernal Pool Habitats and Queach”. January 2003 issue of the Habitat published by Connecticut Association of Conservation and Inland Wetlands Commissions, Inc.
Silbert, Jerry. “The Protection of Vernal Pool Ecosystems.”
Unpublished. February, 2001
State of Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection. “Connecticut’s Endangered,
Threatened and Special Concern Species 1998.” 5, 1998.
State of Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection. “1996 Amendments to the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Act” published November of 1996, and “1999 Legislation and Regulation Advisory” published January of 2000 by the Bureau of Water Management.
State of Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection. The “Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Model Regulations” published by the Bureau of Water Management.
State of Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection. “Guidelines – Upland Review Area Regulations – Connecticut’s Inland Wetlands & Watercourses Act” published June, 1997 by the Wetlands Management Section of the Bureau of Water Management.
“Vernal Pool Wetlands.” (Insert to) Vernal Pools Proceedings Workgroup Organized by the CT DEP and CACIWC. 3-16,1998.
Welsh, J. David. “Riparian Forest Buffers – Function and Desugn for Protection and Enhancement of Water Resources”, published in 1991 by United States Department of Agriculture - Forest Service
Wrinn, H. David. “The Reach of Queach: Regulations Outside of Wetlands and Watercourses After Queach Corporation V. Inland Wetlands Commission, 258 Conn. 178 (2001)”. January 2003 issue of the Habitat published by Connecticut Association of Conservation and Inland Wetlands Commissions, Inc.
“Stream Crossing Guidelines” Inland Fisheries Division – Habitat Conservation and Enhancement Program - Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection - February 26, 2008
“Massachusetts Stream Crossing Handbook” – Massachusetts Riverways Program - Department of Fish and Game, Commonwealth of Massachusetts June 2005
5 4
APPENDIX G Connecticut General Statute section 1-1(q)
Except as otherwise specifically defined, the words “agriculture” and “farming” shall include
cultivation of the soil, dairying, forestry, raising or harvesting any agricultural or horticultural
commodity, including the raising, shearing, feeding, caring for, training and management of
livestock, including horses, bees, poultry, fur-bearing animals and wildlife, and the raising or
harvesting of oysters, clams, mussels, other molluscan shellfish or fish; the operation,
management, conservation, improvement or maintenance of a farm and its buildings, tools and
equipment, or salvaging timber or cleared land of brush or other debris left by storm, as an
incident to such farming operations; the production or harvesting of maple syrup or maple sugar,
or any agricultural commodity, including lumber, as an incident to ordinary farming operations
or the harvesting of mushrooms, the hatching of poultry, or the construction, operation or
maintenance of ditches, canals, reservoirs or waterways used exclusively for farming purposes;
handling, planting, drying, packing, packaging, processing, freezing, grading, storing or
delivering to storage or to market, or to a carrier for transportation to market, or for direct sale
any agricultural or horticultural commodity as an incident to ordinary farming operations, or, in
the case of fruits and vegetables, as an incident to the preparation of such fruits or vegetables for
market or for direct sale. The term “farm” includes farm buildings, and accessory buildings
thereto, nurseries, orchards, ranges, greenhouses, hoophouses and other temporary structures or
other structures used primarily for the raising and, as an incident to ordinary farming operations,
the sale of agricultural or horticultural commodities. The term “aquaculture” means the farming
of the waters of the state and tidal wetlands and the production of protein food, including fish,
oysters, clams, mussels and other mulluscan shellfish, on leased, franchised and public
underwater farm lands. Nothing herein shall restrict the power of a local zoning authority under
chapter 124.
APPENDIX H
Connecticut General Statute section 8-7d
Sec. 8-7d. Hearings and decisions. Time limits. Day of receipt. Notice to adjoining
municipality. Public notice registry. (a) In all matters wherein a formal petition,
application, request or appeal must be submitted to a zoning commission, planning and
zoning commission or zoning board of appeals under this chapter, a planning commission
under chapter 126 or an inland wetlands agency under chapter 440 and a hearing is
required or otherwise held on such petition, application, request or appeal, such hearing
shall commence within sixty-five days after receipt of such petition, application, request
or appeal and shall be completed within thirty-five days after such hearing commences,
unless a shorter period of time is required under this chapter, chapter 126 or chapter 440.
Notice of the hearing shall be published in a newspaper having a general circulation in
such municipality where the land that is the subject of the hearing is located at least
twice, at intervals of not less than two days, the first not more than fifteen days or less
than ten days and the last not less than two days before the date set for the hearing. In
addition to such notice, such commission, board or agency may, by regulation, provide
for additional notice. Such regulations shall include provisions that the notice be mailed
to persons who own land that is adjacent to the land that is the subject of the hearing or
5 5
be provided by posting a sign on the land that is the subject of the hearing, or both. For
purposes of such additional notice, (1) proof of mailing shall be evidenced by a certificate
of mailing, and (2) the person who owns land shall be the owner indicated on the
property tax map or on the last-completed grand list as of the date such notice is mailed.
All applications and maps and documents relating thereto shall be open for public
inspection. At such hearing, any person or persons may appear and be heard and may be
represented by agent or by attorney. All decisions on such matters shall be rendered
within sixty-five days after completion of such hearing, unless a shorter period of time is
required under this chapter, chapter 126 or chapter 440. The petitioner or applicant may
consent to one or more extensions of any period specified in this subsection, provided the
total extension of all such periods shall not be for longer than sixty-five days, or may
withdraw such petition, application, request or appeal.
(b) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, whenever the
approval of a site plan is the only requirement to be met or remaining to be met under the
zoning regulations for any building, use or structure, a decision on an application for
approval of such site plan shall be rendered within sixty-five days after receipt of such
site plan. Whenever a decision is to be made on an application for subdivision approval
under chapter 126 on which no hearing is held, such decision shall be rendered within
sixty-five days after receipt of such application. Whenever a decision is to be made on an
inland wetlands and watercourses application under chapter 440 on which no hearing is
held, such decision shall be rendered within sixty-five days after receipt of such
application. The applicant may consent to one or more extensions of such period,
provided the total period of any such extension or extensions shall not exceed sixty-five
days or may withdraw such plan or application.
-30-
(c) For purposes of subsection (a) or (b) of this section and section 7-246a, the date of
receipt of a petition, application, request or appeal shall be the day of the next regularly
scheduled meeting of such commission, board or agency, immediately following the day
of submission to such commission, board or agency or its agent of such petition,
application, request or appeal or thirty-five days after such submission, whichever is
sooner. If the commission, board or agency does not maintain an office with regular
office hours, the office of the clerk of the municipality shall act as the agent of such
commission, board or agency for the receipt of any petition, application, request or
appeal.
(d) The provisions of subsection (a) of this section shall not apply to any action
initiated by any zoning commission, planning commission or planning and zoning
commission regarding adoption or change of any zoning regulation or boundary or any
subdivision regulation.
(e) Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, if an application involves an
activity regulated pursuant to sections 22a-36 to 22a-45, inclusive, and the time for a
decision by a zoning commission or planning and zoning commission established
pursuant to this section would elapse prior to the thirty-fifth day after a decision by the
inland wetlands agency, the time period for a decision shall be extended to thirty-five
days after the decision of such agency. The provisions of this subsection shall not be
construed to apply to any extension consented to by an applicant or petitioner.
(f) The zoning commission, planning commission, zoning and planning commission,
5 6
zoning board of appeals or inland wetlands agency shall notify the clerk of any adjoining
municipality of the pendency of any application, petition, appeal, request or plan
concerning any project on any site in which: (1) Any portion of the property affected by a
decision of such commission, board or agency is within five hundred feet of the boundary
of the adjoining municipality; (2) a significant portion of the traffic to the completed
project on the site will use streets within the adjoining municipality to enter or exit the
site; (3) a significant portion of the sewer or water drainage from the project on the site
will flow through and significantly impact the drainage or sewerage system within the
adjoining municipality; or (4) water runoff from the improved site will impact streets or
other municipal or private property within the adjoining municipality. Such notice shall
be made by certified mail, return receipt requested, and shall be mailed within seven days
of the date of receipt of the application, petition, request or plan. Such adjoining
municipality may, through a representative, appear and be heard at any hearing on any
such application, petition, appeal, request or plan.
-31-