11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 1/200
Town of East Hampton, CT
Friday, November 1, 2019
Chapter C. Charter
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town of East Hampton as amended through 11-8-2016. Subsequent
amendments noted where applicable.]
CHAPTER I. INCORPORATION AND GENERAL POWERS
Section 1.1. Incorporation.
All the inhabitants dwelling within the territorial limits of the Town of East Hampton, as heretofore
constituted, shall continue to be a body politic and corporate under the name of the "Town of East
Hampton," hereinafter in this charter called, "the town", and as such shall have perpetual succession
and may hold and exercise all powers and privileges heretofore exercised by said town and not
inconsistent with the provisions of this charter, the additional powers and privileges herein conferred,
and all powers and privileges conferred upon towns under the general law of the State of Connecticut.
Section 1.2. Rights and obligations.
All property, both real and personal, all rights of action and rights of every description and all securities
and liens in said town as of the date when this charter shall take effect are continued. The town shall
continue to be liable for its debts and obligations. Nothing herein shall be construed to affect the right
of the town to collect any assessment, charge, debt or lien. If any contract has been entered into by
said town prior to the effective date of this charter or any bond or undertaking has been given by or in
favor of said town which contains provisions that the same may be enforced by any office or agency
therein named, which may at any time be abolished, such contracts, bonds, or undertakings shall be in
no manner impaired but shall continue in full force and effect. The powers conferred and the duties
imposed with reference to the same upon any such office or agency shall, except as otherwise
provided in this charter, thereafter be exercised by the Town Council of said town.
Section 1.3. General grant of powers.
The town shall have, in addition to the powers specifically granted by this charter, all powers vested in
the town or any officer, board or commission thereof at the effective date of this charter, all powers
fairly implied in or incident to the powers expressly granted herein, and all other powers incident to the
management, government and affairs of the town including all powers hereafter conferred upon the
town or towns by General Statutes or Special Acts of the State of Connecticut and also including the
power to enter into contracts with the United States Government, the State of Connecticut, or any
political subdivision thereof for services and the use of facilities, the exercise of which is not expressly
forbidden by the Constitution of the United States of America or the Constitution or General Statutes of
the State of Connecticut. The enumeration of particular powers in this and any other chapter of this
charter shall not be construed as limiting this general grant of power but shall be considered as an
addition thereto.
Section 1.4. Term of Office; Oath of Office.
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 2/200
The term of office of the Town Council shall commence on the first Wednesday following the regular
election and biennially thereafter. The term of office of each other elected town official shall likewise
commence on the first Wednesday following the regular election, unless such official is elected for a
term commencing at a specified future date. All elected officials shall be sworn in by the Town Clerk or
other authorized individual prior to beginning their service in office.
CHAPTER II. THE TOWN COUNCIL
Section 2.1. Election.
At each biennial election there shall be elected seven members of the Town Council, hereinafter
referred to as the "council", all for terms of two years, who shall serve without compensation. Not more
than five of the members shall be of the same political party. No member shall hold more than one
elected or appointed office under the government of the Town of East Hampton. During the term of
office for which he is elected, and for one year thereafter, they may not be appointed to any position of
remuneration within said government. This prohibition shall not preclude any elected official from
volunteering in any capacity.
Section 2.2. Chairman.
The council shall hold an organizational meeting on the first Wednesday following the regular biennial
town election in November, 1989, and biennially thereafter, for the purpose of choosing one of its
members to be chairman, but this office shall not deprive the chairman of his vote on any question. He
shall preside over all meetings of the council and perform such other duties consistent with his office
as may be imposed by the council. He shall be recognized as the official head of the town for all
ceremonial purposes, for military purposes and for the purpose of serving civil process. During his
absence or disability his duties shall be performed by another member chosen by the council except as
otherwise specifically provided in this charter.
Section 2.3. Procedure.
At the first meeting of the council following each biennial town election said members shall fix the time
and place of their regular meetings and provide a method for the calling of the special meetings. They
shall by resolution determine their own rules of procedure. All meetings of the council for the
transaction of business shall be open to the public and the votes shall be recorded as prescribed by
Section 1-225 of the General Statutes, as amended. Four members shall constitute a quorum, but no
ordinance, resolution, or vote, except a vote to adjourn or to fix the time and place of the next meeting,
shall be adopted by less than four affirmative votes.
Section 2.4. General powers and duties.
Except as otherwise provided in this charter the council shall have the powers and duties conferred by
the general and special laws of the state upon Boards of Selectmen of towns. The legislative power of
the town shall be vested in the council except for those powers specifically reserved for the town
meeting. The council shall have the power to enact, amend or repeal all ordinances which the
legislative body of the town is empowered to adopt, and shall have the power to create or abolish by
ordinance, boards, commissions, departments or offices except as otherwise provided for in this
charter, and to establish by resolution such study, advisory or consulting committees as they may
determine to be necessary or appropriate for the general welfare of the town. The council shall adopt
and revise, as necessary, a uniform personnel policy for all employees of the town except employees
of the Board of Education. The council may contract for services and the use of facilities of the United
States or any federal agency, the State of Connecticut and any political subdivision thereof, or may by
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 3/200
agreement join any such political subdivision to provide services and facilities. Each year the council
shall submit to the Board of Finance a policy statement outlining its annual budget goals and objectives
for the ensuing fiscal year. The council shall appoint for an indefinite term and may remove a Town
Manager.
Section 2.5. Public hearing on ordinances.
At least one public hearing ten days notice of which shall be given by publication in a newspaper
having a circulation in the town and by posting in such public place or places as the council shall by
ordinance prescribe, shall be held by the council or a committee thereof before any ordinance shall be
passed. The passage of such ordinance shall be advertised in one or more newspapers having a
circulation in said town and shall not become effective until 20 days after such publication provided, an
ordinance stated to be a public emergency measure and stating the facts constituting such public
emergency shall become effective immediately after such publication and no public hearing shall be
required for any public emergency measure. Every such emergency ordinance, including any
amendments thereto, shall automatically stand repealed at the termination of the 61st day following
final passage of said ordinance. All ordinances shall be filed with the town clerk, and recorded,
complied and published by him as required by law.
CHAPTER III. TOWN MANAGER
Section 3.1. Selection.
The town manager shall be chosen by the council exclusively on the basis of his administrative
qualifications, character and experience. He shall be the chief executive officer and chief administrative
officer of the town. At the time of his appointment the town manager need not be a resident of the town
of East Hampton, but within one year of the commencement of his term as town manager he shall
establish and maintain residence in the town.
Section 3.2. Duties of Town Manager.
The town manager shall be directly responsible to the council for the administration of all offices and
agencies in charge of persons appointed by him, including responsibility for hiring necessary
employees therefore, and for his own office, and shall supervise and direct same. The town manager
shall keep full and complete records of the doings of his office and it shall be his duty to make periodic
reports to the council and to attend their meetings with full right of participation in their discussions; to
recommend to the council such measures as he shall deem necessary or expedient; to keep or cause
to be kept complete books of account showing the financial condition and financial transactions of the
town including accounts of all funds and appropriations and such other accounts and records, not
specifically required by law to be kept by other offices, as may be prescribed by the council; to
purchase or cause to be purchased, subject to such rules and regulations as shall be prescribed by the
council, all supplies, materials, equipment, and other commodities required by any office or agency of
the town, except the Board of Education unless specifically requested by said Board; to keep the
council fully advised as to the financial condition of the town; to prepare job descriptions and
employment contracts subject to the approval of the council; to assist the council and the Board of
Finance in the preparation of an annual budget; to prepare and cause to be printed as soon as
practicable after the close of each fiscal year a town report; and to exercise such other powers and
duties as may be imposed on him by ordinance or resolution by the council. Neither the town meeting
nor the council shall diminish by ordinance, vote or otherwise the powers and duties of the town
manager, except those powers and duties imposed on him by ordinance or resolution, of the council.
Unless otherwise specifically provided by ordinance, any duty imposed by the General Statutes on the
chief executive officer of a municipality shall be vested in and exercised by the town manager.
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 4/200
Section 3.3. Appointments.
Based upon merit and fitness alone, the town manager shall appoint for an indefinite term or remove
for cause, a town clerk, a collector of revenue, a finance director who shall perform the duties of
treasurer, a building official, a zoning enforcement officer, a director of health, a civil preparedness
director, an animal control officer, a tree warden, a harbor master and a superintendent of public works.
In addition to the aforementioned, the town manager shall appoint, based upon merit and fitness alone,
all other department heads and employees, except employees of the board of education. Such
appointments shall be made when vacancies exist or new positions are created by the council. The
town manager may, subject to the approval of the council, perform the duties of any office which he
may fill by appointment. The council may appoint an interim town manager to act during the absence of
the town manager or a vacancy in that office.
CHAPTER IV. TOWN MEETING
Section 4.1.
The town meeting shall have the power to adopt the annual budget and shall approve the issuance of
all bonds and notes. Any additional appropriations made during the fiscal year, to a board, commission,
department or agency in excess of an amount specified by town ordinance shall be approved by the
town meeting. Any ordinance or resolution authorizing the purchase or sale of any interest in real
estate shall be acted upon by the town meeting, after approval by the Board of Finance. The power to
enact and amend zoning regulations shall continue to be exercised by the zoning commission and the
power to enact subdivision regulations shall continue to be exercised by the town plan commission, all
in accordance with the General Statutes or as they may be amended, subject to change made by
ordinance enacted pursuant to the provisions of the General Statutes governing zoning and planning.
The Board of Finance shall receive from the Town Manager and the Board of Education their
respective proposed budgets (the annual budget) by April 15th. The call of the Annual Budget Meeting
shall present, as separate resolutions, the Town Government Budget and the Board of Education
Budget. The Annual Budget Meeting shall be adjourned to referendum, by machine or ballot vote,
within the time period provided by State Statute. The ballot questions shall provide for separate
approval/disapproval of the Town Government Budget and the Board of Education Budget. In the event
that either or both of the Town Government Budget and/or Board of Education Budget shall fail to pass
at the referendum, such budget(s) which did not pass shall be revised and submitted for consideration
at additional annual budget meetings, each of which shall likewise be adjourned for referendum, until
such time as each budget shall have been adopted.
Section 4.2. Petition for overrule of action of the Town Council.
Ordinances adopted by the council, except emergency ordinances adopted in accordance with the
provisions of Chapter II, Section 2.5 of this charter, shall be subject to overrule by a special town
meeting as follows: If within 20 days after publication of any such ordinance, a petition conforming to
the requirements of Section 7-9 of the General Statutes, as amended and signed by not less than 10%
of the voters qualified to vote in a town meeting is filed with the town clerk requesting its reference to a
special town meeting, the effective date of such ordinance shall be suspended and the council shall fix
the time and place of such meeting, which shall be within 20 days after the filing of the petition, and
notice thereof shall be given in the manner provided by law for the calling of a special town meeting.
An ordinance so referred shall take effect upon the conclusion of such meeting unless a majority of
those voting thereon, shall have voted in favor of overruling.
Section 4.3. Petition for enactment of ordinances.
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 5/200
No less than 10% of the voters qualified to vote in a town meeting may at any time petition over their
personal signatures for the enactment of any proposed lawful ordinance by filing such petition,
including the complete text of such ordinance, with the town clerk. The council shall call a special town
meeting, to be held within 30 days from the date of filing, unless prior to such meeting such ordinance
shall be enacted by the council. The call for such meeting shall state the proposed ordinance in full and
shall provide for a "yes" or "no" vote as to its enactment. If a majority of the persons entitled to vote,
voting at such meeting, shall vote "yes" then such ordinance shall take effect on the tenth day
thereafter without further action of the council. Any such proposed ordinance shall be examined by the
town attorney before being submitted to the special town meeting. The town attorney is authorized to
correct the form of the ordinance for the purpose of avoiding repetitions, illegalities, and
unconstitutional provisions, and to assure accuracy in its text and references and clearness and
preciseness in its phraseology, but not materially changing its meaning and effect.
Section 4.4. Referendum.
Any item, or items on the call of any town meeting, including items resulting from petitions filed
pursuant to Chapter IV, or Section 4.2 or 4.3 of this charter, shall be subject to vote by ballot or voting
machine pursuant to the provisions of General Statutes Section 7-7, as amended. Any such items may
also be submitted to a vote by ballot or voting machine in accordance with Section 7-7, as amended,
by vote of the council.
CHAPTER V. BOARD OF FINANCE
Section 5.1. Election.
There shall be a Board of Finance consisting of seven members who shall be elected to four year
overlapping terms as provided by ordinance. No more than five members shall be of the same political
party. The Board of Finance shall have all the powers and duties conferred on boards of finance by the
General Statutes or as they may be amended, except as otherwise specifically provided by this
charter.
Section 5.2. General powers and duties.
Upon receipt and consideration of the town council's policy statement concerning the proposed annual
budgets, the Board of Finance shall hold one or more public hearings on the proposed annual budgets
and shall with the advice of the town manager, not later than April 15 in each year, present to the
council a complete proposed annual budgets for the ensuing fiscal year. The council may make any
alterations or reductions in the proposed annual budgets that they deem necessary, except for
increasing the total proposed annual budgets and shall submit same to the town meeting for approval.
If the town council disagrees with the total proposed annual budgets, the council may reject same and
return said proposed annual budgets to the Board of Finance for further consideration. After further
consideration, the Board of Finance shall submit the final proposed annual budgets to the council and
the council shall submit same to the town meeting for approval. Upon the establishment of the annual
town budget by the town meeting, the Board of Finance shall fix the tax rate in mills which shall be
levied upon the taxable property in the town on the grand list of the previous October 1. The Board of
Finance shall review and make recommendations regarding all requests for additional appropriations
to be submitted to the council.
CHAPTER VI. MISCELLANEOUS
Section 6.1. Existing laws and ordinances.
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 6/200
All Special Acts of the State of Connecticut applicable to the town and all ordinances and regulations of
the town shall continue in full force and effect, except insofar as they are inconsistent with the
provisions of this charter.
Section 6.2. Other town officers.
Except as otherwise specifically provided by this charter the Town of East Hampton shall have such
other town officers, departments, boards, commissions and agencies as now exist and as are provided
by the General Statutes. Special Acts or as provided by any ordinance adopted pursuant to law. All
such officers, departments, boards, commissions and agencies, including the Board of Finance, shall
be elected or appointed in the manner provided by General Statutes or by Special Act or by this
charter or as provided by ordinances adopted pursuant to law, and shall continue to have such powers,
duties, privileges and functions as are or may in the future be conferred on them by the General
Statutes, Special Acts, this charter, ordinances or regulations adopted pursuant to law, or amendments
thereto.
Section 6.3. Vacancies in elective offices.
Whenever a vacancy in an elective office occurs, the council or other appointing authority so
designated by law, shall fill the vacancy by appointment for the unexpired portion of the term.
Section 6.4. Saving clause.
If any section or part of any section of this charter shall be held invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, such holding shall not affect the remainder of this charter nor the context in which said
section or part thereof so held invalid may appear, except to the extent that an entire section or part of
a section may be inseparably connected in meaning and effect with the section or part of a section to
which such holding shall directly apply.
Section 6.5. Amendment of charter.
This charter may be amended in the manner prescribed by law.
Section 6.6. Effective date.
This charter shall become effective, provided it is approved by the electors of the town at the election
on November 8, 2016. If the charter is so approved, all provisions of this charter shall be effective on
the day after the election of November 8, 2016.
Chapter D. Code of Conduct
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town Council of the Town of East Hampton 1-28-2003. Amendments noted
where applicable.]
§ D-1. Intent.
The Town of East Hampton requires that all public officials and employees be independent, impartial,
and responsible to its citizens. The public judges its government by the way public officials and
employees conduct themselves in the positions for which they are elected, appointed, or hired. The
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 7/200
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
A.
B.
C.
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
people have the right to expect that all public officials and employees will conduct themselves in a
manner that will preserve the confidence and respect for government in which they represent.
§ D-2. Expected behavior.
This confidence and respect can be achieved and promoted if all elected or appointed public
officials and employees:
Treat all citizens with courtesy, impartiality, fairness and equality under the law.
Avoid both actual and potential conflicts between their private self-interest and the interest of
the public.
Keep the community informed on Town affairs.
Encourage communication.
Seek to improve the quality and image of public service.
Recognize that the function of local government is to serve in the best interest of all the
people.
These behaviors are meant to preserve the rights of everyone and ensure cooperation. They
require common sense, good judgment, and acceptable interpersonal behaviors.
This code is to serve as a guide and is not intended to be an all-inclusive list.
Chapter E. Code of Ethics
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town of East Hampton 9-4-1975; amended 1-28-1997. Subsequent
amendments noted where applicable.]
ATTACHMENTS
Ea Conflict of Interest and Rec Guidelines
Eb Definition of Consanguinity
§ E-1. Declaration of policy.
The proper operation of democratic government requires that public officials and employees be
independent, impartial and responsible to the people; that government decisions and policies be
made in proper channels of the governmental structure; and that public office not be used for
personal gain. The public judges its government by the way public officials and employees
conduct themselves in the posts to which they are elected or appointed. The people have a right
to expect that all public officials and employees will conduct themselves in a manner that will tend
to preserve public confidence in, and respect for, the government they represent.
Such confidence and respect can best be promoted if every appointed or elected public official
and employee, whether paid or unpaid, will uniformly:
Treat all citizens with courtesy, impartiality, fairness and equality under the law; and
Avoid both actual and potential conflicts between their private self-interest and the public
interest.
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 8/200
C.
A.
B.
C.
D.
[1]
(a)
(b)
(1)
A.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish guidelines for ethical standards of conduct for all such
officials and employees by setting forth those acts or actions that are incompatible with the best
interests of the Town and by directing disclosure by such officials and employees of private
financial or other interests in matters affecting the Town.
§ E-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
BUSINESS ENTITY
Any business, proprietorship, firm, partnership, person in a representative or fiduciary capacity,
association, venture, trust or corporation, whether paid or unpaid, including members of any
board, committee or commission thereof.
INTEREST
A direct or indirect pecuniary or material benefit accruing to a public officer or employee as a result
of a contract or transaction which is or may be the subject of an official act or action by or with the
Town of East Hampton, except for such contracts or transactions which by their terms and by the
substance of their provisions confer the opportunity and right to realize the accrual of similar
benefits to all other persons and/or property similarly situated. For the purposes of this code, a
public officer or employee shall be deemed to have an interest in the affairs of:
Any person related to him by blood or marriage in a degree closer than the fourth degree
consanguinity or affinity (determined by the civil law method),[1] and a divorce or separation
between spouses shall not be deemed to terminate any such relationship;
Any person or business entity with whom a contractual relationship exists with the public
officer or employee;
Any business entity in which the public officer or employee is an officer, director, or member
having a financial interest in, or employed by;
Any business entity in which the stock of, or legal or beneficial ownership of, in excess of 5%
of the total stock or total legal and beneficial ownership, is controlled or owned directly or
indirectly by the public officer or employee.
OFFICIAL ACT OR ACTION
Any legislative, administrative, appointive or discretionary act of any officer or employee of the
Town of East Hampton or any agency, board, committee or commission thereof.
Editor's Note: See materials included at the end of this chapter for a description of consanguinity.
§ E-3. Standards of conduct.
The requirements herein set forth shall constitute a code of ethics establishing reasonable standards
and guidelines for the ethical conduct of public officers and employees of the Town of East Hampton.
Interest in contract or transaction.
No public officer or employee having the power or duty to perform an official act or action,
related to a contract or transaction which is or may be the subject of an official act or action of
the Town of East Hampton, shall:
Have or thereafter acquire an interest in such contract or transaction; or
Have an interest in any business entity representing, advising or appearing on behalf of,
whether paid or unpaid, any person involved in such contract or transaction; or
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 9/200
(c)
(d)
(e)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(2)
B.
C.
D.
E.
(1)
(2)
F.
G.
H.
Have solicited or accepted present or future employment with a person or business entity
involved in such contract or transaction; or
Have solicited, accepted or granted a present or future gift, favor, service or thing of
value from or to a person involved in such contract or transaction, except as provided in
Subsection A(2); or
Have encouraged, made or accepted any ex parte or unilateral application or
communication where a determination is to be made after a public hearing and such
public employee fails to make the contents of the communication a part of the record.
The prohibition against gifts or favors in Subsection A(1)(d) shall not apply to:
An occasional nonpecuniary gift, insignificant in value; or
An award publicly presented in recognition of public service; or
Any gift which would have been offered or given to him if he were not an official or
employee.
Preacquisition of interest. No public officer or employee, with respect to any contract or transaction
which is or may be the subject of an official act or action of the Town of East Hampton, shall
acquire an interest in or affected by such contract or transaction at a time when the public
employee believes or has reason to believe that it will directly or indirectly be affected by an official
act or action of the Town of East Hampton.
Disclosure of information. No public officer or employee, with respect to any contract or
transaction which is or may be the subject of an official act or action of the Town of East Hampton,
shall, without proper legal authorization, disclose confidential information concerning the property,
government or affairs of the Town or use such information to advance the financial or other private
interest of himself or others.
Incompatible service. No public officer or employee shall engage in or accept private employment
or render service, for private interest, when such employment or service is incompatible with the
proper discharge of his official duties or would tend to impair his independence of judgment or
action in the performance of his official duties, unless otherwise permitted by law and unless
disclosure is made as provided in this code.
Appearances. No public officer or employee shall appear on behalf of any private person, other
than himself, his spouse or minor children, before any Town agency or court. However, a member
of the Town Council may appear before Town agencies on behalf of his constituents in the course
of his duties as a representative of the electorate or in the performance of public or civic
obligations.
Public contracts. No public officer or employee who in his capacity as such officer or employee
participates in the making of a contract in which he has a private pecuniary interest, direct or
indirect, or performs in regard to that contract some function requiring the exercise of discretion on
his part, shall enter into any contract with the Town unless:
The contract is awarded through a process of public notice and competitive bidding; or
The Town Council waives the requirement of this section after determining that it is in the best
interest of the Town to do so.
Public property. No public officer or employee shall request or permit the unauthorized use of
Town-owned vehicles, equipment, materials or property for personal convenience or profit.
Special treatment. No public officer or employee shall grant any special consideration, treatment
or advantage to any citizens beyond that which is available to every other citizen.
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 10/200
I.
A.
B.
C.
A.
[1]
B.
Later case interest. No public officer or employee shall, after the termination of service or
employment with the Town, appear before any board, commission, committee or agency of the
Town in relation to any case, proceeding or application in which he personally participated during
the period of his service or employment, or which was under his active consideration.
§ E-4. Exceptions.
It shall not be deemed a violation of the standards of the code if the interest of a public officer or
employee in a person or business entity is a contractual obligation of less than $500 which has not
been preceded by any other obligation, discharged or existing, between the parties, and which is
not the first in a series of two or more loans or debts which either of the parties is under an
obligation to make or incur.
A commercially reasonable loan made in the ordinary course of business by an institution
authorized by the laws of this state to engage in the making of such loans shall not be deemed to
create an interest in violation of this code.
A contract for a commercial retail sale, even though over the value of $500, shall not be deemed
to create an interest in violation of this code.
§ E-5. Disclosure of interest in Council action.
Any member of the Town Council who has a financial interest or personal interest in any proposed
action before the Town Council shall disclose on the record of the Town Council the nature and
extent of such interest.
Any other official or employee who has a financial or personal interest in any proposed action of
the Town Council and who participates in discussion with or gives an official opinion or
recommendation to the Town Council shall disclose on the record of the Town Council the nature
and extent of such interest.[1]
Editor's Note: Former § E-6, Enforcement, which immediately followed this subsection, was
repealed 8-8-2006. See now Ch. 43, Ethics Commission.
Part I, Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1. General Provisions
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town Council of the Town of East Hampton as indicated in article histories.
Amendments noted where applicable.]
Article I. Adoption of Code
[Adopted 12-12-2006]
§ 1-1. Code adopted.
The compilation of the Town Charter and ordinances of a general and permanent nature of the Town of
East Hampton, as revised, codified and consolidated into chapters and sections by General Code
Publishers Corp., and consisting of Chapters 1 through 299, together with an Appendix, is hereby
approved, adopted, ordained and enacted as the "Code of the Town of East Hampton, Connecticut,"
hereinafter called the "Code." All provisions contained in the compilation provided for herein and
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 11/200
A.
known as the "Code of the Town of East Hampton” shall be in force and effect on and after the
effective date of this ordinance.
§ 1-2. Continuation of existing provisions.
The provisions of the Code, insofar as they are substantively the same as those of the legislation in
force immediately prior to the enactment of the Code by this ordinance, are intended as a continuation
of such legislation and not as new enactments, and the effectiveness of such provisions shall date
from the date of adoption of the prior legislation.
§ 1-3. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code, in loose-leaf form, has been filed in the office of the Town Clerk and shall remain
there for use and examination by the public until final action is taken on this ordinance, and, if this
ordinance shall be adopted, such copy shall be certified to by the Town Clerk, and such certified copy
shall remain on file in the office of said Town Clerk to be made available to persons desiring to
examine the same during all times while said Code is in effect.
§ 1-4. Publication; filing.
The Clerk of the Town of East Hampton shall cause to be published, in the manner required by law, a
copy of this Adoption Ordinance. Sufficient copies of the Code shall be maintained in the office of the
Clerk for inspection by the public at all times during regular office hours. The enactment and
publication of this ordinance, coupled with the availability of a copy of the Code for inspection by the
public, shall be deemed, held and considered to be due and legal publication of all provisions of the
Code for all purposes.
§ 1-5. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code, when adopted in such form
as to indicate the intention of the Town Council to make them a part thereof, shall be deemed to be
incorporated into such Code so that reference to the "Code of the Town of East Hampton” shall be
understood and intended to include such additions, deletions, amendments or supplements. Whenever
such additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code shall be adopted, they shall
thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder, inserted in the loose-leaf book containing said Code
as amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 1-6. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Town Clerk, or someone authorized and directed by the Clerk, to keep up-todate
the certified copy of the book containing the Code required to be filed in the Clerk's office for use
by the public. All changes in said Code and all ordinances adopted subsequent to the effective date of
this codification which shall be adopted specifically as part of the Code shall, when finally adopted, be
included therein by reference until such changes or new ordinances are printed as supplements to said
Code book, at which time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-7. Supplementation of Code.
Supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the
Town Council. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 12/200
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
C.
D.
parts of ordinances passed by the Town Council and all changes made thereby in the Code. The
pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will,
where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete. When the supplemental pages
have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest
ordinances included in the supplement.
In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall
be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages.
When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or
organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in
ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so
to embody them into the unified Code. For example, the codifier may:
Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subsections;
Provide appropriate headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code
printed in the supplement, and make changes in such headings and titles;
Assign appropriate numbers to chapters and sections to be inserted in the Code and, where
necessary to accommodate new material, change existing or other section numbers;
Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this
article," "this section," etc., as the case may be, or to "§§ _______ to ___________" (inserting
section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections
of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and
Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance
sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the
meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already in the Code.
The Town Clerk shall cause copies of each and every such supplement to be distributed to each
distributee and to every purchaser of the Code who has ordered and paid for maintenance
service.
§ 1-8. Sale of Code book.
Copies of the Code, or any chapter or portion of it, may be purchased from the Clerk or an authorized
agent of the Clerk upon the payment of a fee to be set by the Town Council. The Clerk may also
arrange for procedures for the periodic supplementation of the Code.
§ 1-9. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions or deletions, any part or
portion of the Code or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause
the law of the Town of East Hampton to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section or
any part of this ordinance shall be subject, upon conviction, to a fine of not more than $100.
§ 1-10. Severability of Code provisions.
Each section of the Code and every part of each section is an independent section or part of a section,
and the holding of any section or a part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause
shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other sections or parts thereof.
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 13/200
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
A.
B.
A.
§ 1-11. Severability of ordinance provisions.
Each section of this ordinance is an independent section, and the holding of any section or part thereof
to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or
constitutionality of any other sections or parts thereof.
§ 1-12. Repealer; supersession of 1991 Compilation.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances of the Town of East Hampton of a general and permanent nature
in force on the date of the adoption of this ordinance which are inconsistent with any provisions of the
Code are hereby repealed from and after the effective date of this ordinance. The 1991 Compilation of
Special Acts and Ordinances of the Town of East Hampton is hereby specifically superseded.
§ 1-13. Certain ordinances not affected by Code.
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise
affect the validity of any of the following:
Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the Town, or any
evidence of the Town's indebtedness.
Any appropriation ordinance providing for the levy of taxes or for any annual budget.
Any order annexing territory to the Town or excluding territory as a part of the Town.
Any ordinance granting any franchise, permit or other right.
Any Zoning Ordinance or amendment thereto.
Any Subdivision Ordinance or amendment thereto.
Any ordinance creating a special services district.
Any ordinance approving, authorizing or otherwise relating to any contract, agreement, lease,
deed or other instrument.
Any ordinance adopting a preliminary or development plan.
Any temporary or special ordinance.
Any Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Agency ordinance or amendments thereto.
Any street standards ordinance or amendments thereto.
Any ordinance adopted subsequent to April 25, 2006.
All ordinances pursuant to this section are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect
to the same extent as if set out at length in this section.
§ 1-14. Effect of repeal of ordinances.
The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the
ordinance repealed took effect, unless expressly stated.
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 14/200
B.
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
B.
[1]
C.
A.
B.
The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal
took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an
offense committed under the ordinance repealed.
§ 1-15. Changes in previously adopted ordinances.
In compiling and preparing the ordinances for publication as the Code of the Town of East
Hampton, no changes in the meaning or intent of such ordinances have been made, except as
provided for in Subsections B and C hereof. Certain grammatical changes and other minor
nonsubstantive changes were made in one or more of said pieces of legislation. It is the intention
of the Town Council that all such changes be adopted as part of the Code as if the ordinances had
been previously formally amended to read as such.
The following changes are made throughout the Code:
All references to the "Board of Selectmen" are hereby changed to "Town Council."
All references to the "First Selectman" are hereby changed to "Town Manager."
All references to the "Zoning Commission" or the “Plan Commission” are hereby changed to
"Planning and Zoning Commission."
All references to the “Tax Collector” are changed to “Collector of Revenue.”
All references to the “Finance Director” or “Treasurer” are changed to the “Director of
Finance.”
All references to the “Chief Administrative Officer” are changed to the “Town Manager.”
In addition, the amendments and/or additions as set forth in Schedule A, attached hereto and
made a part hereof, are made herewith, to become effective upon the effective date of this
ordinance. (Chapter and section number references are to the ordinances as they have been
renumbered and appear in the Code.)[1]
Editor’s Note: In accordance with § 1-15C, the chapters, parts and sections which were added,
amended, adopted or deleted by this ordinance are indicated throughout the Code by a footnote
referring to Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I. During routine supplementation, footnotes indicating
amendments, additions or deletions will be replaced with the following history: “Amended (added,
deleted) 12-12-2006.” Schedule A, which contains a complete description of all changes, is on file
in the Town offices.
§ 1-16. Catchlines, histories and references.
The catchlines of the several sections of this Code are intended as mere catchwords to indicate
the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections nor as
any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of
such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted.
The histories appearing in brackets after sections and subsections and the references and notes
located throughout the Code are for the benefit of the user of the Code and shall have no legal
effect.
§ 1-17. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect upon passage and publication as required by law.
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 15/200
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
Chapter 5. Admissions, Board of
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Special Town Meeting of the Town of East Hampton 8-22-1966.
Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 5-1. Composition.
The Board of Admissions for the Town of East Hampton shall be the Town Clerk and the Registrars of
Voters as provided for in C.G.S. § 9-15a.
Chapter 6. Agriculture Commission
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town Council of the Town of East Hampton 10-8-2013. Amendments noted
where applicable.]
§ 6-1. Commission established.
Be it resolved that the Town of East Hampton hereby creates an Agriculture Commission (the
"Commission") to be advisory to the Town Council and other Town officials; and
Be it further resolved that the Town of East Hampton shall provide staff and budgetary support to
effectuate the performance of this Commission; and
Be it further resolved that the Commission follow the provisions set forth in Public Act No. 11-188,
including the following charges.
§ 6-2. Charges; powers and duties.
The Commission shall extol the role of East Hampton's natural resources and agriculture as major
contributors to the Town's quality of life and the economy. The Commission will advocate for
agricultural issues before nonprofit agencies, civic organizations, municipal boards and commissions,
elected officials and residents. The Commission will foster public awareness of the importance of
agriculture and how this enhances and preserves East Hampton's small town character. In addition,
the Commission shall:
Provide information to local farmers and to municipal boards and commissions about the benefits
of a balance between agriculture and other land uses; and review and make recommendations to
improve the balance between agriculture and residential property owners.
Provide information and guidance on protecting farmland and agricultural viability--related to
taxes, PA490 classifications, zoning, wetlands, watercourses, public infrastructure and others--to
Town departments and other boards and commissions and residents.
Review existing and proposed East Hampton zoning regulations and other regulatory provisions
relating to agriculture and provide information, guidance and recommendations to appropriate
Town departments, boards, commissions and residents.
Promote the value of agriculture to the Town in areas of property taxes, environment, employment
and other quality-of-life and economic issues.
Increase awareness of East Hampton's agricultural enterprises, including recognizing and
supporting existing and new farms and identifying opportunities to preserve and expand
agriculture.
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 16/200
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
A.
Serve as a conduit between local farmers and East Hampton government, nonprofit agencies,
civic organizations and non-farm residents and provide advisory services.
Act as a Town resource for agriculture and conservation information; educate municipal officials
about agricultural laws and safety issues.
Identify, pursue and sponsor grant sources for farmers and municipalities.
Support local, regional and state vocational agricultural programs concerning agricultural matters.
Identify innovative opportunities for agriculture.
Create a climate that supports the economic viability of agriculture in East Hampton.
§ 6-3. Membership.
The Agriculture Commission shall consist of seven voting members appointed by the Town Council, at
least three of which shall be from the agriculture community. In addition, three East Hampton youths,
under the age of 19, shall serve as nonvoting ex officio members recommended by the Commission
and appointed by the Town Council. The East Hampton Animal Control Officer shall also serve as an
ex officio member. The failure of a voting member to attend four consecutive meetings of the
Commission may constitute cause for the Town Council to remove the member and fill the position
thus vacated. A chair and vice chair shall be elected by the Commission and serve for a term of one
year.
§ 6-4. Length of terms.
The members of the Commission shall serve three-year terms; provided, however, that with the first
appointment by the Town Council, four regular members shall be appointed for three-year terms with
the remaining members appointed for two-year terms. The ex officio youth members shall serve oneyear
terms.
Chapter 7. Arts and Cultural Commission
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town Council of the Town of East Hampton 12-14-2010. Amendments
noted where applicable.]
§ 7-1. Establishment.
There is hereby established a commission in East Hampton known as the "East Hampton Arts and
Cultural Commission" (EHACC). This commission shall be formed to foster, promote, encourage and
celebrate the excellence, enjoyment, and abundance of arts and culture in East Hampton.
§ 7-2. Appointment, terms and vacancies; compensation.
The Commission shall consist of nine members, who shall be appointed by the East Hampton
Town Council. No more than six of the Commission's members shall be members of the same
political party. The Commission's members will be electors of the Town chosen for their
knowledge, competence, or experience in the arts or cultural activities. Initially, three members will
be appointed to terms that end on December 31, 2013, three members will be appointed to terms
that end on December 31, 2012, and three members will be appointed to terms that end on
December 31, 2011. All future terms will run for three-year periods ending on December 31 of the
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 17/200
B.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
third year. Vacancies shall be filled by the Town Council for the balance of the unexpired term. In
addition, there will be a nonvoting student ad hoc member consisting of an East Hampton High
School student with interest in arts and culture who will be selected by the Superintendent of
Schools or high school principal to provide bi-directional communication between the Arts and
Cultural Commission and local students active in the arts.
The members of the Commission shall serve without compensation, but shall be reimbursed for
necessary budgeted expenses incurred in the performance of their official duties.
§ 7-3. Purpose.
The Commission is intended to support and promote interesting, innovative and entertaining programs
that are representative of the fine, applied and performing arts in East Hampton. The Commission will
promote a supportive climate to attract artists of all ages, cultures and areas of interest as well as to
promote participation in our community. Through its endeavors, the East Hampton Arts and Cultural
Commission will help to broaden understanding of and the appreciation for artistic diversity, cultural
awareness and a sense of community spirit.
§ 7-4. Organization; rules and regulations; meetings.
The Commission shall annually elect a chairperson, a vice chairperson, and a Secretary, and shall
have the power to make rules and regulations for the transaction of its business. All its meetings shall
be held at an accessible place and be open to the public.
§ 7-5. Duties and responsibilities.
The East Hampton Arts and Cultural Commission shall have the following duties and responsibilities:
To make an initial survey of the cultural and artistic resources of the Town of East Hampton,
including civic organizations, community theatre companies, local artists, dance studios, and local
private and civic events.
Produce and update an ongoing arts and cultural events calendar which may be distributed and
promoted in hard copy or e-mail and posted on the Town of East Hampton website.
To stimulate, encourage and promote community involvement in arts and cultural events in East
Hampton.
To advise and make recommendations to the Town Council on matters of arts and cultural
significance to the Town of East Hampton on at least an annual basis.
The Commission may pursue and receive federal, state and municipal or private monies for the
purpose of fostering, assisting and encouraging the arts and to encourage the participation in, and
promotion, development and appreciation of, artistic and cultural activities. All funds so received
will be held and expended in accordance with the requirements of any governmental granting
body and of the East Hampton Charter and Code of Ordinances.
To enter into contracts, within the limits of the funds available, with individuals, organizations and
institutions for services and programs which meet the objectives of the Commission. All such
contracts will require the prior approval of the Town Manager and will conform to the requirements
of the East Hampton Charter and Code of Ordinances for purchases by Town agencies.
§ 7-6. Expenses.
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 18/200
The Commission shall prepare a proposed estimate of receipts and expenditures and may submit a
proposed budget to the Town Manager as provided in the Code of the Town of East Hampton.
§ 7-7. Auxiliary services.
The Commission may recommend to the Town Manager the appointment of employees, and the use of
facilities and services, necessary for the discharge of its duties.
Chapter 12. Cemetery Board
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town Council of the Town of East Hampton 3-9-1993. Amendments noted
where applicable.]
§ 12-1. Creation; purpose; supervision.
Pursuant to § 7-148(c)(6)(A)(i) of the Connecticut General Statutes as amended there is hereby
created a Town Cemetery Board to establish, construct, maintain, control and operate public
cemeteries under the general supervision of the Town Manager.
§ 12-2. Membership; term; compensation.
The Town Manager, with the consent of the Town Council, shall appoint four persons who are residents
and taxpayers of the Town, who shall constitute and be called the "Town Cemetery Board." They shall
each be appointed for a term of five years and until their successors are duly appointed and qualified,
and shall serve without compensation. All initial appointments shall be made within 45 days of the
effective date of this chapter.
§ 12-3. Quorum; meetings; organization.
A majority of the members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business, and they shall
hold at least two regular meetings per year for the transaction of business. The Board may make and
establish such reasonable bylaws, rules and regulations as necessary for its governance and for the
full and complete execution of its powers and duties and the use of Town-owned cemeteries. The
Board shall elect one member to be Chairman and one member to be Vice Chairman.
§ 12-4. Duties; employment of sexton.
The Town Cemetery Board shall have the authority to control and operate Town cemeteries and the
appurtenances of same and may, subject to the Town budget process, contract the services of a
competent sexton for the Town cemeteries or request that the Town Manager employ on its behalf a
sexton, or may, without compensation, exercise the duties of a sexton by a designated member of the
Board or the Board as a whole.
§ 12-5. Rules, regulations, fees and assessments.
The Town Cemetery Board shall establish rules and regulations concerning cemetery policy and
recommend to the Town Council the update and/or establishment of charges for burial plots, grave
openings, and other sundry charges, as necessary.
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 19/200
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
[1]
(4)
B.
§ 12-6. Staff support.
The Town Clerk's office shall continue to prepare deeds to plots and shall collect payments for sale of
plots and other charges as set. The Superintendent of Public Works shall continue to coordinate
general maintenance of Town cemeteries as necessary. Both the aforementioned officials shall serve
as ex officio members of the Board (without vote) and shall work with the four regular members in
assisting in the discharge of their duties.
Chapter 16. Citation Hearing Procedure
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town Council of the Town of East Hampton 12-10-2002. Amendments
noted where applicable.]
§ 16-1. Authority; purpose.
Pursuant to the power granted by § 7-152c of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended, the
following chapter shall be adopted in order to implement a citation hearing procedure following the
issuance of a citation or notice of violation for violation of any Town ordinance and/or regulation.
§ 16-2. Appointment of Hearing Officer.
Immediately upon adoption of this chapter, the Town Manager shall appoint a Hearing Officer to
conduct hearings authorized by this chapter. Said Hearing Officer shall serve without pay or
compensation and shall not be a police officer, enforcement official as hereafter defined, or employee
of the Town of East Hampton. Said Hearing Officer shall serve until such time as a new Hearing Officer
is designated by the Town Manager.
§ 16-3. Advisory notice to cited individual.
Within the period set forth below, the official who issued the citation or notice of violation for
violation of any Town ordinance and/or regulation (hereafter referred to as the "enforcement
official") may send an advisory notice to the cited individual. Such advisory notice shall be sent by
certified mail, return receipt requested, and by first-class mail, postage prepaid. The period within
which said advisory notice may be provided is the twelve-month period following expiration of the
final period for the payment of all fines, penalties, fees and/or costs imposed by the citation or
notice of violation. Said advisory notice shall be directed to the last known address of the cited
individual.
Such advisory notice shall contain the following information:
A list of the allegations against the cited individual and the amount of fines, penalties, fees
and/or costs due;
A statement that the cited individual may contest his liability before a Citation Hearing Officer
by delivering in person or by mail written notice to the enforcement official within 10 days of
the date of the notice;
A statement that if the cited individual does not demand such a hearing, an assessment and
judgment shall be entered against him; and
That such judgment may issue without further notice.[1]
Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 20/200
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
C.
D.
§ 16-4. Admission of liability; request for hearing; hearing notice.
If the cited individual who has been sent an advisory notice wishes to admit liability for any alleged
violation, he may, without requesting a hearing, pay the full amount of the fines, penalties, fees
and/or costs to the Director of Finance of the Town of East Hampton. Such payment shall be
inadmissible in any civil or criminal proceeding to establish the conduct of such person making
payment.
Any cited individual who fails to request a hearing within 10 days of the date of the advisory notice
shall be deemed to have admitted liability, and the enforcement official shall so certify to the
Hearing Officer. The Hearing Officer shall immediately thereafter enter and assess the fines,
penalties, fees and/or costs provided for by the applicable ordinances and/or regulations and shall
follow the procedure set forth in § 16-6 below.
Any cited individual who requests a hearing shall be given written notice of the date, time and
place for such hearing. Said hearing notice shall be provided by the Hearing Officer, who shall
provide a copy of same to the enforcement official. The hearing shall be held not less than 15
days nor more than 30 days from the date of mailing of the hearing notice, provided the Hearing
Officer shall grant, upon good cause shown, any reasonable request by any interested party for
postponement or continuance.
§ 16-5. Hearing.
An original or certified copy of the original citation or notice of violation shall be retained by the
enforcement official and shall be deemed to be a business record as provided by Connecticut
General Statutes and shall be evidence of the facts contained therein. The enforcement official
must attend the hearing if the cited individual so requests. The enforcement official or other Town
official may present evidence on behalf of the Town.
Unless excused by the Hearing Officer, the cited individual must attend the hearing and may
present evidence in his behalf. The Hearing Officer may excuse the cited individual from attending
the hearing only where he has previously received from the cited individual, by mail, copies of
police reports or other investigatory reports which he believes renders unnecessary the
appearance of the cited individual.
If the cited individual fails to appear, the Hearing Officer may enter an assessment by default
against him upon a finding of proper hearing notice and liability.
The Hearing Officer shall conduct the hearing in the order and form and with such methods of
proof as he deems fair and appropriate. All testimony shall be given under oath or affirmation, but
the rules of evidence shall not be strictly applied.
§ 16-6. Decision.
The Hearing Officer shall announce his decision at the end of the hearing. If he determines that the
cited individual is not liable, he shall dismiss the matter and enter his determination in writing
accordingly. If he determines that the cited individual is liable for the violation, he shall forthwith enter
and assess the fines, penalties, fees and/or costs against the cited individual as provided by the
applicable Town ordinances and/or regulations.
§ 16-7. Payment of assessment; fees; assessment notice.
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 21/200
A.
B.
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
B.
C.
D.
E.
If such assessment is not paid on the date of its entry, the Hearing Officer shall send by first class
mail an assessment notice to the cited individual who has been found liable and shall file, not less
than 30 days nor more than 12 months after such mailing, a certified copy of the assessment
notice with the Clerk of Superior Court for Middlesex County, together with an entry fee of $8. The
certified copy of said assessment notice shall constitute a record of assessment. Within such
twelve-month period, assessments against the same individual may be accrued and filed as one
record of assessment.
The Clerk shall enter judgment in the amount of such record of assessment and court costs of $8
against the cited individual in favor of the Town of East Hampton. The Hearing officer's
assessment, when so entered as a judgment, shall have the effect of a civil money judgment, and
a levy of execution of such judgment may issue without further notice to such individual.
§ 16-8. Appeal rights.
Pursuant to § 7-152c(g) of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended, the individual against whom
an assessment is entered is entitled to judicial review by way of appeal. The appeal must be instituted
with the Superior Court for Middlesex County within 30 days of the mailing of the assessment notice,
as provided by the Connecticut General Statutes. The rules of the judges of the Superior Court shall
thereafter apply.
Chapter 18. Commission on Aging
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town Council of the Town of East Hampton 9-9-2008. Amendments noted
where applicable.]
§ 18-1. Establishment; organization.
[Amended 2-8-2011]
There shall be a Commission on Aging in the Town of East Hampton, consisting of seven regular
members, which shall be called the "East Hampton Commission on Aging."
[Amended 7-23-2013]
Members shall be appointed by the Town Council and shall be selected as follows:
[Amended 7-23-2013]
One regular member shall be a representative of the East Hampton Housing Authority.
Three regular members shall be members of the public, with both genders represented.
Three regular members shall be members of the public 60 years of age or older.
All members so appointed shall be persons interested in and committed to the consideration and
solutions of the needs and concerns of the elderly.
A Chairperson shall be elected by the members of the Commission from among the members.
The Town Manager, the Director of Health of the Town of East Hampton, and the Senior Services
Coordinator and Municipal Agent for the Elderly (or their designees) shall be nonvoting, ex officio
members.
§ 18-2. Membership; terms of appointment; compensation.
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 22/200
A.
B.
C.
D.
[1]
[Amended 2-8-2011; 7-23-2013]
In January of each year, the Town Council shall appoint members to replace those whose terms are
then expiring. All members shall be appointed to hold office for a period of three years, except for the
initial appointments of which two regular members shall be for three years, two regular members for
two years, one regular member for one year. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired portion of the
term, and the Commission may recommend a candidate to the Town Council to fill said vacancy.
Members of the Commission shall serve without compensation.
§ 18-3. Purpose.
The purpose of the Commission shall be to review and analyze the needs and conditions of the elderly
as brought to its attention by the Senior Services Coordinator (or citizens at large), in relation to
housing, nutrition, employment, economic welfare, health, long-term care, recreation, social services,
transportation and other matters and concerns of the elderly. The Commission shall act as an advocate
for the elderly and shall make recommendations to the Senior Services Coordinator, Town Council
and/or other relevant agencies via the Town Council as appropriate. The Commission shall interact
with and coordinate services as needed and as available through Town, regional, state or federal
services. A key responsibility of this Commission is to research, identify and attempt to secure funding
sources for the Town's elderly, including state grants as made available pursuant to § 17B-425 of the
Connecticut General Statutes.
§ 18-4. Duties.
The Commission shall act as an advisory board to the Senior Service Department of the Town of
East Hampton.
The Commission shall support the mission statement of the East Hampton Senior Center.
The Commission shall assist in interpreting and developing policies and guidelines for services
and programs for the elderly.
The Commission may advise and make recommendations to the Senior Services Coordinator with
regard to programs and services for the elderly. The Senior Services Coordinator may evaluate
those recommendations and implement as appropriate.
§ 18-5. Expenses.
The Commission shall prepare a proposed estimate of receipts and expenditures and may submit a
proposed budget to the Town Manager as provided in the Code of the Town of East Hampton.
Chapter 20. Conservation-Lake Pocotopaug Commission
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town Council of the Town of East Hampton 5-12-2009.[1] Amendments
noted where applicable.]
Editor's Note: Former Ch. 20, Conservation Commission, adopted 2-14-1989, as amended, was
repealed 6-9-2009.
§ 20-1. Establishment.
In order to promote the development, conservation and supervision of natural resources, including
water resources within the territorial limits of the Town of East Hampton, an East Hampton
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 23/200
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
Conservation - Lake Pocotopaug Commission is hereby established and hereinafter referred to as
"The Commission."
§ 20-2. Duties.
The Commission shall conduct research into the utilization and possible utilization of land areas of
the municipality and may coordinate the activities of unofficial bodies organized for similar
purposes and may advertise, prepare and distribute books, maps, charts, plans and pamphlets as
necessary for its purposes.
The Commission shall keep an index of all open areas, publicly or privately owned, including open
marshlands, swamps and other wetlands, for the purpose of obtaining information on the proper
use of such areas and may, from time to time, recommend to the Planning and Zoning
Commission plans and programs for the development and use of such areas, which may include
the acquisition of conservation easements.
The Commission shall recommend acquisition of land and easements to the Town Council for the
purpose of open space or recreational use. The Commission, upon approval of the Town Council
and Town Meeting, may receive gifts of land and easements in the name of the Town of East
Hampton for purposes not inconsistent with this chapter.
The Commission may receive gifts of money in the name of the Town of East Hampton for any
purpose not inconsistent with the purpose of this chapter. Such gifts of money, if not designated
for a special purpose by the donor, shall be determined by a vote of the Commission. Special gifts
of money shall be deposited in a special fund of the Town of East Hampton created for this
purpose and may be used by the Commission for such special purposes upon approval by the
Town Council. The Director of Finance shall keep an accurate record of all funds received and
disbursed.
The Commission shall recommend to the Town Manager or designee best management practices
for land management on Town-owned properties.
The Commission shall be the advisory resource of information from and among each of the Town
agencies with respect to any aspect of conservation of natural resources, including water
resources.
The Commission shall provide a Lake Pocotopaug and Watershed Management Plan at the end
of nine months from the effective date of this chapter, with updates submitted annually, that protect
the environmental aspects of the Lake Pocotopaug ecosystem and watershed area and other
possible watershed management areas, including but not limited to the Connecticut River, Salmon
River and Pine Brook, improves water quality and ensures appropriate ongoing maintenance and
monitoring.
The Commission shall evaluate and monitor the environmental and biological needs and
conditions of Lake Pocotopaug, the Salmon River, the Connecticut River, and other streams and
tributaries of same within the Town of East Hampton, and actively investigate grant opportunities.
It shall seek input and establish relationships when necessary with state agencies, hired
consultants and Town organizations and commissions to create necessary water protection
programs or actions to abate algae and aquatic weed growth, improve fish populations and
combat existing and potential sources of pollution. It may make recommendations to the Inland
Wetlands and Watercourses Agency (IWWA) and other Town agencies and commissions with
respect to all applications submitted to the Commission in accordance with the terms of this
chapter.
The Commission shall, on a periodic basis, but not less than annually, report to the Town Council
the environmental conditions of open space, greenbelts, Lake Pocotopaug and its watershed, the
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 24/200
J.
K.
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
Salmon River, the Connecticut River, and other streams and tributaries of same within the Town of
East Hampton, any changes in conditions, and recommend steps to remediate or improve such
conditions.
The Commission shall work in cooperation with state environmental agencies to conduct water
quality management studies, establish educational programs and disseminate information
regarding the care, preservation and protection of Lake Pocotopaug, the Salmon River, the
Connecticut River and other streams and tributaries of same within the Town of East Hampton by
area residents and the general public.
The Commission shall review all applications submitted to the East Hampton IWWA, Planning and
Zoning Commission (P&Z) and Zoning Board of Appeals (ZBA) relating to and/or affecting open
space, greenbelts, the Lake Pocotopaug watershed area, the Salmon River, the Connecticut River
and other streams and tributaries of same and other natural resources within the Town of East
Hampton. All applications shall be submitted to the Commission within five business days of
receipt by the IWWA, P&Z, and ZBA. Any Commission advisory opinion shall be rendered in
sufficient time to enable the IWWA, P&Z and ZBA, and other Town agencies and commissions, to
review and act upon the application within the time prescribed by state statute, when applicable.
§ 20-3. Membership and appointments.
The Commission shall consist of not more than nine regular members, and not more than three
alternates, all appointed to staggered, overlapping terms by the Town Manager of the municipality,
to serve for terms to be designated by the Town Council. All appointments shall be for a term of
four years, and terms shall expire on June 30 in each year, except that an appointment to fill an
unexpired term shall be for the duration of said unexpired term only. Within a period not exceeding
30 days after the first day of July of each year, the members of the Commission shall elect a
Chairman and Vice Chairman from their own members. The Town Manager may remove any
member for cause and may fill any vacancy. Each of the said commissioners shall serve without
compensation and shall be electors of the Town of East Hampton. No more than six regular
members may be from any one political party.
The Town Manager shall assign staff support to the Commission, as he shall deem necessary to
ascertain the work and operations of the Commission. The assigned staff member will work with
the Commission Chairman to develop the agenda for the meetings and will assist as the conduit to
the Town Manager's office, Town Council and other commissions.
§ 20-4. Organization and attendance.
Regular meetings will be held monthly at the East Hampton Town Hall or other appropriate Town
public building. The officers of the Commission shall consist of a Chairman and a Vice Chairman.
The Chairman shall preside at all meetings of the Commission and shall have the duties normally
conferred by parliamentary usage on such officers. The Chairman shall have the authority to
appoint committees, call special meetings and generally perform other duties as may be
prescribed by Commission bylaws. The Chairman shall be one of the Commission members and
shall have the privilege of discussing all matters before the Commission and of voting thereon.
The Vice Chairman shall act for the Chairman in his or her absence and shall have the authority to
perform the duties prescribed for that office. He or she shall be a Commission member.
The Commission shall adopt bylaws, regulations, rules and procedures to carry out the purpose of
this chapter. The Commission, through its Town staff designee, may submit a budget request to
the Town Manager in accordance with the procedures set forth in the Town Charter.
Members shall notify Town staff or the presiding Chair of his or her inability to attend regularly
scheduled or special meetings. Attendance policy shall be in accordance with set Town policy.
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 25/200
[1]
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
A.
B.
Chapter 24. Constables
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Special Town Meeting of the Town of East Hampton 4-8-1985, effective 6-
1-1985. Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 24-1. Appointment; number; term.
Pursuant to § 9-185 of the Connecticut General Statutes, the Town Manager shall appoint up to four
Constables for a term of three years, subject to the approval of the Town Council, in lieu of constables
to be elected under § 9-200.[1]
Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that the terms of office of the Constables currently serving
shall expire at the end of the day on which the 1985 Town election is held.
Chapter 28. Design Review Board
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town Council of the Town of East Hampton 4-25-2006 (Ord. No. 3.05).
Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning and Zoning Commission — See Ch. 104.
§ 28-1. Purpose.
To ensure that development in the Town of East Hampton is in accord with the Plan of Conservation
and Development and does not adversely affect surrounding properties, the Town Council establishes
this Design Review Board (“DRB”) to serve as an advisory body to the Planning and Zoning
Commission ("P&Z") and Zoning Board of Appeals (“ZBA”) on matters of commercial site and building
design. The DRB is charged with reviewing all projects regarding nonresidential exterior construction
and renovation submitted to the P&Z and ZBA, and suggesting ways to preserve, enhance and add to
the design or appearance of proposed projects.
§ 28-2. Guiding principles.
This chapter provides a set of guiding principles setting forth various aesthetic and functional
provisions to guide nonresidential, commercial, office, industrial and public/quasi public
development in the Town. The guiding principles are listed below. Over time, the Town may, by
ordinance, amend this section, refine or expand these principles and add design concepts to
reflect the changing desires of the community. It is anticipated that the principles and concepts
herein will be incorporated into and supplemented by more detailed development standards and/or
design guidelines as the Town matures.
To encourage high-quality land/site planning, architecture and landscape design;
To encourage development in keeping with the desired character of the Town and/or specific
design attributes identified in plans adopted by the Town;
To ensure physical, visual, and functional compatibility between uses; and
To ensure proper attention is paid to site and architectural design, thereby protecting land
values.
The designated approving authority under this chapter shall have the authority to apply the guiding
principles flexibly to account for circumstances relating to the proposed site plan.
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 26/200
A.
§ 28-3. Membership.
The DRB consists of seven members, including: two ex-officio members (Town Manager and Town
Planner or their respective designees), and five full citizen members to be appointed by the Town
Council for two-year terms. There shall also be two alternate members of the DRB, who shall be
citizens appointed by the Town Council for two-year terms. Because the DRB benefits from a
membership whose backgrounds and expertise are in the fields of architecture, arboriculture, site
planning, landscape architecture, construction, historic preservation, professional engineering,
commercial real estate, and graphic design, preference should be given to appointment of citizen
members who are professionals in the above-mentioned or related fields.
§ 28-4. Review procedures.
DRB review is required of all nonresidential projects in the Town of East Hampton. “Project” is defined
as new construction or exterior alterations or modifications requiring a building permit. Interior
changes, ordinary maintenance and temporary emergency repairs shall not be considered projects.
The Town Planner shall consider each application requiring a building permit for technical review and
determine when referral to DRB review of the project is required. The DRB advisory opinion shall be
rendered in sufficient time to enable the P&Z and ZBA to act upon the site plan within the time
prescribed by state statute.
§ 28-5. Design review.
The Planning Department shall forward an applicant’s site plan drawings and any supporting materials
that have been provided (such as color swatches and sample materials) to the DRB. Such drawings
shall include a rendering of the overall design of the proposed project, including the elevation of the
facade and all other exterior elevations abutting a public way, showing all fenestration, signs, and other
architectural features, including the color and style of building materials and any architectural details or
peculiarities. The DRB shall meet as required to review the applicant’s submission prior to P&Z and/or
ZBA review. The DRB review shall be based upon the standards for review set forth in § 28-7 of this
chapter. The DRB may recommend changes in scope, design, and materials relating to a project. After
a majority vote, the DRB will then render its advisory opinion in writing in a method determined by the
Planning Department to the appropriate commissions and board and to the applicant.
§ 28-6. Impact of advisory opinions and Planning and Zoning
Commission and Zoning Board of Appeals decisions.
The P&Z and ZBA have the final authority to deny or approve all projects within their jurisdictions. The
P&Z and ZBA may urge that the applicant make modifications to the proposed project as it deems
necessary to conform to the DRB advisory opinion. The DRB advisory opinion shall not bind the P&Z
and ZBA, but shall provide guidance to the P&Z and ZBA in the performance of their duties.
§ 28-7. Standards of review.
The DRB shall base its evaluation for project review on the following:
The compatibility with the Plan of Conservation and Development of the Town of East Hampton
(the “POCD”) and existing zoning regulations as same may be amended from time to time (refer to
§§ 28.1.C through 28.1.G).
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 27/200
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
L.
The compatibility of a proposed architectural design with the architectural designs of existing
adjacent buildings and the architectural character of the neighborhood as a whole.
The impact on the historical significance of the affected property/structure and other properties in
the immediate area.
The compatibility of the landscape and layout on the parcel with the landscaping and layout of
adjacent parcels.
The landscape treatment should enhance architectural features, strengthen vistas, and provide
shade and other means of public comfort, and establish a desirable transition with the streetscape
and provide safe pedestrian movement and parking.
Mechanical equipment or other utility hardware on the roof, ground, or building, service yards,
refuse storage areas, dumpsters, and other places that tend to be unsightly should be screened
from public view by use of walls, fencing, plantings, or a combination of the above, and should be
equally effective in winter and summer.
Fencing, walls, paving, brick, stone, gravel and cobbles should be used where appropriate to
enhance the project.
Exterior lighting should enhance the architectural and landscape design, and the lighting fixtures
should be compatible with the design of the building and neighborhood.
Style and color of building materials should be in harmony with the design of the building and with
adjacent buildings.
Relationship of width to height of new structures should be consistent with the ratio of existing
adjacent buildings.
Landscaping of all open spaces and buffer zones, including the location, type, and size of all trees
and shrubbery.
The lighting, design, materials, colors, size and location, but not content of signs.
Chapter 33. Economic Development Commission
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town Council of the Town of East Hampton 9-25-1979, as amended
through 4-8-2008. Subsequent amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 33-1. Establishment; membership; terms.
There shall be an Economic Development Commission of the Town of East Hampton, which shall
consist of seven electors of the Town to be appointed by the Town Manager for a term of four years.
§ 33-2. Removal of members; vacancies.
The Town Manager shall have the right and power to remove any member for cause. Vacancies arising
from any circumstances shall be filled by appointments by the Town Manager for the unexpired portion
of the term vacated.
§ 33-3. Compensation of members.
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 28/200
The members of the Commission shall serve without compensation, but shall be reimbursed for their
necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their official duties.
§ 33-4. Support staff; powers and duties.
The Commission shall be empowered to recommend to the Town Manager the appointment of
employees necessary for the discharge of its duties, and shall have any and all other rights, powers,
duties and obligations arising under § 7-136 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as the same may be
amended.
§ 33-5. Officers; rules and regulations; meetings.
The Commission shall elect a Chairman, Vice Chairman and any other officers deemed necessary and
shall have the power to make rules and regulations for the transaction of its business. The Commission
shall hold meetings at a fixed and regular time and place, and all such meetings, whether regular,
adjourned or special, shall be held at an accessible place and shall be open to the public.
§ 33-6. Annual report.
The Commission shall annually prepare and transmit to the Town Council a report of its activities and
its recommendations for improving economic conditions and development, and an itemized account of
all receipts and disbursements from the preceding year.
§ 33-7. Incumbent members.
All incumbent members of the existing Commission shall continue to serve out their terms at the time
this chapter is revised.
Chapter 37. Elections
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town of East Hampton as indicated in article histories. Amendments noted
where applicable.]
Article I. Town Council
[Adopted by the Board of Selectmen 5-23-1989]
§ 37-1. Membership; party affiliation; biennial election.
At each biennial election there shall be elected seven members of the Town Council, all for terms of
two years as provided in Section 2.1 of the Town Charter, as amended. Not more than five of the
members shall be of the same political party, and each political party shall nominate no more than five
candidates for Town Council. No elector shall vote for more than five candidates at each biennial
election for Town Council.
Chapter 41. Emergency Management
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town Council of the Town of East Hampton 7-10-1990. Amendments noted
where applicable.]
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 29/200
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
§ 41-1. Agency created; director; advisory board.
There is hereby created a Civil Preparedness (Defense) Agency under the supervision of a Director
with an advisory board. Such Director and board shall be appointed by and may be removed by the
Town Manager at any time.
§ 41-2. Duties of Civil Preparedness Director.
The Civil Preparedness Director shall have the following duties:
He shall advise the Town Manager on matters pertaining to civil preparedness and disaster
emergency operations.
He shall coordinate the activities of all Town agencies in disaster emergency situations but in no
case will he assume command of any agency or department other than the Civil Preparedness
(Defense) Agency unless directly ordered to do so by the Town Manager.
He will coordinate the activities of all Civil Preparedness (Defense) Agency forces, both full-time
and volunteer, and will be responsible for the recruitment and training of needed civil
preparedness personnel.
He will assist the Town Manager in the preparation and updating of Town emergency operations
plans and standard operating procedures.
He will maintain contact with the State Department of Emergency Management and Homeland
Security through the area office so designated for the Town of East Hampton, and will coordinate
with the State Department of Emergency Management and Homeland Security in the preparation
of required reports, procedures, and other necessary paperwork to ensure that the Town receives
all possible funding, equipment and other benefits available to the state through state and national
emergency management agencies for civil preparedness.
He will perform such other civil preparedness related functions as may, from time to time, be
assigned to him by the Town Manager.
§ 41-3. Advisory board.
The advisory board shall assist the Director in the formulation of policy for the governing of the Civil
Preparedness (Defense) Agency. The terms of office for the appointed advisory board shall be two
years, except that in the case of a board member serving by virtue of holding another Town office, such
member shall serve for a term corresponding with the term of such other office.
§ 41-4. Authority in case of disaster.
In the event of disaster, the Town Manager, or in the event of a vacancy in the office of Town Manager,
the Chairman of the Town Council, will assume complete command of all local government functions
and facilities. All available local resources will be brought to bear on the disaster existent in an effort to
protect and preserve human life and property of the community, to the greatest extent possible. The
authority of the Town Manager, or in the event of a vacancy in his office, of the Chairman of the Town
Council, shall be limited only by the Governor of the State of Connecticut in state declared
emergencies or the President of the United States of America in a declared national emergency.
§ 41-5. Interpretation of terms.
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 30/200
[1]
[2]
[3]
The terms "emergency management," "civil preparedness," and "civil defense" shall have the same
meaning and shall be interchangeable as said terms may apply to the agency and/or agencies referred
to in this chapter and all plans, equipment, directives, and activities connected herewith
Chapter 43. Ethics Commission
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town Council of the Town of East Hampton 8-8-2006. Amendments noted
where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Code of Conduct — See Ch. D.
Code of Ethics — See Ch. E.
§ 43-1. Intent and purpose.
The Town of East Hampton requires that its officials and employees be impartial, responsible to its
residents, not have interests that would be incompatible with the proper discharge of their official
responsibilities, and strive to avoid even the appearance of impropriety. The purpose of the Town’s
Code of Ethics and Code of Conduct is to maintain and enhance a tradition of responsible and
effective public service by setting forth standards of ethical conduct to guide its officials and employees
in the conduct of their public responsibilities. An independent Ethics Commission to investigate and
hear complaints under our Code of Ethics and Code of Conduct is a critical link between our
established ethical standards, Town officials and employees, and our residents’ confidence in the
integrity of Town governance.
§ 43-2. Definitions.
Unless otherwise indicated or defined herein, the terms and conditions used in this chapter shall have
the same meanings as used in the Code of Ethics adopted on September 4, 1975, revised and
updated on January 28, 1997.[1]
CODE
The Code of Ethics adopted on September 4, 1975, revised and updated on January 28, 1997,
and as further amended by those certain Conflict of Interest and Recusal Guidelines as adopted
by Town Council on September 27, 2005.[2]
CODE OF CONDUCT
That certain Code of Conduct adopted by the Town Council on January 28, 2003.[3]
COMPLAINANT
The party initiating a complaint alleging a violation of the Code or Code of Conduct or requesting
an advisory opinion.
RESPONDENT
The party against whom the complainant has alleged a violation of the Code or Code of Conduct.
Editor's Note: See Ch. E, Code of Ethics.
Editor's Note: The Conflict of Interest and Recusal Guidelines are included at the end of Ch. E, Code of
Ethics.
Editor's Note: See Ch. D, Code of Conduct.
§ 43-3. Establishment; membership.
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 31/200
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
A.
The Town Council shall appoint an Ethics Commission consisting of five regular members and two
alternate members. No more than two of the regular members may be affiliated with any one political
party or slate committee. The alternate members may not be affiliated with the same political party or
slate committee. At all times, at least one regular member shall not be affiliated with any political party
or slate committee. The members of the Commission shall serve four-year terms, provided, however,
that with the first appointments by the Town Council, three regular members and one alternate shall be
appointed for two-year terms, with the remaining regular members and alternate appointed for fouryear
terms. Thereafter, the Town Council shall appoint Commission members in the manner provided
for in the Town Charter, subject to the terms of this chapter.
§ 43-4. Organization and procedure.
The Commission shall elect a Chairman and Vice Chairman, who shall serve for two-year terms. The
Commission shall establish its own rules and procedures consistent with the Town Charter, this
chapter, the Town’s duly established ordinances and generally applicable law, including, without
limitation, Section 1-82a(a) through (e) of the Connecticut General Statutes, as the same may be
amended from time to time. The first rules and procedures shall be established within six months of the
date on which the Town Council initially appoints members of the Commission. The Commission shall
hold meetings at the call of the Chairman or two of the Commission members and at such other times
as may be provided by rules and procedures adopted by the Commission.
§ 43-5. Qualifications of members; compensation.
Each member and each alternate member shall be a resident elector of the Town and shall not be
compensated for service on the Commission. No member or alternate member shall:
Hold or campaign for any Town or state office.
Have held Town, state or federal office, including the town committee of a local political party, for a
period of two years prior to being appointed as a member or alternate member of the Commission.
Hold office in any political party, political action committee or be a member of any other type of
political committee.
Serve as a member of any other Town agency or commission.
Have been found in violation of any state, municipal or professional code of ethics.
Be employed by the Town or have been employed by the Town during the period two years prior to
the date of appointment as a member or alternate member of the Commission.
§ 43-6. Minimum affirmative vote requirements.
Not less than four affirmative votes shall be required for a finding of and recommended penalty relating
to a violation of the Code and/or Code of Conduct.
§ 43-7. Powers and duties; complaint procedures.
The Commission shall have the authority to prepare and recommend to the Town Council any
amendments or revisions to the Code and/or Code of Conduct or guidelines explaining the same
that, in the judgment of the Commission, are appropriate or necessary to establish practicable
ethical provisions, maintain the public’s confidence in the integrity of Town government and ensure
the highest ethical standards for Town officials and employees.
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 32/200
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
A.
B.
The Commission shall have the authority and power to render opinions, conclusions or findings of
fact to the Town Council with respect to the applicability of or any violation under either the Code
and/or Code of Conduct by any public officer or employee. Such findings shall include
recommended penalties for any determined violation(s) of the Code and/or Code of Conduct. The
Commission may employ the Town Attorney and direct the Town Manager in furtherance of its
duties hereunder.
The Commission’s procedures shall specify how the public may initiate complaints alleging a
violation of the Code or Code of Conduct or requests for advisory opinions. The Commission, by
majority vote, may also initiate a complaint or advisory opinion. The Commission shall have the
power to hold hearings concerning the applicability of the Code and/or Code of Conduct and
alleged violations and may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses by subpoena
to the extent permitted by state law. As required by Section 7-148h(a) of the Connecticut General
Statutes, the provisions of Section 1-82a(a) through (e) of the Connecticut General Statutes (as
the same may be amended from time to time) shall apply to all investigations and hearings held
under this chapter.
If the Commission determines that any Town officer or employee has violated the provisions of this
Code or Code of Conduct, the Commission shall file a memorandum of decision within 20 days
following its finding of a violation with the Town Council and give notice of such memorandum to
the respondent and the complainant. The Commission shall also file its memorandum of decision
with the Town Manager within 20 days after its finding of a violation if the respondent is an
employee appointed or under the jurisdiction of the Town Manager and with the Board of
Education if the respondent is a member of the Board of Education.
If the Commission determines that the respondent has not violated the provisions of the Code
and/or Code of Conduct, the Commission shall so notify the respondent and complainant, and the
Town Council, Town Manager or the Board of Education, as the case may be, within 20 days of
such finding. In the event the Commission determines that the respondent has not violated the
provisions of the Code and/or Code of Conduct, the contents of the Commission’s investigations
shall remain confidential.
Except as expressly set forth herein, nothing in this chapter shall limit the authority of the Town
Council, Town Manager or the Board of Education under the Town Charter or any other applicable
ordinance, regulation, statute or law. The Commission’s actions shall be deemed supplemental to
the authority of the Town Council, Town Manager or Board of Education granted under any
ordinance, statute or any other law.
No complaint may be brought after three years from the date the action giving rise to the complaint
occurred.
§ 43-8. Penalties for offenses.
General provisions. In the event that a failure to comply with the Code and/or Code of Conduct by
a Town Official or employee is determined by the Commission, the Commission shall recommend
to the Town Council (for Town officials) or Town Manager (for Town employees) either that no
penalties be imposed or one or more of the following penalties be imposed: censure, reprimand,
suspension, demotion, removal, or dismissal of officers and employees, as is applicable. In the
event that a failure to comply with the Code and/or Code of Conduct by a member of the Board of
Education is determined by the Commission, the Commission shall make its recommendation to
the Board of Education.
Enforcement. The Commission’s findings and conclusions regarding alleged violations of the Code
and Code of Conduct shall be binding on the respondent and complainant. The Town Council,
Town Manager, or the Board of Education, as is the case, shall retain exclusive authority regarding
the determination and imposition of any penalties arising from any Code or Code of Conduct
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 33/200
C.
violation. The Town Council, Town Manager and the Board of Education shall, however, in making
their penalty determination, give due deference to the Commission’s penalty recommendation. No
member of the Town Council or the Board of Education or the Town Manager may participate or
vote in any penalty determination in which he or she is the respondent.
General limitation. In the event that the provisions of this § 43-8 are inconsistent with any
remedies and procedures specified in applicable state and federal law, the Town Charter, other
applicable Town ordinances, personnel rules, contract grievance rules, or other work rules,
policies and procedures, the latter shall govern.
§ 43-9. Good faith disclosures.
No person shall take or threaten to take official action against an individual for such individual’s
disclosure of information to the Commission under this chapter. After receipt of information from an
individual under the provisions of this chapter, the Commission shall not disclose the identity of such
individual without such individual’s consent unless the Commission determines that such disclosure is
unavoidable during the course of its investigation. No person shall be subject to civil liability for any
good faith disclosure that such person makes to the Commission.
Chapter 45. Finance and Budget
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town of East Hampton as indicated in article histories. Amendments noted
where applicable.]
Article I. Collection of Sewage System Connection and Use
Charges
[Adopted by the Board of Selectmen 6-12-1984]
§ 45-1. Collection agent.
Pursuant to § 7-258 of the Connecticut General Statutes, the Collector of Revenue of the Town of East
Hampton is designated as collector of sewerage system connection and use charges. Said collector
shall collect and receive, in accordance with the provisions of the Connecticut General Statutes for the
collection of property taxes, all charges levied or to be levied by the East Hampton Water and Sewer
Authority (Water Pollution Control Authority) relating to the use, maintenance and construction of the
public sewers in the Town, including but not limited to connection charges, use fees, beneficial
assessments and fees and interest which may, by law, be added thereto.
§ 45-2. When effective.
This article shall become effective with the election and qualification of a Collector of Revenue on or
after Tuesday, November 5, 1985, and shall continue in force thereafter.
Article II. Appropriations
[Adopted by the Board of Selectmen 1-26-1988; amended by the Town Council 11-24-1992]
§ 45-3. Additional appropriations.
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 34/200
Pursuant to Section 4.1 of the Town Charter, the Board of Finance may make additional appropriation
to any board, commission, department or agency upon request, after inquiry, but if the amount
requested together with the sum of additional appropriations made previously in the same fiscal year
exceeds $25,000 from the Town Fund Balance, such appropriation shall not be made until, upon
recommendation of the Board of Finance, the same has been approved by vote at a Town Meeting
called for such purpose. If, however, the additional appropriation is funded entirely from a grant,
donation, gift or other source of revenue received in the current fiscal year, other than local taxes, said
appropriation in its entirety, regardless of amount, shall be made as recommended by the Board of
Finance and approved by the Town Council.
Article III. Budget Process; Unexpended Balances;
Payment of Claims
[Adopted by the Board of Selectmen 9-26-1989]
§ 45-4. Estimates of receipts and expenditures.
At such time or times as the Town Manager shall prescribe, each department, office, board,
commission, committee and agency of the Town, except the Board of Education, shall submit on forms
prescribed by him its estimates of receipts and expenditures for the ensuing fiscal year.
§ 45-5. Submission of proposed budget by Town Manager.
[Amended 12-13-2016]
At such time or times as the Board of Finance shall prescribe, the Town Manager shall present to the
Board a proposed budget consisting of the total expenditures and revenues estimated for the ensuing
fiscal year and recommendations thereon along with the proposed budget of the Board of Education as
submitted by the Board of Education. The Town Government budget as presented by the Town
Manager shall include the annual appropriation to the capital reserve fund, debt service payments, and
transfers to other funds for noneducation purposes.
§ 45-6. Submission of proposed budget by Board of Finance.
Upon receipt of, and consideration of, the Town Council's policy statement, the Board of Finance shall
prepare a proposed Town budget as prescribed in Section 5.2 of the East Hampton Town Charter as
amended.
§ 45-7. Disposition of unexpended balances.
During the last month of the fiscal year, upon recommendation of the Board of Finance as required by
C.G.S. § 7-347, the Town Council may make transfers in the adopted operating budget, except the
Board of Education budget, from unexpended or unencumbered appropriations in one department to
another for the purpose of balancing accounts to close out the fiscal year.
§ 45-8. Lapse of noncapital appropriations.
Noncapital appropriations shall lapse at the end of the fiscal year for which they were made, and any
balance credited to the General Fund. An appropriation for a capital outlay shall not lapse, but shall
continue from fiscal year to fiscal year until the object for which the appropriation was made has been
accomplished. If no expenditure for, or encumbrance of, the capital outlay has been made after three
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 35/200
[1]
consecutive fiscal years, the Town Council may cancel said appropriation upon the recommendation of
the Board of Finance and transfer same to another capital outlay or to the capital reserve fund or a
sinking fund for a future capital outlay. All interest earned by the capital reserve fund shall remain in the
fund in a contingency line item until it is reallocated by the Town Council, upon recommendation of the
Board of Finance, to another capital outlay.
§ 45-9. Payment of claims.
No payroll, bill or other claim against the Town, except those of the Board of Education, shall be paid
until the same has been audited and endorsed for correctness, legality and payment by the Town
Manager or an officer so designated by him. All payments shall be by check drawn on a Town bank
account bearing the signature of the Town Manager and the Director of Finance. In the absence of the
Town Manager or Director of Finance, the Controller, Assistant to the Manager or Town Clerk may
substitute for either, but not both, with the approval of the Town Council, the intention being that all
checks must be signed by two separate persons. All payroll, bills, or other claims against the Board of
Education shall be audited by said Board and signed by a member or members of the Board so
designated and countersigned by the Town Manager or the Director of Finance.
Article IV. Budget Meetings and Referendums
[Adopted by the Town Council 1-13-1998]
§ 45-10. Date of annual budget meeting.
The annual budget meeting of the Town shall be held no earlier than the first Monday in April nor later
than the second Monday in May in each year commencing April 6, 1998.
§ 45-11. Budget votes.
All budget meetings commencing in 1998 shall be adjourned to a machine vote (referendum). Pursuant
to § 7-9b of the Connecticut General Statutes as amended, voting shall be from the hours of 6:00 a.m.
to 8:00 p.m.
Chapter 49. Fire Department
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town Council of the Town of East Hampton 11-26-2013.[1] Amendments
noted where applicable.]
Editor’s Note: This ordinance also superseded former Ch. 49, Fire Department, adopted 7-26-1994.
Article I. Establishment
§ 49-1. Authority; purpose.
Pursuant to § 7-301 of the General Statutes of Connecticut there is hereby established a Town Fire
Department, which shall have all of the powers and duties of a Town fire department as prescribed by
statute, Town Charter, or otherwise, which is established for the purpose of protection from fire or other
disaster, persons and property within the limits of the Town of East Hampton, or as otherwise
hereinafter provided.
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 36/200
A.
B.
C.
(1)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(2)
D.
§ 49-2. Powers and duties.
[Amended 8-14-2018]
The management, discipline, and control thereof shall be vested in a Board of Fire
Commissioners, which shall have powers as this chapter and statute provide. The Board of Fire
Commissioners shall be subject to the purchasing requirements as outlined by the Town Charter
for acquisition of all supplies and equipment necessary for its operation and shall have the
statutory power to enter into agreements with any volunteer fire company or companies within the
Town for the protection thereof from fire on such conditions as to the financial assistance and the
observance of the regulations as such Board of Fire Commissioners shall prescribe, subject,
however, to the provision of this chapter.
Said Board of Fire Commissioners shall promote proper cooperation and coordinate activities
among the several divisions of the Department and/or companies or other municipal agencies,
boards, or commissions, public or private, whose aims are to provide protection from fire or other
disaster for persons or property within East Hampton.
Subject to statute and Town Charter and the terms of this chapter, the Board of Fire
Commissioners has the power and authority to make agreements with the State of Connecticut,
other towns, municipalities, fire districts, and government bodies representing them to promote
mutual fire protection and provide maximum fire and other disaster protection for East Hampton.
When authorized by the Town Council, expenses incurred in carrying out the foregoing shall be
paid as a municipal expense by the Town of East Hampton.
Fire Marshal.
Appointment of Fire Marshal. The Board of Fire Commissioners shall appoint a local Fire
Marshal. In making such appointment, preference shall be given to a member of the regular
or volunteer Fire Department of the Town of East Hampton. The local Fire Marshal shall be
sworn to the faithful performance of his duties by the Clerk of the Town of East Hampton and
shall continue to serve in that office until removed for cause by the Board of Fire
Commissioners in accordance with the procedure set forth in this chapter.
Duties of Fire Marshal.
The local Fire Marshal shall annually inspect all buildings and facilities of public service
and occupancies, except one- and two-family dwellings, regulated by the State Fire
Safety Code, and inspect other buildings upon receiving an authentic report that they
pose a fire hazard that could endanger life.
The local Fire Marshal shall, where applicable, review plans for buildings and structures
under their jurisdiction to determine compliance with the Fire Safety Code before the
building permits are issued.
The local Fire Marshal shall investigate the cause, origin, and circumstances of all fires
that caused or threatened to cause property or personal damage or deaths.
The local Fire Marshal shall certify that residential buildings subject to the Fire Safety
Code are equipped with code-compliant smoke detection and warning equipment before
they are issued a certificate of occupancy.
The local Fire Marshal shall, upon receiving a complaint, inspect one- and two-family
dwellings to ensure that statutory requirements on smoke detection and warning
equipment are satisfied.
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 37/200
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
(3)
(4)
(5)
A.
B.
The local Fire Marshal shall issue permits for keeping, selling, using, storing, procuring,
or transporting explosives.
The local Fire Marshal shall inspect fireworks and special effects display sites.
The local Fire Marshal shall determine the appropriate amount of fire protection and fire
extinguishing equipment required at amusement parks, sporting events and carnivals.
The local Fire Marshal shall issue open burning permits.
Oversight and reporting of local Fire Marshal. The day-to-day reporting and determining
compliance with the fulfillment of the local Fire Marshal's duties stated above shall be
overseen by the Town Manager.
Dismissal of local Fire Marshal. If the local Fire Marshal fails to faithfully perform the duties of
his office, the Board of Fire Commissioners shall, after proper inquiry, dismiss him and
appoint another in his place. The local Fire Marshal shall not be dismissed unless he has
been given notice, in writing, of the specific grounds for such dismissal and a meaningful
opportunity to be heard in his own defense, personally or by counsel, at a public hearing,
before the Board of Fire Commissioners, who possess the power of dismissal. This
meaningful opportunity includes the production at the public hearing, by the Board of Fire
Commissioners, of the person or persons whose complaints form the basis of the ground or
grounds in the notification of grounds for potential dismissal and the opportunity to examine at
that time any or all of these complainants should the local Fire Marshal decide to do so. The
local Fire Marshal shall also be provided with a written statement indicating the reason or
reasons upon which the Board of Fire Commissioners premise dismissal, if that is the
sanction imposed. Such public hearing shall be held not less than five nor more than 10 days
after such notice.
Appeal. Any person so dismissed may appeal within 30 days following such dismissal to the
Superior Court for the judicial district of Middlesex at Middletown. Service shall be made as in
civil process. Said court shall review the record of such hearing and, if it appears upon the
hearing upon the appeal that testimony is necessary for an equitable disposition of the
appeal, it may take evidence or appoint a referee or a committee to take such evidence as it
may direct and report the same to the court with his or its findings of fact, which report shall
constitute a part of the proceedings upon which the determination of the court shall be made.
The court, upon such appeal, and after a hearing thereon, may affirm the action of such
authority, or may set the same aside if it finds that such authority acted illegally or arbitrarily or
in the abuse of its discretion or with bad faith or malice.
Article II. Board of Fire Commissioners
§ 49-3. Membership; terms.
The Board of Fire Commissioners shall consist of five electors of the Town of East Hampton, not
more than three of whom shall be members of the same political party, and shall be appointed by
the Town Council for staggered terms of three years. The Town Council may remove any member
for cause.
Effective August 1, 1994, all future appointments shall be for three-year terms; members
appointed prior to August 1, 1994, shall continue to serve out their original five-year terms. No
active or senior member of any volunteer fire company under the direction and control of the
Board of Fire Commissioners shall be appointed to the Board; however, this shall not prohibit the
appointment of any retired member.
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 38/200
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
C.
§ 49-4. Compensation.
The members of the Board of Fire Commissioners shall receive no compensation for their services as
such, but shall be reimbursed for their necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their duties
when authorized by the Town Council.
§ 49-5. Officers.
The Board of Fire Commissioners shall appoint from its membership a Chairman and a Secretary, who
shall perform such duties and have such authority, and shall serve for such terms as may be
prescribed in bylaws duly adopted by the Board of Fire Commissioners.
§ 49-6. Meetings.
The Board of Fire Commissioners shall hold an annual meeting on the second Monday of August
of each year, at which time all annual reports are to be submitted to it, in writing, from the officers
and the committee chairman, as hereinafter provided.
Regular meetings shall be held at the times and dates set by the Board of Fire Commissioners,
and special meetings may be called at any time by the Chairman or by any three members
thereof, provided written notice of the time and place for such meeting shall be given to all
members of the Board at least 24 hours prior to such special meeting. Three members thereof
shall constitute a quorum at any regular or special meetings, and the vote of three members
thereof shall be necessary for any action taken by the Board.
The order of business at all regular meetings shall be as follows:
Call to order.
Approval of minutes.
Approval of bills/budget report.
Fire Marshal's report.
Communications.
Unfinished business.
New business.
Adjournment.
§ 49-7. Recordkeeping.
The Board of Fire Commissioners shall keep proper and accurate records of its doings, which records
shall be subject to the inspection of the Town Council at any reasonable time.
§ 49-8. Purchase and maintenance of equipment.
Subject to the approval of the Town Council and within the budget provided therefor, the Board of Fire
Commissioners, in conformance with the Town Charter, shall acquire, maintain, repair and replace all
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 39/200
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
A.
B.
A.
B.
equipment, apparatus and trucks used for the purpose enumerated in this chapter. They shall provide
housing and storage space for the same, and may contract, under such terms and conditions deemed
advisable, for the use of needed housing and storage space when unavailable within buildings owned
by the Town of East Hampton.
§ 49-9. Use of equipment outside Town.
The Board of Fire Commissioners may permit fire apparatus, equipment and trucks to be taken
and used without the municipal limits of East Hampton for the following purposes:
For ceremonies and parades.
For tests, demonstrations or repairs.
Pursuant to the terms of agreements made with other towns, etc., as provided in this chapter.
For serious emergencies in any town or city.
Determination of "serious emergencies" may be conferred upon the Chief of the Fire Department.
In all cases, the use of the fire equipment, apparatus, and equipment shall be governed by the
regulations established by the Board of Fire Commissioners.
§ 49-10. Annual report.
During the first week of September of each year, or at such other times as the Town Council may
direct, the Board of Fire Commissioners shall submit a report of its doings to the Town Council for
publication in the Annual Town Report. At such time as directed, the Board shall submit to the Town
Manager an estimate of expenses for each fire company for the coming fiscal year.
§ 49-11. Conduct and discipline of Department members.
The Board of Fire Commissioners shall be responsible for the discipline and proper conduct of the
officers and members of the Department as set forth in the Department bylaws. The Board shall have
the power to expel any member for cause, or as provided in the Department regulations, and may
remove from office, for cause, any officer of the Department.
Article III. Governance of Department
§ 49-12. Bylaws.
Except as provided therein and by statute or Town Charter, the Fire Department shall be governed
by bylaws adopted by the members of the Fire Department. Upon adoption, the bylaws, or any
amendment thereto, shall be submitted to the Board of Fire Commissioners. Such bylaws, or
amendments, automatically shall become effective within 30 days following submission to the
Board of Fire Commissioners unless rejected by vote of all Commissioners. In the event of partial
rejection, the portion not so rejected shall become effective as provided herein.
Such bylaws shall specify, in addition to other matters, the method and qualifications necessary for
gaining membership to the Department; the method and qualifications necessary for the election
of officers; and the responsibilities, duties, standards of conduct, and disciplinary action to which
officers and members shall be subjected.
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 40/200
Chapter 53. Fiscal Year
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town of East Hampton as indicated in article histories. Amendments noted
where applicable.]
Article I. Change of Fiscal Year
[Adopted by Town Meeting 8-29-1967]
§ 53-1. Compliance with state law.
The Town of East Hampton shall become a complying municipality as provided in Chapter 110 of the
General Statutes of Connecticut, as amended, and the Town Clerk shall file with the State Tax
Commissioner a certificate that the Town has become a complying municipality as provided in said
Chapter 110.
Article II. Establishment; Payment of Taxes
[Adopted by the Board of Selectmen 9-22-1981, effective 10-15-1981]
§ 53-2. Fiscal year established.
The fiscal year of the Town commencing September 1, 1967, shall end on June 30, 1968, and
thereafter the fiscal year of the Town shall commence on July 1 of each year and end on the following
June 30.
§ 53-3. Payment of taxes.
Taxes for the fiscal year commencing on and after July 1, 1968, shall be payable in two installments,
one-half on July 1 and the second half on the following January 1 unless the total tax payable on any
list shall be less than or equal to $100, in which case the full amount shall be due and payable on July
1, 1982, and each July 1 thereafter.
Chapter 57. Flood and Erosion Control Board
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Selectmen of the Town of East Hampton 8-25-1981. Amendments
noted where applicable.]
§ 57-1. Adoption of state law provisions.
Pursuant to § 25-84 of the Connecticut General Statutes, §§ 25-84 through 25-94, inclusive, of the
Connecticut General Statutes concerning the establishment of a flood or erosion control system are
hereby adopted.
§ 57-2. Town Council to act as Board.
The Town Council of the Town of East Hampton shall be empowered to act as a flood and erosion
control board for purposes of carrying out the statutory provisions relating to flood or erosion control.
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 41/200
[1]
A.
B.
Chapter 66. Housing Partnership
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Selectmen of the Town of East Hampton 3-14-1989. Amendments
noted where applicable.]
§ 66-1. Findings of fact.
The Town Council, of the municipality of the Town of East Hampton hereby declares that a local
housing partnership be formed, in accordance with P.A. 88-305,[1] in order to develop ways to increase
the supply and availability of affordable housing in the Town of East Hampton.
Editor's Note: See C.G.S. § 8-336f et seq.
§ 66-2. Housing partnership created.
There is hereby created the Town of East Hampton Housing Partnership, appointed by the Town
Council of the Town of East Hampton. The Partnership shall consist of the following members:
Community representatives.
Organization Number of Members
Town Council 2
Social Services Advisory Committee 1
Ecumenical Council 1
East Hampton Lions Club 1
Senior Citizens Club 1
Agent for the Elderly 1
Chamber of Commerce 1
Inland/Wetlands and Watercourses Agency 1
Planning and Zoning Commission 1
Housing Authority 1
Judge of Probate 1
East Hampton Rotary Club 1
Board of Finance 1
Ministerial Association 1
Concerned Citizens Group 1
Historic District Commission 1
Staff representatives.
Position Number of Members
Social Services Coordinator 1
Senior Center Coordinator 1
Youth Services Director 1
Midstate Regional Planning Agency 1
Greater Middletown Community Corp. 1
Planning Administrator 1
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 42/200
[1]
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
§ 66-3. Initial designation under Connecticut Housing Partnership
Program.
The responsibilities of the municipality of the Town of East Hampton, in order to receive initial
designation under the Connecticut Housing Partnership Program, shall include the following:
Submit evidence to the Commissioner of Housing that the Town of East Hampton Housing
Partnership has been formed in accordance with P.A. 88-305;[1] and
Editor's Note: See C.G.S. § 8-336f et seq.
Submit evidence to the Commissioner of Housing that sufficient local resources have been
committed to the Town of East Hampton Housing Partnership.
§ 66-4. Development designation under Connecticut Housing
Partnership Program.
The duties of the Town of East Hampton Housing Partnership, in order to receive development
designation under the Connecticut Housing Partnership Program, shall include the following:
To examine and identify housing needs and opportunities in the community;
To explore the availability of any state, municipal or other land that is suitable for the development
of affordable housing;
To review applicable zoning regulations to determine whether such regulations restrict the
development of affordable housing in the community;
To identify any necessary changes to such regulations;
To establish priorities and develop a long-range plan to meet identified housing needs in the
community consistent with regional housing needs;
To establish procedures for the development of a written proposal to achieve such priorities in
accordance with said plan; and
To start an activity, development or project designed to create additional affordable housing in the
Town of East Hampton.
§ 66-5. Conflicting resolutions, orders, rules and regulations
suspended.
At all times when any orders, rules and regulations made and promulgated pursuant to this chapter
shall be in effect, they shall supersede all existing resolutions, orders, rules and regulations insofar as
the latter may be inconsistent therewith.
§ 66-6. No conflict with state or federal statutes.
This chapter shall not be construed so as to conflict with any state or federal statute, rule or regulation.
§ 66-7. Expenses and obligations.
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 43/200
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
No person shall have the right to expend any public funds of the municipality in carrying out any
Partnership activities authorized by this chapter without prior approval by the legislative body, nor shall
any person have any right to bind the municipality by contract, agreement, or otherwise without prior
and specific approval of the legislative body.
Chapter 70. Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Agency
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Special Town Meeting of the Town of East Hampton 5-28-1974; amended
8-22-1989. Subsequent amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 70-1. Incorporation of state law provisions.
The legislative finding and the purpose of "The Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Act" as set forth in
§ 22a-36 of the Connecticut General Statutes is hereby incorporated into this chapter as such applies
to the Town of East Hampton.
§ 70-2. Membership; removal of members; officers.
The Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Agency shall consist of seven regular members and two
alternate members appointed by the Town Council for three-year overlapping terms. Incumbent
members shall continue to serve until their terms expire and replacements are appointed. In addition,
two alternates shall be appointed, one to serve until May 31, 1990, and one to serve until May 31,
1991; thereafter the terms of alternates shall be for three years.
The Town Council may remove any member for cause.
The Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Agency shall elect its own officers.
§ 70-3. Rules and regulations.
The Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Agency is authorized and empowered to promulgate such
regulations, in conformity with regulations promulgated by the Commissioner of Environmental
Protection, as are necessary to protect the wetlands and watercourses within the territorial limits of the
Town of East Hampton and define boundaries of inland wetland areas in the scope and manner set
forth in said statutes, as amended.
§ 70-4. Policy considerations.
In carrying out the purposes and policies of the Act, the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Agency
shall take into consideration all relevant facts and circumstances, including, but not limited to:
The environmental impact of the proposed action;
The alternatives to the proposed action;
The relationship between short-term uses of the environment and the maintenance and the
enhancement of long-term productivity;
Irreversible and irretrievable commitments of resources which would be involved in the proposed
activity;
The character and degree of injury to, or interference with, safety, health or the reasonable use of
property which is caused or threatened; and
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 44/200
F. The suitability or unsuitability of such activity to the area for which it is proposed.
§ 70-5. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by a final decision of the Town acting through the Inland Wetlands and
Watercourses Agency shall have the right of appeal to the Superior Court of Middlesex County as
provided by § 22a-43 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
§ 70-6. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating this chapter or regulations promulgated thereunder shall be subject to the
remedies and penalties provided by § 22a-44 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
Chapter 75. Justices of the Peace
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town Council of the Town of East Hampton 4-9-1996 (Ord. No. 2.06).
Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 75-1. Number of Justices.
The number of Justices of the Peace for the Town Of East Hampton to be selected in 1996 and
quadrennially thereafter shall be 24.
Chapter 77. (Reserved)
[Former Ch. 77, Lake Pocotopaug Commission, adopted 5-23-2006, was repealed 6-9-2009. See now
Ch. 20, Conservation-Lake Pocotopaug Commission.]
Chapter 79. Land Acquisition Fund
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town Council of the Town of East Hampton 10-26-1999 (Ord. No. 1.10).
Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 79-1. Establishment; purpose; term.
It is recognized that pursuant to C.G.S. § 7-131r there is hereby established the Open Space, Land
Acquisition and Preservation Fund (the "fund"), which shall be used solely for the purposes of the
preservation of open space and the acquisition of land (or any interest in land, including, but not limited
to, conservation easements and development rights) to be used for open space or recreational or
housing purposes. The fund shall not lapse at the close of the municipal year.
§ 79-2. Funding.
There shall be deposited into the fund such sums as (a) the Town may, from time to time, appropriate
for that purpose as part of its Capital Improvement Program, (b) funds acquired by the Town, whether
by gift, bequest, grant or otherwise, solely for the purposes to be served by the fund, and (c) all monies
appropriated to said fund. The total of all deposits into the fund in any one fiscal year (exclusive of
gifts, bequests and grants) shall not exceed that amount which would be generated by the imposition
of a tax of two mills against all of the property subject to tax in East Hampton as shown on the last
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 45/200
A.
B.
C.
D.
complete Grand List. The Town shall also investigate on a continuing basis the availability of any state
and federal monies available for land acquisition and development rights.
§ 79-3. Types of land considered for acquisition.
The following types of land may be considered for acquisition:
Land that has recreational value; or
Land that has development value for Town parks or playgrounds, or recreational facilities; or
Land that has significant scenic, topographic, conservation or wilderness value based on the
characteristics of the land; or
Land that has significant historical, cultural or archaeological value.
§ 79-4. Recommendations to Town Meeting; appropriations.
The Town Council shall have the exclusive authority to identify those parcels of land, interests in land,
and/or development rights to be recommended to the Town Meeting for acquisition. All such
recommendations from the Town Council shall be consistent with the purpose for which the fund is
created. Appropriations from the fund shall be made only upon approval of the Town Meeting following
recommendation of the Town Council, and review by the Planning and Zoning Commission pursuant to
C.G.S. § B-24, and Board of Finance approval.
§ 79-5. Public hearings.
Any ordinance or resolution authorizing the purchase or sale of any interest in land, including but not
limited to easements and development rights, shall be acted upon by Town Meeting, after approval by
the Board of Finance. When the public hearing is to be held, the Town Council shall cause notice to be
published at least 10 days prior to said public hearing in a newspaper having substantial continuous
circulation in the Town.
§ 79-6. Existence and dissolution.
The fund shall continue in existence until such time as an ordinance amends or discontinues same.
Upon dissolution of the fund, any remaining balances shall be paid over into the general fund or such
other fund as the ordinance terminating said fund shall direct.
Chapter 83. Library
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town of East Hampton as indicated in article histories. Amendments noted
where applicable.]
Article I. Principal Library
[Adopted 9-11-1967 STM (Ord. No. 7.02)]
§ 83-1. Designation.
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 46/200
A.
B.
The East Hampton Public Library is designated as the "Principal Public Library" for the Town of East
Hampton.
Article II. Library Department
[Adopted 5-22-1989 STM (Ord. No. 7.01)]
§ 83-2. Establishment; responsibilities.
There is hereby established a Public Library Department which shall be responsible for operating the
Town's Public Library, which shall be known and named the "East Hampton Public Library."
§ 83-3. Library Director.
The Library Director shall be head of the Public Library Department, and shall be appointed by the
Town Manager as prescribed by Section 3.3 of the East Hampton Town Charter, as amended.
The Library Director shall be responsible for the proper operation of the Public Library
Department, shall make recommendations for policies and programs and shall be responsible for
the supervision of personnel assigned thereto. The Library Director shall perform all other duties
as prescribed by the job description for the position under the general direction of the Town
Manager.
§ 83-4. Annual budget.
Each year, at such time or times that the Town Manager shall prescribe, the Library Director shall
prepare and submit to the Town Manager an estimated budget for the operation of the Library
Department, together with any other information for the ensuing fiscal year.
§ 83-5. Personnel and operating policies.
The Town Council, as prescribed by Town Charter, as amended, shall adopt a uniform personnel policy
for all employees assigned to the Library Department. The Town Council shall review and adopt all
operating policies of the Library Department or shall delegate the approval of such policies to the Town
Manager.
§ 83-6. Incumbent employees.
All incumbent library personnel, including the Director, upon the adoption of this article, shall continue
employment without interruption, and shall maintain the longevity and seniority that they enjoyed prior
to the adoption of this article.
§ 83-7. Effective date; repealer.
This article shall take effect on the day following the election of the Town Council on November 7,
1989. All other ordinances pertaining to the East Hampton Public Library, adopted prior to the date this
article becomes effective, are hereby repealed.
Article III. Public Library Advisory Board
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 47/200
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
A.
B.
[Adopted 9-23-2014]
§ 83-8. Purpose.
The purpose of the Board shall be to act as representatives of the public's library service interests and
serve as liaison between the community and its municipal government.
§ 83-9. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
EAST HAMPTON PUBLIC LIBRARY
Synonymous with "public library" or "the library." Refers to both the physical location of 105 Main
Street and all of the programs and operations originating from that address.
§ 83-10. Duties.
The Board shall act as an advisory board to the East Hampton Public Library, a department of
East Hampton municipal government.
The Board shall assist in supporting the mission statement of the library.
The Board shall assist in encouraging greatest use of East Hampton Public Library facilities,
programs, and services for all East Hampton residents.
The Board shall assist in interpreting and developing policies and guidelines for East Hampton
Public Library services and programs, including general operating and collection development
policies, with policy approval by the Town Council or approval delegated to the Town Manager.
The Board shall assist in the library's long-range planning process, to include representative input
and implementation and outcome evaluation components.
The Board shall assist in ensuring the library has an active marketing program and support the
ongoing development and implementation of same.
The Board shall assist in researching, identifying and attempting to secure grant funding sources
to forward or enhance the library's programs, services, and plans in an effort to accomplish the
Department's mission.
The Board shall be familiar with local, state, and federal library laws as well as pending library
legislation and work to educate the East Hampton general government on both the pros and cons
for the library.
The Board may advise and make recommendations to the Library Director with regard to public
library services, programs, and plans.
§ 83-11. Establishment; organization.
There shall be a Public Library Advisory Board in the Town of East Hampton, consisting of seven
regular members, which shall be called the "East Hampton Public Library Advisory Board."
Members shall be appointed by the Town Council and shall be selected as follows:
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 48/200
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
C.
D.
E.
[1]
Four regular members shall be members of the public, with both genders represented.
Two regular members shall be members of the public and represent the interests of the early
childhood community, with both genders represented.
One member shall be a member of the public 60 years of age or older.
No more than four of said electors shall be members of the same political party.
All members so appointed shall be persons interested in and committed to the delivery of library
services in East Hampton and represent a broad spectrum of community interests, cultural
experience, and expertise.
Said Board shall elect its own officers, which shall include a Chairman and a Vice Chairman, and
shall adopt its own rules and procedures.
The Town Manager, or his/her designee, shall be a nonvoting, ex officio member.
§ 83-12. Membership; terms of appointment; compensation
In January of each year, the Town Council shall appoint members to replace those whose terms are
expiring. All members shall be appointed to hold office for a period of three years, except for the initial
appointments to hold office of which three regular members shall be for three years, three regular
members for two years, one regular member for one year. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired
portion of the term, and the Board may recommend a candidate to the Town Council to fill the vacancy.
Members of the Board shall serve without compensation.
Chapter 88. Lower Connecticut River Valley Council of
Governments
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town Council of the Town of East Hampton 9-11-2012.[1] Amendments
noted where applicable.]
Editor’s Note: This ordinance also repealed former Ch. 88, Midstate Planning Region, adopted 1-23-
1962.
§ 88-1. Participation.
The Town of East Hampton adopts the provisions of §§ 4-124i through 4-124p, inclusive, of the
Connecticut General Statutes, and joins in the creation of the Lower Connecticut River Valley Council
of Governments. The representative of the Town of East Hampton on said Lower Connecticut River
Valley Council of Governments shall be the Chairperson of the Town Council, provided said
Chairperson may designate the Town Manager to be the Town’s representative. In the absence of said
Chairperson or Town Manager (if so designated), the Vice Chairperson of the Town Council shall be
the Town’s representative.
Chapter 96. Parks and Recreation Department
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town Council of the Town of East Hampton 8-22-1989 (Ord. No. 12.01).
Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and recreation — See Ch. 246.
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 49/200
A.
B.
A.
[1]
B.
§ 96-1. Establishment; responsibilities.
There is hereby established a Parks and Recreation Department which shall be responsible for
providing balanced recreational programs for the inhabitants of the Town, and the care, maintenance
and management of parks and grounds assigned to said Department.
§ 96-2. Parks and Recreation Director.
The Parks and Recreation Director shall be head of the Department established in § 96-1, and
shall be appointed by the Town Manager as prescribed by Section 3.3 of the East Hampton Town
Charter, as amended.
The Parks and Recreation Director shall be responsible for the proper operation of the Department
and programs and shall supervise all personnel assigned thereto. The Parks and Recreation
Director shall perform all other duties as prescribed by the job description for the position under
the general direction of the Town Manager. All incumbent personnel, including the Director, upon
the adoption of this chapter, shall continue employment without interruption, and shall maintain the
longevity and seniority that they enjoyed prior to the adoption of this chapter.
§ 96-3. Annual budget; disposition of revenues.
Each year, at such time or times that the Town Manager shall prescribe, the Parks and Recreation
Director shall prepare and submit to the Town Manager an estimated budget for the operation of the
Parks and Recreation Department, together with any other information for the ensuing fiscal year. Said
Department shall operate within the appropriations made by the Town for its purposes, and all
revenues collected by the Department shall be promptly deposited in the Town Treasury.
§ 96-4. Parks and Recreation Advisory Board.
There shall be a Parks and Recreation Advisory Board which shall consist of seven electors of the
Town who shall serve without pay except for reimbursement of necessary expenses. Not more
than five of said electors shall be members of the same political party. All members shall be
appointed by the Town Council for three-year overlapping terms. All incumbent members of the
Parks and Recreation Advisory Commission existing prior to the amendment of this chapter shall
be considered appointed to the Advisory Board established herein and shall continue in office until
their present terms expire.
[Amended 6-8-1999]
The Parks and Recreation Advisory Board shall work with the Director and periodically advised the
Town Council on long-range needs for public parks, playgrounds, swimming pools and places,
athletic fields, public gardens and other recreational sites, including equipment and facilities used
in connection therewith as now or may hereafter be established, whether within or without the
corporate limits of the Town, which regulations shall be enforced as hereinafter provided. Said
Board shall also advise the Town Council on necessary rules and regulations for the care and
management of the aforementioned sites and facilities, or the Town Council by resolution or
ordinance may delegate the power to adopt such rules and regulations to said Board. Said Board
shall elect its own officers, which shall include a Chairman and Vice Chairman, and shall
determine their own rules of procedures. Said Board shall hold regular and special meetings as
necessary and may conduct informational hearings for public input, all in conformance with the
Freedom of Information Act.[1]
Editor's Note: See C.G.S. § 1-200 et seq.
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 50/200
A.
B.
Chapter 100. Personnel Policies
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Selectmen of the Town of East Hampton 8-22-1989 (Ord. No.
12.09). Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Salaries — See Ch. 125.
Terms of office — See Ch. 130.
§ 100-1. Purpose and applicability.
Pursuant to Section 3.3 of the Town Charter, as amended, all employees of the Town, except
employees of the Board of Education, shall be appointed based upon merit and fitness alone or
removed for cause. Pursuant to Section 2.4 of the Town Charter, as amended, the Town Council,
hereinafter referred to as "Council," shall adopt and revise as necessary a uniform Personnel Policy for
all employees of the Town, except employees of the Board of Education. The provisions of this chapter
shall apply to all municipal employees except employees of the Board of Education and shall set forth
uniform guidelines concerning personnel.
§ 100-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
DEPARTMENT HEAD OR SUPERVISOR
Any appointed employee who has direct supervision and responsibility for personnel, records,
funds, maintenance and service to be performed by a municipal department.
FULL-TIME EMPLOYEE
Any person who works year round in excess of 20 hours per week. "Regular full-time employee"
and "full-time employee" mean the same thing.
PART-TIME EMPLOYEE
Any person who works fewer than 1,040 hours per year.
TOWN COUNCIL (also referred to as "COUNCIL")
The seven-member elected legislative and policy-making body of the Town of East Hampton
established pursuant to the Town Charter. For purposes of this chapter, prior to the Town election
of November 7, 1989, "Council" shall also mean "Board of Selectmen."
TOWN MANAGER
The chief executive and administrative officer of the Town appointed pursuant to the Town Charter
and the designated appointing authority for all municipal employees except employees of the
Board of Education.
§ 100-3. Employment of personnel.
All employees shall be appointed in the manner prescribed by Town Charter, as authorized by the
annual budget or by approval of appropriations, to perform necessary duties as outlined in each
job description.
The Town Manager shall authorize such examinations, tests, interviews, background
investigations and other methods to select personnel by merit and fitness for the position,
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 51/200
[1]
including a review of an applicant's work history and qualifications. A physical exam shall be
required of all newly hired full-time employees.
§ 100-4. Dismissal.
Any employee may be dismissed for just cause. An employee who is dismissed shall be given written
notice of the reasons for the dismissal action, copies of which notice shall be retained by the Town
Manager in the employee's personnel file.
§ 100-5. Outside employment.
No municipal employee shall engage in any outside employment which will impair the performance of
his duties or be detrimental to the municipal service.
§ 100-6. Grievance.
Employees with any grievances arising out of their employment by the Town, except requests for the
general wage increase, shall have the right of appeal to their immediate department supervisor. Appeal
shall be made in writing and may be presented by the employee individually or by said employee's
selected representative. In the event the grievance cannot be settled between the department
supervisor and the employee, or his selected representative, the department supervisor shall submit a
report in writing to the Town Manager, whose decision shall be final in the matter.
§ 100-7. Retirement.
Normal retirement from municipal duty for personnel shall be at the age of 65, and the day of such
retirement shall be the last day of the month in which the employee's 65th birthday is attained.
However, an employee may continue to work past his normal retirement date to the extent provided by
state and federal law.
§ 100-8. Affirmative action.
The Town of East Hampton shall take whatever steps are necessary to ensure compliance with the
Connecticut Fair Employment Practices Act,[1] Equal Employment and Opportunities Act, and all other
applicable federal and state laws concerning municipal employees.
Editor's Note: See C.G.S. § 46a-51 et seq.
Chapter 104. Planning and Zoning Commission
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town of East Hampton as indicated in article histories. Amendments noted
where applicable.]
Article I. Establishment
[Adopted 2-24-1981 STM (Ord. No. 3.01)]
§ 104-1. Planning Commission to act as Planning and Zoning
Commission.
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 52/200
A.
B.
The Planning Commission of the Town of East Hampton is hereby designated as the Planning and
Zoning Commission, which shall have all the powers and duties of both a Planning Commission and
Zoning Commission authorized under the laws of the State of Connecticut.
§ 104-2. Membership; appointment.
The Planning and Zoning Commission shall consist of seven members who shall be electors of the
Town of East Hampton holding no salaried municipal office. Members of the Commission shall be
appointed by the Town Council.
§ 104-3. Terms.
On the effective date of this article, all present members of the Planning Commission shall be
appointed to the Planning and Zoning Commission as follows: member with present term expiring
January 10, 1982, shall be appointed with term expiring December 31, 1981; member with present
term expiring January 10, 1983, shall be appointed with term expiring December 31, 1982;
member with present term expiring January 10, 1984, shall be appointed with term expiring
December 31, 1983; member with present term expiring January 10, 1985, shall be appointed with
term expiring December 1984; member with present term expiring January 10, 1986, shall be
appointed with term expiring December 31, 1985. The Town Council shall appoint two additional
members as follows: one term expiring December 31, 1984, and one term expiring December 31,
1985.
Upon the expiration of the initial terms, subsequent appointments shall be for the term of five
years, commencing on the first day of January.
§ 104-4. Vacancies.
Vacancies shall be filled by the Town Council for the unexpired portion of the term.
§ 104-5. Dissolution of Zoning Commission; disposition of Zoning
Commission rules and regulations.
Upon the adoption of this article and the appointment of a Planning and Zoning Commission
hereunder, the present Zoning Commission shall cease to exist, and its books and records shall be
turned over to the Planning and Zoning Commission established hereunder, provided all regulations
promulgated by the present Zoning Commission shall continue in full force and effect until modified,
repealed or suspended in accordance with the provisions of the Connecticut General Statutes, as
amended.
§ 104-6. Officers; rules; records.
The Commission established hereunder shall elect a Chairman and Secretary from its members, shall
adopt rules for the transaction of its business, and shall keep a public record of its activities.
§ 104-7. Minority representation.
There shall be minority representation in accordance with Connecticut General Statutes, as amended,
on the Planning and Zoning Commission.
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 53/200
Article II. Alternate Members
[Adopted 2-24-1981]
§ 104-8. Panel of alternates; terms.
There is hereby established a panel of alternates to the Planning and Zoning Commission consisting of
three electors of the Town of East Hampton who shall be appointed by the Town Council. At the time of
original appointment, one member shall be appointed to serve until December 31, 1981, one member
until December 31, 1982, one member until December 31,1983, and each successor shall be
appointed for a term of two years commencing on the first day of January.
§ 104-9. Powers and duties.
Any member of the panel of alternates shall, when designated to act for any member of the Planning
and Zoning Commission as provided in § 8-1b of the General Statutes of Connecticut, as amended,
have all the powers and duties of a member of the Planning and Zoning Commission.
§ 104-10. Vacancies.
The unexpired term of any alternate shall be filled by appointment of the Town Council.
§ 104-11. Minority representation.
There shall be minority representation per State statute requirements on the panel of alternates to the
Planning and Zoning Commission.
Chapter 109. Police Department
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Special Town Meeting of the Town of East Hampton 5-22-1989 (Ord. No.
8.01). Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 109-1. Establishment; purpose.
Pursuant to § 7-148(c)(4)(A) of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended, there is hereby
established a Police Department for the Town of East Hampton, which shall have all the powers and
duties of a municipal police department conferred by state statutes and local ordinances for the
purpose of police protection and law enforcement.
§ 109-2. Appointments.
Pursuant to Town Charter, based upon merit and fitness alone, the Town Manager shall appoint a Chief
of Police and all sworn law enforcement officers for the Department.
§ 109-3. Powers and duties of Chief of Police.
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 54/200
The Chief of Police, subject to such rules and regulations as are adopted by the Town Council, shall
have general management, administrative and supervisory control over all operations of the
Department. The Chief of Police shall be the traffic authority for the Town of East Hampton.
§ 109-4. Transfer of authority.
The ordinance adopted in June 1963 establishing a Board of Police Commissioners is hereby repealed
upon the effective date of this chapter. All incumbent police officers, including the Chief of Police, shall
continue to hold rank, and all such equipment assigned to the Commission shall hereby be
permanently transferred to the department established by this chapter.
§ 109-5. Effective date.
This chapter shall take effect upon the election of a Town Council on November 7, 1989.
Chapter 113. Property, Disposition of
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Selectmen of the Town of East Hampton 11-26-1985 (Ord. No.
8.03). Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 113-1. Purpose.
Pursuant to § 50-9 of the Connecticut General Statutes, this chapter covers the provisions of §§ 50-10
through 50-14 of the Connecticut General Statutes with respect to lost, found and unclaimed property
and provides for the expedient disposition of said property within said Town of East Hampton.
§ 113-2. Duties of finder; penalties for offenses.
Any person who finds and takes possession of any article of the value of $1 or more shall report the
finding of such article to the East Hampton Police Department within 48 hours from the time of such
finding. The finder of such article shall, at the time of reporting, furnish to the East Hampton Police
Department the date, time and place of finding, his name and address and a description of the article
found and, within a period of one week from such finding, shall deliver such article to the East
Hampton Police Department. Any person who violates or fails to comply with the provisions of this
section shall be fined not more than $100 or imprisoned not more than 30 days, or both.
§ 113-3. Advertising; sale of perishable goods.
The East Hampton Police Department shall, commencing within one week from the date of receipt of
any lost article, advertise a general description of such article once a week for at least two successive
weeks in a newspaper having a circulation in the Town of East Hampton and shall retain custody of
such article for six months from the date of receipt thereof, unless it is claimed by the rightful owner
within such six-month period. The requirement of advertising may be omitted when the value or
estimated value of the article is less than $2. Perishable or obnoxious property or articles of a
dangerous or harmful nature may be sold or otherwise disposed of as soon as practicable on the best
terms available.
§ 113-4. Restoration to owner if claimed.
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 55/200
[1]
[1]
A.
B.
C.
D.
If the owner of any such article claims it within six months from the date of receipt by the East Hampton
Police Department, the article or the proceeds thereof shall be restored to him upon payment or
deduction of all proper charges.
§ 113-5. Procedure if unclaimed.
If no owner claims such article within six months from the receipt thereof by the East Hampton Police
Department, the Police Department shall, within two weeks thereafter, notify the finder of such fact by
registered or certified mail sent to his last known address, and the article or the proceeds thereof shall
be turned over to the finder, upon demand by him within 30 days from the expiration of the six-month
period and upon payment or deduction of all proper charges; but if such finder fails to demand such
article or the proceeds thereof or refuses to pay such charges within 30 days from the expiration of the
six-month period, such article or proceeds shall belong to such municipality. The requirement of
notification may be omitted when the value or estimated value of the article is less than $5.
§ 113-6. Disposition after expiration of time for making claim.
The East Hampton Police Department shall sell at public auction any articles which it acquires as
provided herein after the expiration of the time for the owner or finder to demand the same and after
the time and place of such sale and a description of the articles to be sold have been advertised once
a week for two successive weeks in a newspaper having a circulation in such municipality. The net
proceeds from such sales and the unclaimed net proceeds from the sales of perishable or obnoxious
property or articles of a dangerous or harmful nature shall be paid to the Director of Finance of the
Town of East Hampton, who shall deposit them in the general fund.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
Chapter 117. Purchasing
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town Council of the Town of East Hampton 1-23-2018[1]. Amendments
noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Code of Ethics — See Ch. E.
Editor's Note: This ordinance also superseded former Ch. 117, Purchasing, adopted 10-30-2001 (Ord.
No. 12.07), as amended.
§ 117-1. Declaration of policy.
It is the intent of the Town to provide consistent rules for the purchase of equipment, services,
supplies and materials to facilitate efficient municipal operations and to provide fairness to all
parties, including but not limited to individuals, corporations, or government agencies whose
equipment, services and supplies are purchased by the Town of East Hampton, including the
Board of Education. Purchases shall be made considering price, quality and availability as
important determining factors in the selection of equipment, services and supplies.
Where federal or state law or regulations including grant requirements require other procedures,
such other procedures will be followed in lieu of those specified within this policy.
The Town Council may delegate its responsibility under this chapter to other Town boards and
committees.
Responsibility for compliance. Compliance with this purchasing policy shall be monitored as
follows:
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 56/200
(1)
(2)
The Town Manager shall bear primary, nondelegable responsibility for ensuring compliance
with this policy. The Superintendent of Schools shall bear primary, nondelegable responsibility
for ensuring compliance with this policy for purchases made by the Board of Education
(BOE).
All employees, including department heads, supervisors and any other authorized personnel
who make purchases for the Town are responsible for following the provisions outlined in this
policy and the purchasing procedures manual when making purchases with Town funds.
§ 117-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated as follows:
BID/REQUEST FOR PROPOSAL (RFP)
A notice in writing in a sealed envelope delivered to the Town Manager (or designee) or
Superintendent of Schools (or designee), as the case may be, by a specified date, to be opened in
public at a specified date and time by the Town Manager (or designee) or by the Superintendent of
Schools (or designee), as the case may be, whereby a vendor informs the Town of the price for
which he/she shall furnish supplies, materials, equipment, or services to the Town.
CAPITAL EQUIPMENT
Equipment, including rolling stock, vehicles, machinery, etc., other than supplies, which is used to
provide a service to the community.
LEGAL SERVICES
Services provided by firms and individuals licensed to practice law in the State of Connecticut.
MATERALS
Basic ingredients in a relatively raw, unrefined or unmanufactured state that may be worked into a
more finished form (i.e., sand, wood, asphalt).
PROFESSIONAL ENGINEERING
A person or firm who is licensed to practice in the State of Connecticut and qualified by reason of
his knowledge of mathematics, the physical sciences and the principles of engineering, acquired
by professional education and practical experience, to engage in engineering practice, including
rendering or offering to render to clients any professional service such as consultation,
investigation, evaluation, planning, design or responsible supervision of construction, in
connection with any public or privately owned structures, buildings, machines, equipment,
processes, works or projects in which the public welfare or the safeguarding of life, public health or
property is concerned or involved.
QUALIFIED
Meeting such qualifications as the Town may set forth in its requests for bids, quotations, or
proposals.
QUOTATION
A notice, in writing, whereby a vendor informs the Town of the price for which he/she will furnish
supplies, materials, equipment or services to the Town. A written promise from a supplier, vendor,
contractor or professional guaranteeing the cost of specific supplies, materials, equipment or
services. Any and all quotes deemed not to be in the best interests of the Town may be rejected,
and any quote deemed to be in its best interests may be accepted.
RESPONSIBLE
Having the experience and financial strengths, in the reasonable judgment of the Town, necessary
to perform in the delivery of services, materials, equipment or supplies.
SERVICES
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 57/200
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
C.
D.
E.
F.
Contractual services rendered to the Town by a vendor.
STUDENT EDUCATIONAL
Tuition paid to public or private institutions as well as special education services provided to
children as identified in the child's Individualized Educational Program (IEP).
SUPPLIES
Goods in a manufactured state kept in the ordinary course of business for regular use or
consumption.
TOWN
All Town agencies, including the Board of Education and excluding Town of Colchester-Town of
East Hampton joint facilities ("joint facilities").
§ 117-3. Purchases of capital equipment, services, materials and
supplies.
All purchases in excess of $2,000 require a purchase order, standing purchase order or requisition.
The following requirements shall govern the purchase of supplies, equipment and services:
If the estimated value is less than $10,000, the department or agency head may make the
purchase after careful review of the most competitive price considering the quality of the proposed
purchased items.
If the estimated value is equal to or greater than $10,000 but less than $20,000, the purchase may
be made with the approval of the Town Manager or his designee (or in the case of Board of
Education purchases, the Superintendent of Schools or his designee) after the department head
or agency head has received at least three written quotations, and the purchase shall be the
lowest qualified and responsible quote. If for any reason three quotes are not obtained, the
purchase may be made after providing written documentation for the files, indicating why three
quotes could not be obtained.
If the estimated value is equal to or greater than $20,000, the purchase shall generally be made
from the lowest qualified and responsible bidder using a sealed bid procedure described in § 117-
5 below, with two exceptions hereafter described. The award shall be made by the Town Council
or, in the case of education purchases, the Board of Education, unless it is a joint bid with another
Town agency, in which case the Council shall make the award.
The first exception is where the proposal of the lowest qualified and responsible bidder
exceeds the Town's budget for the item, in which case the Town may reject all proposals by
majority vote of the Town Council or Board of Education, as the case may be.
The second exception applies where it is deemed to be in the best interests of the Town of
East Hampton to make the award to a bidder other than the lowest qualified and responsible
bidder. This latter exception requires an affirmative vote of 3/4 of the elected membership of
the Town Council at a regular or special meeting.
Contracts for service and/or maintenance shall be acquired or bid in accordance with the
provisions of this section. Such contracts may be entered for periods renewable on a month-tomonth
basis and shall be terminable upon written thirty-day notice by the Town/Board of Education
or the vendor/supplier. Such contracts shall remain in effect until such termination and shall not
require quotation or rebid until such termination.
Splitting of contracts to avoid any of the limits of this section shall be prohibited.
Consulting services shall be acquired through a request for proposal process, unless a written
justification is provided to the Town Council or Board of Education that a single source is uniquely
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 58/200
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
L.
M.
[1]
A.
qualified to provide the desired services.
§ 117-4. Exemptions.
The items listed below will not require sealed bids and are exempt from the requirements of § 117-3,
but do require Town Manager approval or, in the case of education purchases, the Superintendent of
Schools:
Legal, physician, professional engineering and student educational services. Auditing services
shall be exempt and shall be approved by the Board of Finance.
Purchases made from any agency or office of the federal, state or local government or other
governmental unit, or nonprofit organization or sole-source supplier shall be exempt.
Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the Town from purchasing items under state bids and/or
contracts and/or participation in regional purchasing councils who have used a sealed bid
procedure.
Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the Town from contracting for repairs of an immediate nature
for health and safety reasons and to prevent damage or injury.
Materials. When multiple suppliers of material are not within the transportable range, the Public
Works Department shall seek to obtain the best price within the transportable range.
Existing maintenance or service contracts which have no fixed duration shall remain in effect on a
renewable basis and shall not be subject to the acquisition and/or bid requirements outlined in
§ 117-3 until such time as said contract is terminated in accordance with § 117-3D.
Purchases of used equipment where comparable bids are unavailable, and it has been
determined by the Town Manager that the purchase of a particular piece of equipment is of good
value to the Town, shall be exempt.
Services furnished by a monopoly utility.
Annual maintenance agreements that are provided by a specialized vendor for specialized types
of equipment, i.e., telephone or computer system service contract.
Those exempted or determined by law.
On-line reverse auctions pursuant to State Public Act 08-141, approved June 5, 2008.
Items that will maintain consistency with other like items previously purchased.
The purchase of surety bonds and insurance shall be exempt
§ 117-5. Sealed bid procedure.
All requests for bids shall be advertised in a newspaper suitable for notifying multiple prospective
bidders or advertised on the State of Connecticut Department of Administrative Services Web
page.[1] When necessary, the Town shall also directly solicit potential qualified sources for bids.
The goal shall be to obtain at least three bids. If, however, after due diligence has been exercised,
fewer than three bids have been received, the Town may award the contract if it is in the best
interest of the Town.
Editor's Note: The Department of Administrative Services Web page can be accessed at
www.das.state.ctus.
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 59/200
B.
C.
[1]
A.
B.
A copy of the invitation to bid or the legal notice will be posted at the Town Hall in the office of the
Town Clerk until the bids have been opened.
Bid documents shall be available to all firms indicating an interest in bidding. A fee may or may not
be charged for bid documents.
§ 117-6. Insurance and licensing requirements.
All parties employed by the Town to perform work on Town-owned property shall carry the required
level of insurance coverage, indemnity, and hold the Town harmless. The Town shall be named as
additional insured on the insurance certificate. When required by law (such as the trades, etc.), all
parties performing work for the Town shall have and maintain the required licenses and/or certifications
to perform such work.
§ 117-7. Waivers.
With a vote of 3/4 of the elected membership of the Town Council, at a regular or special meeting, the
Town Council may waive the bidding procedure with regard to any purchase upon finding that such
waiver is in the best interest of the Town. Such waiver shall include in the record the reasons for the
Council's action. Public notice shall be given at least seven days in advance of any vote to consider a
waiver of the bidding procedure.
§ 117-8. Nondiscrimination.
Purchasing shall be conducted without regard to the political affiliation, race, sex, age, religion, national
origin, disability, familial relationship or business associations of vendors and/or contractors. All
purchasing will comply with the provisions of applicable state and federal laws pertaining to civil rights,
equal opportunity and affirmative action.
§ 117-9. Conflicts of interest.
The Ethics Resolution as adopted and amended by the Town Council shall be applicable to this
chapter.[1]
Editor's Note: See Ch. E, Code of Ethics.
§ 117-10. Local vendor preference.
For all bids and quotes submitted for purchases exceeding $20,000, any qualified and registered
local vendor who has submitted a bid or quote not more than 5% higher than the lowest qualified
bid or quote will be awarded the contract or purchase order, so long as such local vendor agrees
to provide the goods or services which are the subject of such contract or purchase order at the
same price as the lowest qualified bid or quote received. In the event that more than one local
vendor submits a bid or quote not more than 5% higher than the lowest qualified bid or quote, the
award shall be to that local vendor originally submitting the lowest qualified bid or quote.
For purposes of this section, a qualified and registered local vendor is defined as one who
maintains a principal place of business within the Town limits of East Hampton by occupying real
property in which to conduct such business or by paying ad valorem taxes on business property to
the Town. Evidence of the maintenance of such principal place of business may include the
ownership or long-term lease of real estate from which the principal place of the business is
operated or the payment of property taxes on the personal property of the business to be used in
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 60/200
C.
[1]
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
the performance of the bid. This section shall not apply in any situation where the preference
created by this section would violate federal or state law or any existing contracts.
This section shall not apply in those instances where the bid requested involves a cooperation
purchasing arrangement between the Town and other municipalities or the State of Connecticut.
Chapter 120. Brownfields Redevelopment Agency
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town Council of the Town of East Hampton 3-10-2009.[1] Amendments
noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Code of Conduct — See Ch. D.
Code of Ethics — See Ch. E.
Economic Development Commission — See Ch. 33.
Planning and Zoning Commission — See Ch. 104.
Editor's Note: This ordinance also superseded former Ch. 120, Redevelopment Agency, adopted 4-10-
2007.
§ 120-1. Brownfields Redevelopment Agency created; powers
and duties.
There is hereby created a Brownfields Redevelopment Agency for the Town in accordance with
§ 8-126 of the Connecticut General Statutes, Revision of 1958, as amended, said agency to be
known as the "East Hampton Brownfields Redevelopment Agency." The Agency shall have any
and all rights, powers, duties and obligations now or hereafter provided for redevelopment
agencies by the Connecticut General Statutes.
The Brownfields Redevelopment Agency is also empowered to undertake environmental
assessments and remediation activities as funded or directed by the EPA, DEP or any other
federal or state agency or as otherwise directed by the Town Manager.
§ 120-2. Membership; term; removal of members.
The Agency shall be composed of seven electors resident in the Town, appointed by the Town
Manager as the chief executive officer of the Town and approved by the Town Council.
Of the members of the Agency first appointed, one member shall be designated to serve for one
year; one member shall be designated to serve for two years; one member shall be designated to
serve for three years; two members shall be designated to serve for four years; and two members
shall be designated to serve for five years; with each term terminating on June 30 of the
respective year. All subsequent appointments of members shall be for terms of five years,
commencing on July 1 of the respective year. Each member shall serve until such member's
successor is appointed and qualified. Any vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired term in the
manner of original appointment.
Any member of the Agency may be removed by the Town Manager for cause and, on request of
such member, after public hearing.
§ 120-3. Officers.
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 61/200
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
Annually at its first meeting on or after July 1, the Agency shall select from among its members a
Chairman, a Vice Chairman and such other officers it deems necessary.
§ 120-4. Meetings; rules of procedure; majority of Agency
members necessary to act.
The Agency shall hold meetings at a fixed and regular time and place, and all such meetings,
whether regular, adjourned or special, shall be held at an accessible place and shall be open to
the public.
The Agency shall adopt rules of procedure for the governance of its meetings, and shall have the
power to make rules and regulations for the transaction of its business.
Action by the Agency shall be taken only on a majority vote of all of the members of the Agency.
§ 120-5. Records; reports.
The Agency shall keep records of its meetings and other activities.
The Agency shall annually on or before July 1 prepare and transmit to the Town Council a report
of its activities for and an itemized account of all receipts and disbursements from the prior fiscal
year, and of its projected activities for the fiscal year then commencing. The Agency shall make
such special reports as the Town Council may request from time to time.
§ 120-6. Compensation.
The members of the Agency shall serve without compensation, but shall be reimbursed for their
necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their official duties.
§ 120-7. Coordination with other Town bodies.
The Agency shall coordinate its activities with the Planning and Zoning Commission, the Economic
Development Commission, and other interested officials and agencies of the Town, and the Agency
may invite to attend and participate in its meetings and deliberations, but without vote, any person not
a member of the Agency.
§ 120-8. Support staff.
The Agency shall be empowered to recommend to the Town Manager the appointment of Town
employees necessary or desirable for the discharge of the Agency's duties.
§ 120-9. Appropriations.
In the performance of its duties and in the exercise of its powers aforesaid, the Agency shall not incur
any expenses or obligate the Town to pay any expense in excess of the funds appropriated for such
purpose.
§ 120-10. When effective.
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 62/200
This chapter shall be effective 20 days after publication as provided by the Town Charter.
Chapter 125. Salaries
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town of East Hampton as indicated in article histories. Amendments noted
where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Code of Conduct — See Ch. D.
Code of Ethics — See Ch. E.
Personnel policies — See Ch. 100.
Article I. Town Clerk
[Adopted by the Board of Selectmen 3-27-1979 (Ord. No. 12.10)]
§ 125-1. Receipt of salary in lieu of fees.
The Town Clerk, effective January 7, 1980, will receive a salary in lieu of any and all fees and other
compensation provided for in the General Statutes.
Chapter 130. Terms of Office
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town of East Hampton as indicated in article histories. Amendments noted
where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Personnel policies — See Ch. 100.
Article I. Board of Education
[Adopted 11-18-1988 (Ord. No. 2.04); amended 3-27-1990; 7-9-1996]
§ 130-1. Terms established.
Pursuant to § 9-206(b) of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended, members elected to the
Board of Education shall serve for four-year overlapping terms.
§ 130-2. Number of members.
The Board of Education shall continue to have nine members as provided by law.
§ 130-3. Implementation of four-year terms; term limits.
Commencing with the Town election in November 1989, one member shall be elected to a two-year
term and two members shall be elected to four-year terms, to replace members whose terms are
expiring. Thereafter, at each biennial election, all members shall be elected to four-year terms to
replace members whose terms are expiring so that every two years either four or five members are
elected to four-year terms. No member shall be elected to more than two consecutive terms.
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 63/200
§ 130-4. Election of members.
Commencing with the Town election in November 1997, the provisions of § 9-204b of the Connecticut
General Statutes are hereby adopted.
Article II. Assessor
[Adopted by the Board of Selectmen 11-22-1988 (Ord. No. 1.04)]
§ 130-5. Appointment and removal.
Based upon merit and fitness alone, and in conformance with Section 3.3 of the East Hampton Town
Charter as amended, the Town Manager shall appoint for an indefinite term, or remove for cause, an
Assessor.
Article III. Board of Finance
[Adopted by the Board of Selectmen 11-22-1988 (Ord. No. 2.03)]
§ 130-6. Membership; terms; party affiliation.
Pursuant to Section 5.1 of the East Hampton Town Charter as amended, there shall be a Board of
Finance consisting of seven members who shall be elected to four-year overlapping terms. Not more
than five members shall be of the same political party.
§ 130-7. Implementation of four-year terms; term limits.
Commencing with the Town election in November 1989, one member shall be elected to a four-year
term. All other members elected and serving as of November 1989, shall continue in office until their
terms expire so that three members shall be elected to four-year terms in November 1991, and four
members shall be elected to four-year terms in November 1993. No member shall serve more than two
consecutive terms.
Article IV. (Reserved)
§ 130-8. (Reserved)
Chapter 134. Town Meetings
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town of East Hampton as indicated in article histories. Amendments noted
where applicable.]
Article I. Moderators
[Adopted by the Board of Selectmen 4-11-1989 (Ord. No. 2.02)]
§ 134-1. Appointment; terms.
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 64/200
Following each Town biennial election, the Town Council shall appoint two Town Meeting Moderators,
whose terms shall run concurrently with the Town Council.
§ 134-2. Party affiliation.
Each Moderator shall be of the opposite political parties or one may be unaffiliated.
§ 134-3. Qualifications.
The Town Council shall make its appointment giving due consideration to the experience and ability of
the candidates and the candidates' familiarity with the conduct of public meetings under state and local
laws and Roberts Rules of Order.
§ 134-4. Deputies.
The Moderators, when so appointed, may appoint Deputy Moderators to serve in their absence or
disability.
§ 134-5. Service at Town Meeting.
Whenever a Town Meeting is to be held, the Chairman of the Council shall select the Moderator to
serve that particular Town Meeting.
Chapter 138. Transfer Station
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Special Town Meeting of the Town of East Hampton 7-27-1987 (Ord. No.
4.10). Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Solid waste — See Ch. 269.
§ 138-1. Establishment.
The Town of East Hampton shall maintain a permanent public waste transfer station by September 1,
1987.
§ 138-2. Hours of operation; authorized users.
Said transfer station shall be open at least three days a week, including Saturday, for use by the
residents of East Hampton.
Chapter 143. Vacancies
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town Council of the Town of East Hampton 2-22-2005 (Ord. No. 12.12).
Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 143-1. Incumbent to hold office until position filled by Council.
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 65/200
[1]
Whenever a vacancy occurs on a Town board, commission or agency due to the expiration of the term
of office for that position, which position is designated to be filled by the Town Council, and the Town
Council fails to take action to fill such vacancy in a timely manner, then the incumbent may continue to
hold office for up to 90 days following the expiration of his/her term if he/she is ready, willing, and able
to do so, or until he/she has been reappointed or his/her successor has been duly appointed and
qualified, whichever occurs first. Any incumbent unwilling or unable to continue to hold office for said
ninety-day period shall give written notice to the Town Manager, upon receipt of which his/her office
shall expire.
Chapter 146. Water and Sewer Authority
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Special Town Meeting of the Town of East Hampton 5-23-1967 (Ord. No.
4.02). Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewer construction — See Ch. 261.
Sewer use — See Ch. 264.
Water system construction — See Ch. 295.
Water system use — See Ch. 299.
§ 146-1. Creation; powers and duties.
The Town of East Hampton hereby creates a Water and Sewer Commission, and designates said
Commission as the Water and Sewer Authority of the Town of East Hampton with all the powers,
purposes and objectives set forth in Chapters 102 and 103 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as
amended, and grants such Commission power to construct and operate a water distribution system
within the Town of East Hampton, subject to the provisions of Chapters 102 and 103 of such statutes.
§ 146-2. Membership; terms; vacancies.
[Amended 12-2-1976 STM; 2-8-1980 STM; 7-29-1987 STM]
Said Commission shall consist of seven electors of the Town of East Hampton, who shall be appointed
by the Town Council and serve without compensation. The seven members shall serve for terms of five
years. When terms end or resignations occur after June 30, 1987, the Town Council shall allow two
positions to remain vacant to reduce the membership from nine to seven members. Terms shall expire
on June 30 in each year. Whenever a vacancy occurs, the Council shall appoint a successor to hold
office for the unexpired portion of the term. A Commissioner shall continue in office until his successor
is appointed.
§ 146-3. Appointments.
[Added 4-9-2013[1]]
Pursuant to Town Charter Sections 3.2 and 3.3, based upon merit and fitness alone, the Town
Manager shall appoint a Public Utilities Administrator to oversee the day-to-day operations of the
Water Pollution Control Authority.
Editor's Note: This legislation also renumbered former §§ 146-3 through 146-5 as §§ 146-4 through
146-6, respectively.
§ 146-4. Officers; minutes; meetings.
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 66/200
[1]
The Commission shall elect a Chairman from among its own members at the first meeting and
annually thereafter at the first meeting held after the first day of July in each year. The Commission
shall appoint a Clerk, who need not be a member of the Commission, an attorney, and such other
employees as it may deem necessary, and shall prescribe and define their duties. The Clerk shall keep
a complete record of the proceedings of the Commission and, when ordered by the Commission, shall
file the same with the Town Clerk. All such records shall be open for public inspection at reasonable
hours. Meetings of the Commission may be called by the Chairman or any two members upon 24
hours' notice thereof.
§ 146-5. Records; annual report; budget.
The Commission shall maintain proper accounting and financial records, and shall make an annual
report to the Council. The Commission shall prepare annually a budget of estimated revenue and
expenditures for the ensuing fiscal year.
§ 146-6. Removal of Commissioners.
A Commissioner may be removed for inefficiency or neglect of duty or misconduct in office by the Town
Council after a hearing conforming to recognized standards of due process of law; a Commissioner
shall be removed only after opportunity to be heard in person or by counsel before the Town Council,
at least 10 days prior to which he shall have been given a copy of the charges against him. In the
event of the removal of any Commissioner, a record of the proceeding, together with the charges and
findings thereon, shall be filed in the office of the Town Clerk of East Hampton.
Chapter 152. Zoning Board of Appeals
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Special Town Meeting of the Town of East Hampton 11-6-1959 (Ord. No.
2.07). Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 152-1. Election; terms.
The regular members of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall continue to be elected at the regular
biennial elections for terms of five years. At the regular election of 1961 and biennially thereafter, there
shall be elected as many regular members as shall be necessary to fill the places of those whose
terms shall expire prior to the next succeeding biennial election.
§ 152-2. Alternate members.
At the regular biennial election in 1961 and quadrennially thereafter, three alternate members of the
Zoning Board of Appeals shall be elected for terms of four years from the dates of their election.
Pursuant to the authority contained in Section I of Public Act No. 146 of 1959,[1] the Town Council shall
appoint three alternate members for the period between the effective date of this chapter and the date
of the regular biennial election in 1961.
Editor's Note: See C.G.S. § 8-5.
Part II, General Legislation
Chapter 157. Alcoholic Beverages
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 67/200
A.
B.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town of East Hampton as indicated in article histories. Amendments noted
where applicable.]
Article I. Consumption in Public
[Adopted by the Town Council 7-10-1990]
§ 157-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR
The same meaning as in the Connecticut Liquor Control Act, § 30-1 et seq. of the Connecticut
General Statutes, as amended.
PARKED VEHICLE
The same meaning as in § 14-1 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
PARKING AREA
Lots, areas or other accommodations for the parking of motor vehicles off the street or highway
and open to public use with or without charge as defined by § 14-212 of the Connecticut General
Statutes, as amended.
POSSESSION WITH INTENT TO CONSUME
Having in one's possession or control alcoholic liquor in a glass, open bottle, open can or other
open container so as to permit consumption.
PUBLIC HIGHWAYS
All public highways within and under the control of the Town of East Hampton and shall also
include the sidewalks.
§ 157-2. Prohibited acts.
Except as permitted in § 157-3 hereof, no person shall consume or possess with intent to consume
any alcoholic liquor within the limits of any public highways, sidewalks or parking areas as they exist
within the Town of East Hampton. For purposes of this section, without limiting the generality of the
foregoing, possession with intent to consume alcoholic liquor in motor vehicles parked on said
premises shall also be deemed a violation hereof.
§ 157-3. Exceptions.
Persons may possess alcoholic liquor with the intent to consume and may consume alcoholic
liquor during any public function, festival or celebration without violating this article; provided,
however, that the Chief of Police or his/her designee has first given written authorization to permit
the service or distribution of alcoholic liquor at or in connection with such function, festival or
celebration. Such authorization may permit the possession or consumption of alcoholic liquor on a
continuing basis, provided that the Chief of Police or his designee is satisfied that such activity will
be supervised by an agent or employee of the Town.
Consumption or possession with intent to consume shall not be permitted in parked vehicles under
any circumstances.
§ 157-4. Penalties for offenses.
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 68/200
[1]
A.
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be fined not more than $100 for each offense.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
Chapter 161. Amusement Devices
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Selectmen of the Town of East Hampton 7-17-1981 (Ord. No.
13.03); amended 6-25-1982; 11-22-1988. Subsequent amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 161-1. Intent.
The regulation of the operation of mechanical/electronic amusement devices and the constant
supervision of the operation of such machines are hereby declared necessary for the protection of the
health, safety and morals of the residents of the Town of East Hampton.
§ 161-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ANNUAL LICENSE
A license issued pursuant to this ordinance and good up to and including the 31st day of
December following its issuance.
MECHANICAL/ELECTRONIC AMUSEMENT DEVICE
Any machine that, upon the insertion of a coin, slug or token, or upon payment of a charge,
releases an object which is propelled manually, mechanically, or electronically and which registers
scores, by striking pins, levers, or bumpers or by falling into holes or slots, or that, upon insertion
of a coin or slug or the payment of a charge, is operated to register a score or tally of any kind. It
shall include such devices as pin-ball or pin-game machines, computer games, television games,
coin-operated table games (i.e., hockey, soccer, bowling) and mechanical/electronic coin-operated
moving picture devices.
OPERATOR
Any person, firm, corporation, club, or association in whose place of business any such
mechanical/electronic amusement device is placed for use by the public, or anyone who may
arrange with the owner of a business or premises for the use of space in which any such
mechanical/electronic amusement device may be placed for the use by the public.
SEASONAL LICENSE
A license issued pursuant to this chapter and good for up to five months after the date of issuance.
§ 161-3. Gambling devices not permitted.
Nothing in this chapter shall in any way be construed to authorize or permit any gambling device
whatsoever or any mechanism that has been judicially determined to be a gambling device or in any
way contrary to law, or that may be contrary to any future laws of the State of Connecticut, including,
but not limited to, § 53-278a et seq. of the General Statutes.
§ 161-4. Licenses required.
Every operator shall obtain a license from the Chief of Police for each mechanical/electronic
amusement device in operation in his place of business.
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 69/200
B.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
A.
B.
[1]
A.
B.
Application for such licenses shall be made to the Chief of Police upon forms to be supplied by
him for that purpose.
§ 161-5. Application.
The application for such a license shall contain the following information under oath:
Name of applicant(s): if a partnership, names of all partners; if a corporation, club or association,
names of officers; if applicant is an agent, the principal or real party in interest shall be disclosed
and such person or persons shall be considered an applicant or applicants for purposes hereof;
Residence of applicants;
Age of applicants; if a corporation, club or association, date organized and under laws of what
state;
Type of business or activity;
Whether applicants or, if a corporation, club or association, officers have ever been convicted of a
crime;
The place where a mechanical/electronic amusement device is to be displayed or operated and
the business or activity conducted at that place (this shall apply only to operators);
Description or type of mechanical/electronic amusement device to be covered by the license.
§ 161-6. Investigation of applicants.
The Chief of Police shall investigate the character and criminal record of the applicants and the
location wherein it is proposed to operate the mechanical/electronic amusement device or devices
described in the application and shall not approve said application or issue a license unless he
finds that the applicants are over 18 years of age and are persons of good moral character and
that the business or activity in such location is a bona fide and lawful one.
In any case of denial or refusal to grant or renew a license, the Chief of Police shall notify the
applicant in writing, by certified mail, return receipt requested, of his proposed action and set a
date, time and place for hearing thereon, giving the applicant not less than five business days'
notice in advance thereof and an opportunity to be represented by counsel, to testify or offer other
evidence, and to question any other person testifying at such hearing.
§ 161-7. Issuance: license fees; term.
If the investigation conducted under § 161-6 of this chapter indicates that a license or licenses
should issue, the Chief of Police shall issue in the name of such applicant such license or licenses
upon payment by said applicant of a fee for each annual license or a fee for each such seasonal
license to be issued pursuant to § 161-4 of this chapter in an amount as set from time to time by
the Town Council.[1]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
Such license fees shall become due and payable as of January first of each year. If in the event a
machine is placed in operation after the first of the year, the applicant shall pay a license fee to be
pro-rated from the first day of the month on which the machine is first placed in operation up to
and including the 31st day of December following. There shall be no rebate for any unexpired
portion of the term of a permit revoked by reason of a violation of any provision of this chapter.
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 70/200
C.
A.
B.
Each license issued shall be renewable upon request of the holder thereof not less than 15 days
prior to the expiration of the license sought to be renewed, upon payment of prescribed fee.
Notwithstanding the above, the Chief of Police reserves the right to make further investigation of
the applicant for a renewal license hereunder, and a determination thereon as set forth in § 161-6
of this chapter.
Any applicant that is a nonprofit corporation under the Internal Revenue Code, Section 501-C,
shall be exempt from payment of the fee for one mechanical/electronic amusement device upon
furnishing proof of same to the Chief of Police. All additional mechanical/electronic amusement
devices shall be subject to said fees.
[Added 9-25-1990]
§ 161-8. Display of licenses.
The license or licenses herein provided for shall be posted permanently and conspicuously at the
location of the mechanical/electronic amusement device or devices for which such license or
licenses have been issued. This location must in all respects conform to the location as stated in
the license.
Each license may be transferred, with notification to the Chief of Police, from one
mechanical/electronic amusement device of the same type without making separate application
therefor. Notwithstanding the above, the failure to notify the Chief of Police by written statement
containing a description of new machine of such transference within three business days shall be
deemed a violation of this chapter, and shall permit the revocation of such license.
§ 161-9. Prohibitions and restrictions; hours of operation.
Each operator, and each servant, agent and employee of each operator, shall maintain good order in
his place of business and not permit such mechanical/electronic amusement devices to be used for
gambling. No person under the age of 14 shall be harbored or allowed to congregate in said place of
business unless accompanied by his or her parent or legal guardian. The licensed operator, or his
approved designee, of any mechanical/electronic amusement device shall be available on the
premises during all hours during each day said devices are in operation. Any place of business
containing three or more mechanical/electronic amusement devices shall not operate such devices on
Sunday before 1:00 p.m., nor on any other day between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. on the
following day, except that such places of business may be permitted to operate such devices until
12:00 midnight on Fridays and Saturdays, upon prior notification to the Chief of Police. The provisions
of this section regarding hours of operation shall be applicable to any premises under the jurisdiction of
the Division of Liquor Control, State of Connecticut, provided permission for such devices has been
obtained from the proper authority.
§ 161-10. Revocation of license; appeals.
The Chief of Police shall have the power to revoke any license issued hereunder for cause in
accordance with the following procedures: The Chief of Police or his authorized representative shall
cause to be sent to the licensee by certified mail, return receipt requested, a notice of intent to revoke
license, which shall set forth the cause for such intended revocation, the place, date and time for a
hearing before the Chief of Police to be held thereon, which shall not be sooner than five business
days from the delivery of such notice, and a statement that the licensee shall be permitted to be
represented by counsel, to testify or offer other evidence, and to question any other person testifying at
such hearing. At the conclusion of such hearing, the Chief of Police shall issue a decision in writing as
to whether such license or licenses shall be revoked, and if the decision is to revoke, the Chief of
Police, or his authorized representative, may enter the premises and take possession of the license or
licenses if so revoked. A written decision to revoke shall also notify the licensee that he may appeal
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 71/200
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
A.
B.
C.
such decision to revoke to the Town Council within five business days. The license shall remain
revoked during any such appeal period. Cause shall be deemed to include, but shall not be limited to,
conviction of a crime involving moral turpitude subsequent to the issuance of the license, false
information in the application for a license knowingly given, or any violation of this chapter.
§ 161-11. Rules and regulations.
The following rules and regulations shall apply to operators and distributors of
mechanical/electronic amusement devices, and any violation thereof shall be deemed sufficient
cause for revocation and/or sufficient grounds for denial of an application for license or renewal
thereof:
No mechanical/electronic coin-operated moving picture devices or lewd behavior shall be
permitted in any place of business where licenses have been issued for the operation or
distribution of mechanical/electronic amusement devices.
All places of business in which mechanical/electronic amusement devices are sought to be
operated must comply with all firesafety and building and health codes, including, but not
limited to, provisions concerning maximum occupancy and proper exits.
No operator shall permit loitering within or adjacent to the premises in which a licensed
mechanical/electronic amusement device is operated. Each such operator shall provide
sufficient places for bicycles and other vehicles in a manner which leaves free for passage all
driveways and walkways within 50 feet of the premises.
The premises shall be of such construction or interior design so as to prevent the noises
emanating from the mechanical/electronic amusement devices from being heard by persons
at adjoining or nearby premises.
The Town of East Hampton reserves the right to amend this chapter to include other reasonable
rules and regulations which are reasonably necessary for the preservation of property, health,
safety and welfare of the citizens of East Hampton.
Any violation of the above rules and regulations shall be deemed to be a nuisance and shall
subject the applicant to proceedings in Superior Court to enjoin the activity or conditions creating
such nuisance, and the applicant shall be liable for costs of such suit and a reasonable attorney's
fee.
§ 161-12. Penalties for offenses.
Any person, firm, corporation or association operating any such mechanical/electronic amusement
device without a permit as required hereunder shall be fined not more than $100 for each offense.
Each date of violation shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 165. Animals
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town of East Hampton as indicated in article histories. Amendments noted
where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and recreation — See Ch. 246.
Solid waste — See Ch. 269.
Article I. Removal of Animal Waste
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 72/200
[Adopted by the Town Council 4-16-1999 (Ord. No. 8.06)]
§ 165-1. Removal required.
It shall be unlawful for any person owning, keeping, walking or in control of any dog or other animal to
allow or permit the animal to defecate upon any privately maintained property owned by another
person, condominium common elements, or Town-maintained property, including but not limited to
Town parks, playgrounds, and school grounds, unless such person shall, before leaving the immediate
premises, remove all feces so deposited by such animal and dispose of the feces in a proper manner.
§ 165-2. Penalties for offenses.
Any violation of this article shall be punishable by a fine of $50.
Chapter 169. Bazaars and Raffles
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Selectmen of the Town of East Hampton 9-13-1988 (Ord. No.
13.04). Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 169-1. State law provisions adopted.
The Town of East Hampton adopts the provisions of §§ 7-170 to 7-186, inclusive, of the Connecticut
General Statutes pertaining to bazaars and raffles.
Chapter 171. Blight and Nuisances
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town Council of the Town of East Hampton 11-13-2012. Amendments
noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building code — See Ch. 177.
Housing code — See Ch. 219.
§ 171-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to define, prohibit, and abate blight and nuisances and to protect,
preserve, and promote public health, safety, and welfare, and to preserve and protect property values.
§ 171-2. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply uniformly to the maintenance of all residential, nonresidential, and
undeveloped premises now in existence or hereafter constructed, maintained, or modified but shall
exclude agricultural lands as defined in § 22-3(b) of the Connecticut General Statutes, land dedicated
as public or semipublic open space or preserved in its natural state through conservation easements,
or areas designated as inland wetlands and watercourses.
§ 171-3. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this chapter.
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 73/200
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
A.
B.
C.
BLIGHTED PREMISES
Any building, structure, or parcel of land, except exempt property as defined below, in which at
least one of the following conditions exists:
It is dilapidated as documented by the Building Official;
It is a fire hazard as determined by the Fire Marshal or as documented by the Fire
Department;
It is determined by the Building Official or the Health Department that the condition of the
building, structure, or parcel of land poses a serious or immediate danger to the safety,
health, or general welfare of the community;
It is not being maintained in accordance to the State of Connecticut Building Code (2005);
It is a factor creating a substantial interference with the reasonable and lawful use and
enjoyment of abutting premises or which blocks or interferes with the use of any public
sidewalk and/or private street or right-of-way or any road sign.
DEBRIS
Material which is incapable of immediately performing the function for which it was designed,
including, but not limited to abandoned, discarded, or unused objects; junk comprised of
machinery equipment or vehicles, automobiles, boats and recreational vehicles which are
unregistered, missing parts, not complete in appearance and/or in an obvious state of disrepair;
parts of vehicles; furniture, appliances, and tires which are in the public view.
DILAPIDATED
No longer adequate for the purpose or use for which it was intended or having fallen into partial or
total ruin or decay.
EXEMPT PROPERTY
Any building or structure undergoing legal demolition, construction, remodeling, restoration, repair,
or renovation permitted by the Town, provided that the blighted condition will be corrected within
the time established by the appropriate Town official and further provided that the building or
structure remains in compliance with required permits as issued by the Town of East Hampton.
§ 171-4. Nuisances prohibited.
No person, firm, corporation, or other legal entity shall cause, allow or maintain any blighted premises,
as defined in the preceding section, to be created or continued on any real property located within the
Town of East Hampton. Any exempt property, as defined in the preceding section, shall not be
considered a blighted premises, and therefore not subject to the provision hereof.
§ 171-5. Effect on other standards.
The provisions in this chapter shall not be construed to prevent the enforcement of other statutes,
codes, ordinances, or regulations which prescribe standards other than those provided in this
chapter.
In any case where a provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict with a provision of any
zoning, building, fire, safety, or health ordinance, regulation, or other code of the Town or state, the
provision which establishes the higher standard for the promotion and protection of the public
health and safety, and property values, shall prevail.
This chapter shall not affect violations of any other ordinances, codes, or regulations existing prior
to the effective date of this code, and any such violations may be governed and continue to be
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 74/200
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
punishable under the provisions of those ordinances, codes, or regulations in effect at the time the
violation was committed.
§ 171-6. Compliance required.
Any owner, lessee, or occupant of premises subject to this chapter may be jointly and severally
obligated to comply with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 171-7. Notice of violation.
Complaints may be submitted to the Building Official by members of the public. Such complaints
must be in writing and signed.
Whenever the Building Official determines that there have been violations of any provision of this
chapter, such official shall give notice of such violation to the person responsible therefor, as
hereinafter provided. Such notice shall:
Be in writing, with a copy of such notice sent to such owner, lessee or occupant, as the case
may require, by U.S. Certified Mail (or its equivalent) at each such party's last known address
as evidenced in the Town's records;
Set forth the violations of this chapter;
Specify a final date for the correction of any violation;
Be served upon the owner, lessee, or the occupant as the case may require, provided such
notice shall be deemed to be properly served upon such owner, lessee, or upon such
occupant if a copy thereof is posted in a conspicuous place in or about the dwelling affected
by this notice, or if such person is served with such notice by any other method authorized or
required under the laws of this state;
Contain an outline of remedial action which, if taken, will effect permanent compliance with
the provisions of this chapter; and
State that the penalties and enforcement provisions of this chapter will become effective on
the final date set for the correction of any violation.
§ 171-8. Penalties for offenses; enforcement.
Penalties.
Each violation of this chapter shall be considered a separate municipal offense.
Each day any violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
Each separate offense under this chapter may be punishable by a fine of $100, payable to the
Town of East Hampton.
Enforcement.
The Building Official in the Town of East Hampton is authorized to issue a citation or
summons for a violation of this chapter.
If a citation is issued, further proceedings shall be in accord with the provisions of the Town's
Citation Hearing Procedure Ordinance,[1] as may be revised from time to time.
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 75/200
[1]
(3)
C.
A.
B.
A.
Editor's Note: See Ch. 16, Citation Hearing Procedure.
In addition thereto, the Town of East Hampton is authorized to initiate legal proceedings in the
Superior Court for the immediate correction of the violation(s), collection of any penalties, and
the recovery of all costs, including costs of remedial action(s) authorized by the court and
reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by the Town of East Hampton to enforce this chapter and
should not preclude the Town's ability to recover or save from immediate damage.
All fines, court costs, costs of remedial action, and attorneys' fees, as ordered by the court, shall
constitute a lien on the subject premises, as provided by C.G.S. § 7-148aa.
Chapter 173. Boating and Navigation
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town Council of the Town of East Hampton 3-27-2001 (Ord. No. 11.01);
amended in its entirety 8-10-2010. Subsequent amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and recreation — See Ch. 246.
§ 173-1. Boats on Lake Pocotopaug.
The following regulations are adopted by the Town Council in addition to the state and federal acts
concerning boats.
§ 173-2. Vessels with built-in toilet systems.
Vessels with built-in toilet systems that are capable of overboard sewage discharge shall not be
allowed in or on the lake at any time. Vessels with portable toilet systems shall not discharge sewage
into the lake.
§ 173-3. Speed limits.
No person shall operate any vessel powered in whole or in part by a motor between 1/2 hour after
sunset and 7:00 a.m. at a speed in excess of slow-no-wake.
No person shall operate a vessel at a speed to exceed slow-no-wake within 200 feet of shore, or
of a dock, pier, float or anchored or moored vessel, unless taking off with a water-skier.
§ 173-4. Beaching of vessels.
The permanent beaching of any vessel at any public or community beach except for emergency use is
hereby prohibited. The term "permanent" shall be defined as exceeding a twenty-four-hour period.
§ 173-5. Swimming restrictions.
No person using the lake for swimming or public bathing shall act recklessly or negligently or in
such a manner that the safety of any person, including himself, shall be endangered. No person
shall swim beyond 100 feet from shore or a raft or mooring without a manned vessel in close and
constant attendance and maintaining line of sight.
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 76/200
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
A.
B.
C.
All persons using inner tubes, air mattresses, inflatable toys, etc., or floating or swimming with the
aid of flotation devices, including life preservers (except water-skiers), shall be considered
swimmers and shall abide by these regulations.
This section shall not apply to law enforcement or emergency personnel while such personnel are
engaged in the performance of their official duties in connection with law enforcement, an
emergency or in connection with training thereof.
§ 173-6. Washing or bathing.
The washing or bathing of any person or animal with soap or detergent in the lake is hereby prohibited.
§ 173-7. Garbage and litter.
Use of the lake either from the shore or from any vessel for the discarding of papers, cans, bottles,
grass cuttings, leaves, wood, lumber or any litter whatever is expressly prohibited.
§ 173-8. Floats and moorings.
All floats, moorings or other anchored personal property shall be confined within the bounds of:
One hundred feet or less from the shoreline; and
The area in front of the property owner's lot that is bounded by lines that bisect the angles
formed by the frontage closure line. A frontage closure line is a straight line between the two
points where property lines meet the shoreline.
A property owner may give permission to other persons to install such moorings, provided the
moorings are within the property owner's bounds as described above.
A property owner may request special permission from the Police Department to install a mooring
beyond 100 feet if necessitated by water depths or other obstructions.
§ 173-9. Maximum speed on Lake Pocotopaug.
The maximum speed limit on Lake Pocotopaug shall be 40 miles per hour from 7:00 a.m. until 1/2 hour
past sunset.
§ 173-10. Speed in proximity to other vessels.
Motor boats are prohibited from coming within 50 feet of all other vessels in excess of slow-no-wake. In
case of a violation, the burdened or giveaway vessel shall be cited.
§ 173-11. Motor coverings.
During normal operation, except for maintenance purposes, all motors must be complete with their
proper cover, so as to muffle sound and prevent bodily injury from moving parts.
§ 173-12. Towing of water-skiers and others.
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 77/200
A.
B.
A.
B.
The maximum number of water-skiers to be towed by a motorboat is two at any one time.
The launching into the air of persons over Lake Pocotopaug through towing by a vessel is
prohibited, i.e., parasails and kites.
§ 173-13. Rafts for waterskiing.
The installation or use of any raft or other structure for the purpose of water ski jumping or other use by
water-skiers in motion is prohibited. This section shall not apply to organized programs approved or
permitted by the Town of East Hampton.
§ 173-14. Operation of snowmobiles.
No person shall operate a snowmobile on the public frozen waters of Lake Pocotopaug from 1/2
hour after sunset until 7:00 a.m.
As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
OPERATE
To control the course of or otherwise use a snowmobile.
SNOWMOBILE
Any self-propelled vehicle designed for travel on ice or snow except vehicles propelled by sail.
§ 173-15. Penalties for offenses.
Any person failing to observe any or all of these regulations shall be guilty of not less than an infraction
and shall be fined the maximum fine allowed for each infraction.
§ 173-16. Buoys to mark dangerous lake conditions.
The Town of East Hampton may, from time to time, endeavor to mark buoys to indicate dangerous or
rocky lake conditions. Should the Town determine to so mark buoys, a map of marked buoys will be
available from the office of the Town Clerk during regular business hours. The marking of buoys, if
performed by the Town, is a courtesy only. In no event shall the Town assume any responsibility or
liability for personal injury or property damage caused by the marking of or failure to mark buoys.
§ 173-17. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect 20 days after publication, provided it is approved by the State
Department of Environmental Protection pursuant to the State Boating Act.
Chapter 177. Building Code
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town of East Hampton 1976 (Ord. No. 10.01); amended in its entirety at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I). Subsequent amendments noted where
applicable.]
§ 177-1. State provisions adopted.
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 78/200
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
C.
D.
In accordance with C.G.S. § 29-253, the State Building Code of the State of Connecticut, including all
amendments thereto, is hereby adopted as the Building Code of the Town of East Hampton.
Chapter 181. Buildings, Numbering of
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town Council of the Town of East Hampton 12-12-1995 (Ord. No. 5.05).
Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building Code — See Ch. 177.
Hotels — See Ch. 215.
Housing Code — See Ch. 219.
§ 181-1. Purpose.
To promote the public safety, health and welfare, particularly to facilitate the delivery of fire protection,
police, ambulance, and postal services to its townspeople, the Town of East Hampton adopts the
following regulations to govern the posting of address identifying numbers on buildings within the
Town.
§ 181-2. Applicability.
All residential, business, or other principal buildings erected or to be erected within the Town of East
Hampton shall display address identifying numbers, as assigned by the Town of East Hampton, in
conformance with the specifications provided herein.
§ 181-3. Numeral specifications.
Numbers shall be Arabic, block style.
Numbers shall be of a color that contrasts clearly with the background to which they are affixed,
and may be of a reflective material.
Numbers shall be a minimum of three inches in height.
§ 181-4. Location specifications.
Numbers shall be securely affixed to the front of the building or other fixed appurtenance in front of
the building, so as to be clearly visible from the street.
Numbers shall be affixed not less than five feet, nor more than 12 feet, above the surface directly
below them.
A building which is set back more than 100 feet from the center of the street on which it fronts, or if
numerals cannot be made legible from that location because of obstructions, shall have the
aforesaid numbers securely affixed to a post, sign, mailbox or other device which shall be located
within 10 feet of the driveway entrance to the premises.
Mailboxes. Where the building has a mailbox located at the edge of the street or roadway,
numbers shall be affixed to both sides of the mailbox. Where the mailboxes are grouped together,
numbers shall be affixed to the front of the mailboxes and any visible side.
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 79/200
E.
F.
A.
B.
C.
Buildings containing more than two dwelling units which have entrances from interior
passageways shall have numbers affixed within five feet of every door by which the building may
be entered. Each individual unit shall have its identifying number or letter affixed to its door or
immediately adjacent to it.
Residential dwellings that consist of multiple units having different street numbers shall post the
range of unit numbers per building at a prominent location thereon, clearly visible at least 100 feet
by approaching emergency personnel. Each individual unit shall have its number affixed at its front
and rear entrances.
§ 181-5. Private drives, courts, roadways.
All such private roads shall be posted in a manner so that the names are clearly visible and
identifiable.
§ 181-6. Date of compliance.
This chapter shall become effective 20 days after publication as prescribed by Town Charter.
All existing buildings requiring numbering are subject to this chapter on that date, following
ordinance adoption.
All buildings required to be numbered, after this date, shall have the prescribed numbering
installed before a certificate of occupancy is issued for the building.
§ 181-7. Effective date.
This chapter shall become effective July 1, 1996.
§ 181-8. Penalties for offenses.
Any building owner in violation of this chapter shall receive a warning notice of the violation(s), issued
by the official designated by the Town Council. The warning notice shall allow an initial 30 days for the
violation(s) to be corrected. It shall be the responsibility of the building owner to notify the Town official
when the violation(s) has been corrected. If, at the end of the initial thirty-day period, the correction(s)
has not been made, the owner shall be subject to a fine of $25, and a second warning notice of the
violation(s) shall be issued. The second warning notice shall allow an additional 10 days for the
violation(s) to be corrected. If, at the end of the additional ten-day period, the correction(s) has not
been made, the owner shall be subject to additional fines of $5 a day for each day thereafter that the
violation(s) is not corrected, to a maximum of $100, inclusive of the citation fine of $25.
Chapter 192. Excavations
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Selectmen of the Town of East Hampton 4-22-1986 (Ord. No.
5.01). Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 192-1. Definition.
The term "permit area," as used in this chapter, shall mean the area within the right-of-way of any Town
street or road.
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 80/200
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
[1]
[1]
§ 192-2. Rules and regulations.
The Superintendent of Public Works may adopt from time to time such rules, regulations and
specifications for the conduct of work incidental to the excavation of streets and sidewalks as he may
deem for the best interest of the Town. The violation of any such rule or regulation shall be a violation
of this chapter.
§ 192-3. Excavation permit-required.
No person shall make any excavation in or dig below the surface of any street or sidewalk in the Town
unless he has obtained a permit to do so issued by the Superintendent of Public Works. A separate
permit shall be required for each excavation.
§ 192-4. Commencement of work prior to issuance of permit.
Whenever the exigencies of public health or safety require that work be done within a permit area, and
the procurement of a permit is impracticable, it shall be lawful for the work to be commenced without a
permit; provided, however, an application is made for such permit on the business day next following
the commencement of work. No commencement of work under this section shall relieve the person
doing such work of the duty of full compliance with this chapter.
§ 192-5. Application.
Before a permit is issued, a written application, on a form furnished for that purpose, shall be filed with
the Superintendent of Public Works setting forth:
The name and address of the applicant,
The proposed work to be done,
The time and place the proposed work is to be done;
A drawing or plan of the work to be done, which drawing or plan shall be sufficiently detailed to
show with specificity the work to be done, to the satisfaction of the Superintendent of Public
Works;
Acknowledgement of a copy of this chapter and all rules and regulations issued hereunder; and
Such other information as the Superintendent may require.
Editor's Note: The Application for a road opening permit is available in the Town offices.
§ 192-6. Fees.
Upon filing the application, each applicant shall pay to the Town a nonrefundable permit application fee
for each excavation within a permit area in an amount as set from time to time by the Town Council. In
addition, each applicant shall pay to the Town, for openings or excavations in a paved surface,
repairing and inspection fees in an amount as set from time to time by the Town Council.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 192-7. Commencement of work.
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 81/200
A.
B.
No permit shall be valid unless the work specified therein shall be commenced within a period of 15
days from the date of issuance, but a renewal thereof may be obtained without additional charge by
filing a statement containing the reason for the delay.
§ 192-8. Indemnity bond.
The Superintendent of Public Works shall require such permittee to file a surety bond, public liability
policy, or other form of security satisfactory to the Superintendent of Public Works in a sum sufficient to
indemnify the Town for any liability incurred by it as a result of the exercise of such permit.
§ 192-9. Continuous work required; backfilling; installation of
permanent paving.
All work under this chapter shall proceed uninterrupted to the completion thereof, and such
openings or excavations shall be immediately backfilled, in accordance with the rules and
regulations adopted by the Superintendent of Public Works.
Permanent paving shall be constructed by the contractor within 60 days after installation of
temporary paving. If, within one year, defects shall appear as a result of improper backfilling by the
applicant, the applicant shall reimburse the Town for the cost of necessary repairs.
§ 192-10. Construction requirements for underground conduits,
pipe lines and structures.
All construction done on underground conduits, pipe lines and structures shall conform as nearly as is
practicable to the plans and specifications filed with and approved by the Superintendent of Public
Works, and shall be done under the supervision and to the satisfaction of the Superintendent of Public
Works.
§ 192-11. Barriers and warning lights.
It shall be the duty of every person who makes any excavation in or digs below the surface of any
street or sidewalk to protect the public against injury therefrom by providing fences or barriers and
warning lights and taking any other precautions that may be necessary or that the Superintendent of
Public Works may order.
§ 192-12. Exemption; waivers.
The Superintendent may waive the required fee in any case wherein the excavation to be done is to be
done by or on behalf of any Town agency or the Water Pollution Control Authority. Notwithstanding the
above, only the Public Works Department of the Town of East Hampton shall be exempt from the other
provisions of this chapter.
§ 192-13. Additional approvals.
Nothing contained herein shall be construed to relieve the applicant/permittee of obtaining any required
approval or permission of any other person, utility company, or state or local government agency for
the excavation intended.
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 82/200
[1]
§ 192-14. Penalties for offenses; civil liability.
For each occurrence, event or incident constituting a violation of any provision of this chapter, the
person so violating shall be liable to pay the sum of $75 as a civil penalty, and each day of a continuing
violation shall constitute a separate violation. In addition thereto, the Town may seek injunctive relief to
restrain or enjoin any continuing violation. In the event that the Town prevails in any action to collect
civil penalties and/or obtain injunctive relief, the Town shall be further entitled to collect its reasonable
attorneys' fees from the defendant(s). Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to relieve
any person from civil liability to any other person for death, or injury to person or property by reason of
malfeasance, misfeasance or nonfeasance.
Chapter 196. Fair Housing
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Selectmen of the Town of East Hampton 12-27-1979 (Ord. No.
10.04). Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Housing Code — See Ch. 219.
§ 196-1. Declaration of policy.
It is the policy of the Town of East Hampton to safeguard all individuals within the Town from
discrimination because of race, color, religious creed, sex, marital status, national origin, ancestry, age,
present or past history of mental disorder, mental retardation, sexual orientation, learning or physical
disability, political activity, union activity or exercise of rights protected by the United States Constitution
in connection with housing; thereby to protect their interest in personal dignity and freedom from
humiliation, to make available to the Town their full production capacities, to secure the Town against
strife and unrest which would menace its democratic institutions and to preserve the public safety and
general welfare.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 196-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
DISCRIMINATE
To cause any difference in treatment based on race, color, religious creed, sex, marital status,
national origin, ancestry, age, present or past history of mental disorder, mental retardation, sexual
orientation, learning or physical disability, political activity, union activity or exercise of rights
protected by the United States Constitution, and includes segregation based upon any of the
foregoing categories.[1]
FAIR HOUSING OFFICER
The person responsible for accepting and acting upon housing discrimination complaints. The Fair
Housing Officer shall be the Town Manager or a duly appointed representative of the Town
Manager.
FAIR HOUSING REVIEW COMMITTEE
A committee established to assist the Fair Housing Officer in the review of housing discrimination
complaints. "Review Committee" means the Fair Housing Review Committee.
HOUSING ACCOMMODATION
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 83/200
[1]
[2]
[1]
A.
B.
[2]
C.
[3]
D.
[4]
E.
F.
G.
Any dwelling, housing unit, structure, or portion thereof, including mobile manufactured homes and
mobile manufactured home park lots, used or to be used for residential purposes.[2]
OWNER
Any person having or exercising the right to sell, rent, or lease any housing accommodation.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 196-3. Unlawful practices.
In connection with any of the transactions set forth in this section which affect any housing
accommodation on the open market, or in connection with any public sale, purchase, exchange, rental
or lease of any housing accommodation, it shall be a prohibited unlawful practice for a person, owner,
financial institution, real estate broker or real estate salesman, or any representative of the above, to:
Refuse to sell, purchase, exchange, rent or lease, or otherwise deny to or withhold any housing
accommodation or real estate from a person because of his race, color, religious creed, sex,
marital status, national origin, ancestry, age, present or past history of mental disorder, mental
retardation, sexual orientation, learning or physical disability, political activity, union activity or
exercise of rights protected by the United States Constitution; or[1]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
To discriminate against a person in the terms, conditions or privileges of the sale, financing,
purchase, exchange, rental or lease of any housing accommodation or real estate, or in the
furnishing of facilities or services in connection therewith; or
To refuse to receive or transmit a bona fide offer to sell, purchase, exchange, rent or lease any
housing accommodation from or to a person because of his race, color, religious creed, sex,
marital status, national origin, ancestry, age, present or past history of mental disorder, mental
retardation, sexual orientation, learning or physical disability, political activity, union activity or
exercise of rights protected by the United States Constitution; or[2]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
To refuse to negotiate for the sale, purchase, exchange, rental, or lease of any housing
accommodation to a person because of his race, color, religious creed, sex, marital status,
national origin, ancestry, age, present or past history of mental disorder, mental retardation, sexual
orientation, learning or physical disability, political activity, union activity or exercise of rights
protected by the United States Constitution; or[3]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
To represent to a person that any housing accommodation is not available for inspection, sale,
purchase, exchange, rental or lease when it is known to such person, owner, financial institution,
real estate broker or real estate salesman, or representatives of any of them, that, in fact, it is so
available, or to refuse to permit a person to inspect any housing accommodation because of his
race, color, religious creed, sex, marital status, national origin, ancestry, age, present or past
history of mental disorder, mental retardation, sexual orientation, learning or physical disability,
political activity, union activity or exercise of rights protected by the United States Constitution;
or[4]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
To discriminate against a person by failing or refusing to show housing accommodations which are
listed for sale or rental; or
To retaliate against a person because he has filed a complaint, testified, assisted, or participated
in any manner in an investigation, proceeding, hearing or conference under this chapter by
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 84/200
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
adjusting his rental, by failing to provide proper services, or by refusing to deal with such person.
§ 196-4. Exemptions.
The provisions of the chapter shall not apply:
To the rental or lease of any housing units in a housing accommodation for not more than two
families living independently of each other, if the owner or members of his family reside in one of
such housing accommodations; or
To the rental of a room or rooms in a housing accommodation, if such rental is by the occupant of
the housing accommodation, or by the owner of the housing accommodation and he or members
of his family reside in such housing accommodation; or
With respect to the prohibition of sex discrimination, shall not apply to rental of sleeping
accommodations provided on a temporary or permanent basis for the exclusive use of persons of
the same sex.
§ 196-5. Powers of Fair Housing Officer.
The administration and enforcement of this chapter shall be the responsibility of the Fair Housing
Officer, and he/she shall have full operating responsibility for carrying out the provisions of this chapter.
In addition to any powers or duties heretofore conferred on said officer, he/she shall have the power
and duty to:
Meet and exercise his/her powers at any place within the Town of East Hampton for the purpose
of implementing and administering this chapter.
Seek the advice and/or services of the Town Counsel, if deemed necessary; and appoint and
empower a Fair Housing Review Committee to assist in effecting the purposes and provisions of
this chapter.
Accept gifts, or bequests, grants or other payments, public or private, and duly recorded as such,
to help finance its activities.
Receive, initiate, investigate, seek to conciliate, hold hearings on and pass upon complaints
alleging violations of this chapter.
Hold hearings, administer oaths and take the testimony of any person under oath.
Issue remedial orders requiring cessation of violation of this chapter, or requiring such affirmative
action as in the judgment of the Fair Housing Officer and/or Review Committee will carry out the
purposes of this chapter, including, where appropriate, an order forbidding the sale, transfer or
leasing of any housing accommodation, or ordering the sale or leasing of a housing
accommodation to a person found to have been denied the rights protected by this chapter.
Apply to a court of competent jurisdiction for such temporary and/or permanent relief as it deems
necessary, and for judicially sanctioned enforcement of any order properly issued under
Subsection F.
With the approval of the Town Council, adopt, promulgate, amend and rescind rules and
regulations to effectuate the purposes of this chapter, including regulations requiring the posting of
notices prepared or approved by the Fair Housing Officer and/or Review Committee.
§ 196-6. Grievance procedure.
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 85/200
(1)
(2)
A.
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
Initiating proceedings.
Any person or persons claiming to be aggrieved by an unlawful practice prohibited by this
chapter may file a written complaint in accordance with the rules and regulations of the Fair
Housing Officer. No complaint hereunder may be filed later than 30 days after the aggrieved
person becomes aware of the alleged unlawful practice, nor, in any event, more than 60 days
after the alleged unlawful practice occurred. Within the above time limitations, any member of
the Fair Housing Review Committee who has reason to believe an unlawful practice has
occurred may file a complaint, naming the Committee itself or the Fair Housing Officer as the
party complainant.
Anything in this chapter to the contrary notwithstanding, in the event that any proceeding is
instituted before the Connecticut Commission on Human Rights and Opportunities growing
out of substantially the same facts, no complaint shall be acted upon by the Fair Housing
Officer and/or Review Committee, and any action already undertaken upon a complaint shall
be suspended. In the event of the institution of such a proceeding, the action of the
Connecticut Commission on Human Rights and Opportunities shall be final.
Upon receipt of a complaint, the Fair Housing Officer shall serve the complaint and a written
statement setting forth the rights of the parties and the procedures to be followed by the Fair
Housing Officer and/or Review Committee in the investigation and adjudication of the complaint
upon the person or persons charged with a violation of this chapter (hereinafter referred to as the
"respondent").
Upon receipt of a complaint, the Fair Housing Officer and/or Review Committee shall conduct a
preliminary investigation of the complaint and shall prepare a written report within 21 days after
service of the complaint on the respondent.
The Fair Housing Officer and/or Review Committee shall, within 10 days after completion of the
report of the preliminary investigation, determine whether there is probable cause to believe that
an unlawful practice has been committed.
If the Fair Housing Officer and/or Review Committee determines that there is no such
probable cause, the complaint shall be dismissed.
If the Fair Housing Officer and/or Review Committee determines that there is such probable
cause, the Fair Housing Officer and/or Review Committee shall make an effort to eliminate
the unlawful practice by conference and conciliation, in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter.
Within 30 days after the Fair Housing Officer and/or Review Committee has determined that
probable cause exists, unless an order has been issued dismissing the complaint or stating the
terms of a conciliation agreement, a hearing shall be called and held by the Fair Housing Officer
and/or Review Committee.
In any proceedings under this section, the respondent may file a written answer to the complaint
and may appear at the hearing in person or otherwise, with or without counsel, and may submit
evidence and be heard. The Fair Housing Officer and/or Review Committee, in conducting any
hearing, may permit reasonable amendments to any complaint or answer, and any testimony
taken at the hearing shall be under oath and shall be fully transcribed, electronically or otherwise,
as determined by the Fair Housing Officer.
Any endeavors or negotiations for conciliation shall not be received in evidence, and shall be held
confidential by the Fair Housing Officer and/or Review Committee.
Upon the conclusion of the hearing, the decision of the Fair Housing Officer and/or Review
Committee shall be communicated to the complainant(s) and respondent.
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 86/200
I.
J.
K.
L.
M.
N.
O.
A.
B.
C.
Proceedings may be reopened upon petition of any aggrieved party, except that an application to
reopen must be filed within 10 days of service of the Fair Housing Officer's and/or Review
Committee's decision upon such aggrieved party; provided, however, that any order previously
entered by the Fair Housing Officer shall not be stayed by such petition except upon decision of
the Fair Housing Officer or vote of the Fair Housing Review Committee if such Committee has
been appointed.
All hearings held under and pursuant to this chapter shall be open to the public.
In computing time or periods of time under this chapter, Sundays and national and state holidays
shall be excluded.
All papers or pleadings required by this chapter shall be served personally, by abode service, or
by certified mail as directed by the Fair Housing Officer.
At any time after a complaint has been filed, the Fair Housing Officer and/or Review Committee
may file an action in any court of competent jurisdiction seeking appropriate temporary relief
against the respondent.
At any time after a complaint has been filed, the Fair Housing Officer and/or Review Committee
may file an action in a court of competent jurisdiction seeking such appropriate relief against any
person as it may deem necessary to prevent any change of position between the complainant(s)
and the respondent.
The Fair Housing Officer and/or Review Committee may file suit in a court of competent
jurisdiction seeking enforcement of any of its orders issued pursuant to this chapter.
§ 196-7. Appeals.
Any respondent or complainant aggrieved by a final order of the Fair Housing Officer and/or Review
Committee, or any complainant aggrieved by the dismissal of his complaint by the Fair Housing Officer
and/or Review Committee, may obtain a review of such order in a court of competent jurisdiction by
filing with the Clerk of said Court, within 30 days after service upon him of said order, a written petition
in duplicate praying that such order be modified or set aside, and by serving a duplicate copy of the
petition on the Fair Housing Officer. The Fair Housing Officer shall then cause to be filed in said court a
certified transcript of the record in the proceedings before it, including the pleadings, testimony and
order.
§ 196-8. Penalties for offenses.
If the Fair Housing Officer and/or Review Committee finds that any person has committed an
unlawful practice as defined in this chapter, it may subject such person to a fine not exceeding
$100 per offense, and each day of violation of this chapter shall be deemed a separate offense.
The Fair Housing Officer may, if such person refuses to pay the fine, file an action in a court of
competent jurisdiction for the collection thereof.
If a real estate broker, a real estate salesman or an employee thereof has failed to comply with
any order issued by the Fair Housing Officer and/or Review Committee, or has been found to have
committed an unlawful practice in violation of this chapter, the Fair Housing Officer may so notify
in writing the Real Estate Commission of the State of Connecticut.
Should the Fair Housing Officer and/or Review Committee determine at any time that a complaint
filed with it alleging a violation of this chapter was filed in bad faith, the Fair Housing Officer shall
forthwith issue an order requiring the complainant(s) to pay to the respondent the amount of the
reasonable expenses caused the respondent by the filing of said complaint, including reasonable
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 87/200
A.
B.
attorney's fees; and such order may be enforced in the same manner as any other order issued by
the Fair Housing Officer and/or Review Committee pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
Chapter 200. Fees and Charges
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town of East Hampton as indicated in article histories. Amendments noted
where applicable.]
Article I. Sewer Connection Charges
[Adopted by the Board of Selectmen 8-23-1983 (Ord. No. 4.07)]
§ 200-1. Connection charges in lieu of assessments.
Whenever a sewer has not been laid out and assessed by the Water Pollution Control Authority, but
has been built for the Water Pollution Control Authority under a developer's permit agreement, said
sewer passing land owned by others, which others might later request a connection to the sewer, no
connection shall be permitted by the Water Pollution Control Authority unless:
Said other owner first signs a form of agreement waiving the Water Pollution Control Authority's
usual sewer assessment procedures and pays a sanitary sewer connection charge in lieu of
assessment; or
The Sewer Commission has levied a sewer assessment covering the section in question.
§ 200-2. Reimbursement of developers and owners.
The Water Pollution Control Authority is empowered, at its discretion, to include in agreements with
developers, or other owners, for the construction of sewers by and at the expense of such developers
or owners, as now provided by ordinance, provisions for reimbursement of said developers or owners
from sanitary sewer connection charges collected in lieu of assessments, as provided in § 200-1
hereof, for the cost of sewers constructed by them in sections of highways on which lands owned by
them do not abut, such reimbursement not to exceed the cost of construction within such sections of
highways, and not to include any portion of the trunk sewer cost, and limiting the time within which
such reimbursements may occur to such time as the Authority deems expedient for the particular case,
but no reimbursements shall be made after 10 years from the date of incorporation of the particular
sewer in the public sewer system. Expiration of the time for reimbursement to the developer shall not
release subsequent permittees from paying connection charges in lieu of assessment to the Water
Pollution Control Authority.
§ 200-3. Application to connect to sanitary sewer.
Any owner desiring to make a connection to a sanitary sewer as provided herein shall make
application to the Water Pollution Control Authority, submitting such plans and specifications as may be
required by said Authority. Said plans and specifications shall contain information as to the amount of
property to be utilized by the proposed buildings and improvements for which such connection is
sought; and giving the type and extent of use contemplated of the sewer system.
§ 200-4. Approval of application; levy and payment of connection
charge.
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 88/200
A.
B.
Such Authority shall, upon making a determination that the planned connection and the necessary
pipes, pumping facilities, if such are required, and other necessary improvements are in accordance
with applicable statutes, regulations, and ordinances, approve said application and forthwith levy a
connection charge. Payment of such connection charge shall be made prior to issuance of a permit to
connect to the sewer system, or may be paid over a period not to exceed five years in accordance with
a resolution of the Authority in each case, which resolution shall specify the terms of payment of
principal and interest, provided that where such periodic payments are permitted, no permit to connect
to the sewer system shall be issued prior to execution by the owner of the land for which connection is
sought of a voluntary lien for recording on the East Hampton Land Records securing the amount of
deferred payments plus interest.
§ 200-5. Amount of charges.
The connection charges provided for under § 200-1 hereof shall be determined by the Water Pollution
Control Authority and shall be based on the lot and/or unit values used in assessing benefits against
properties in the particular area applied to such part of such real property as, in the opinion of the
Water Pollution Control Authority, is benefited at the time of connection, less a credit for the real
property for which an assessment or connection charge has been paid, such credit to be determined
by the Water Pollution Control Authority in accordance with such formula as it finds to be equitable.
§ 200-6. Payment of charges; disposition.
When under the provisions of § 200-1 hereof an assessment is declared due and payable, or a
connection charge is due and payable, it shall be paid to the Director of Finance of the Town of East
Hampton, to be added to a sewer sinking fund maintained by such Director of Finance to be utilized as
determined by the Water Pollution Control Authority in accordance with the provisions of §§ 200-2 and
200-7 hereof.
§ 200-7. Use of sewer fund.
Such sewer sinking fund may be utilized to pay for the cost of extensions and expansions of, and
improvements to, the East Hampton sewerage system, including survey, design, and engineering
expenses, after public hearing and upon resolution of the Water Pollution Control Authority pursuant to
C.G.S. § 7-247a, provided provision is made for returning some or all of such cost to such sewer
sinking fund from sewer benefits assessments or from connection charges levied against the
properties especially benefited by such expansions. Said sewer sinking fund may also be utilized, upon
resolution duly adopted by the Water Pollution Control Authority, to contribute to sewerage system
annual bond payments, and to reimburse developers and owners pursuant to § 200-2 hereof.
Article II. Land Use Applications
[Adopted by the Board of Selectmen 3-2-1985 (Ord. No. 3.04)]
§ 200-8. Fee schedule.
[Amended 8-29-1986[1]]
A schedule of fees for land use applications of the Town of East Hampton shall be set from time to time
by the Town Council for the following:
Applications to the Inland/Wetland Agency.
Applications to the Zoning Board of Appeals.
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 89/200
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
[1]
Applications seeking site plan approval or the granting of a special permit.
Applications seeking a special permit for an apartment complex.
Applications seeking approval of a subdivision plan.
Other applications to the Planning and Zoning Commission.
Applications to the Middle Haddam Historic District Commission.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 200-9. Public improvements.
Public improvements, for the purposes of this article, include, but are not limited to, improvements to
existing roads and drainage systems, new roads and drainage systems and erosion and sedimentation
controls.
Chapter 207. Gas and Oil Exploration
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town Council of the Town of East Hampton as indicated in article histories.
Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewer use — See Ch. 264.
Solid waste — See Ch. 269.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 273.
Article I. Use and Disposal of Fracking Waste
[Adopted 6-27-2017]
§ 207-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
DISPOSAL
The discharge, deposit, injection, dumping, spilling, leaking or placing of any waste into or on any
land or water so that such waste, or any constituent of such waste, may enter the environment, be
emitted into the air or discharged into any waters of the state.
HYDRAULIC FRACTURING
The process of pumping a fluid into or under the surface of the ground in order to create fractures
in rock for exploration, development, production or recovery of gas. "Hydraulic fracturing" does not
include the drilling or repair of a geothermal water well or any other well drilled or repaired for
drinking water purposes.
PERSON
Any individual, firm, partnership, association, syndicate, company, trust, corporation, limited
liability company, municipality, agency or political or administrative subdivision of the state.
STORAGE
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 90/200
[1]
The holding of waste for a temporary period, at the end of which the waste is treated, disposed of
or stored elsewhere.
TRANSFER
To move from one vehicle to another or to move from one mode of transportation to another.
TREAT
Any method, technique or process designed to change the physical, chemical or biological
character or composition of any waste.
WASTE FROM HYDRAULIC FRACTURING
Any wastewater, wastewater solids, brine, sludge, drill cuttings or any other substance used for or
generated secondarily to the purpose of hydraulic fracturing.
§ 207-2. Collection or transport prohibited.
No person shall collect or transport untreated waste from hydraulic fracturing for receipt, acceptance,
storage, disposal or transfer in the Town of East Hampton.
§ 207-3. Certain uses restricted.
No person may sell, offer for sale, barter, manufacture, distribute or use any product for anti-icing, deicing,
pre-wetting or dust suppression that is derived from or that contains waste from hydraulic
fracturing unless such product has been approved for such use by the CT DEEP.
§ 207-4. Effect on other provisions.
No provision of this section shall be construed so as to affect any provision of Chapter 264, Sewer
Use, Chapter 269, Solid Waste, or Chapter 273, Streets and Sidewalks.
Chapter 211. Historic Districts
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Selectmen of the Town of East Hampton 5-11-1977 (Ord. No.
14.00); amended in its entirety by the Town Council 2-23-2010. Subsequent amendments noted where
applicable.]
ATTACHMENTS
211a Historic District Map
§ 211-1. Purpose.
To promote the educational, cultural, economic, and general welfare and to preserve and protect the
distinctive characteristics of buildings and places associated with the history of the Town or indicative
of a period or style of architecture, there is hereby established an historic district in the Town, to be
known as "Middle Haddam Historic District," and the boundaries of the historic district are shown on a
map delineating the area involved, which map is incorporated herein by reference and entitled “Middle
Haddam Historic District Town of East Hampton Connecticut” dated August 2009 and prepared by
Applied Geographics, Inc.[1]
Editor's Note: The Middle Haddam Historic District Map prepared by Applied Geographics, Inc., dated
August 2009, is included at the end of this chapter.
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 91/200
A.
B.
C.
§ 211-2. Historic District Commission; membership and records.
This Historic District Commission established under the provisions of this chapter shall consist of
five regular and three alternate members, who shall be electors of the Town in which the district is
situated holding no salaried municipal office. At least three members and two alternates of the
Historic District Commission shall reside in the Historic District. Such alternate members shall,
when seated as provided in this section, have all powers and duties of a member of the
Commission. If a regular member of said Commission is absent or has a conflict of interest, the
Chairman of the Commission shall designate an alternate to so act, choosing alternates in rotation
so that they shall act as nearly equal a number of times as possible. If any alternate is not
available in accordance with such rotation, such fact shall be recorded in the minutes of the
meeting.
The Board of Selectmen shall make appointments to the Commission as follows: one member to
be appointed for a term expiring January 1, 1982, one for a term expiring January 1, 1983, one for
a term expiring January 1, 1984, one for a term expiring January 1, 1985, and one for a term
expiring January 1, 1986; and one alternate member for a term expiring January 1, 1983, one
alternate member for a term expiring January 1, 1984, and one alternate member for a term
expiring January 1, 1985. All subsequent appointments shall be made by the Town Council and
shall be for a term of five years, except that an appointment to fill an unexpired term shall be for
the duration of said unexpired term only. The Commission shall elect annually a Chairman, a Vice
Chairman, and a Clerk from its own number. Each member and alternate shall continue in office
until his successor is duly appointed. All members and alternates shall serve without
compensation. Any member or alternate may be appointed for an additional term or terms.
The Historic District Commission shall keep a permanent record of its resolutions, transactions,
and determinations and of the vote of each member participating therein.
§ 211-3. Duties of Commission.
The Commission shall have such powers, shall perform such functions and shall be subject to such
limitations as shall from time to time be prescribed by the applicable General Statutes of Connecticut.
The Commission shall fix the time and place of its regular meetings and provide a method for calling
special meetings, in accordance with the Freedom of Information Act, § 1-210 et. seq. of the General
Statutes of Connecticut. It shall adopt rules of procedures not inconsistent with the provisions of § 7-
147a et. seq. of the General Statutes of Connecticut. The presence of four members or alternate
members shall constitute a quorum, and no resolution or vote except a vote to adjourn or to fix the time
and place of its next meeting shall be adopted by fewer than three affirmative votes. The Commission
may adopt regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of § 7-147a et. seq. of the General Statutes
of Connecticut to provide guidance to property owners as to factors to be considered in preparing an
application for a certificate of appropriateness.
§ 211-4. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ACT
The provisions of §§ 7-147a through 7-147k of the Connecticut General Statutes, as the same
may be amended from time to time.
ALTERED
Changed, modified, rebuilt, removed, demolished, restored, razed, moved, or reconstructed.
APPROPRIATE
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 92/200
A.
B.
C.
Not incongruous with those aspects of the historic district which the Historic District Commission
determines to be historically or architecturally significant.
BUILDING
A combination of materials forming a shelter for persons, animals, or property.
ERECTED
Constructed, built, installed or enlarged.
EXTERIOR ARCHITECTURAL FEATURES
Such portions of the exterior of a structure or buildings as are open to view from a public street,
way or place.
MUNICIPALITY
The Town of East Hampton.
STRUCTURE
Any combination of materials, other than a building, which is affixed to the land, and shall include,
but not be limited to, signs, fences, and walls.
§ 211-5. Certificate of appropriateness.
No building or structure shall be erected or altered within an historic district until after an
application for a certificate of appropriateness as to exterior architectural features has been
submitted to the Historic District Commission and approved by said Commission.
No building permit for erection of a building or structure or for alteration of an exterior architectural
feature within an historic district and no demolition permit for demolition or removal of a building or
structure within an historic district shall be issued by a municipality or any department, agency or
official thereof until a certificate of appropriateness has been issued. A certificate of
appropriateness shall be required whether or not a building permit is required.
The Historic District Commission may request such plans, elevations, specifications, material and
other information, including, in the case of demolition or removal, a statement of the proposed
condition and appearance of property after such demolition or removal, as may be reasonably
deemed necessary by the Commission to enable it to make a determination on the application.
The style, material, size and location of outdoor advertising signs and bill posters within an historic
district shall also be under the control of such Commission. The provisions of this section shall not
be construed to extend to the color of paint used on the exterior of any building or structure.
§ 211-6. Hearings.
The Commission shall hold a public hearing upon each application for a certificate of appropriateness
unless the Commission determines that such application involves items not subject to approval by the
Commission. The Commission shall fix a reasonable time and place for such hearing. Notice of the
time and place of such hearing shall be given by publication in the form of a legal advertisement
appearing in a newspaper having a substantial circulation in the Town of East Hampton not more than
15 days nor less than five days before such hearing.
§ 211-7. Decision on application.
Within not more than 65 days after the filing of an application, the Commission shall pass upon such
application and shall give written notice of its decision to the applicant. When a certificate of
appropriateness is denied, the Commission shall place upon its records and in the notice to the
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 93/200
A.
B.
C.
applicant the reasons for its determination. In the notice to the applicant the Commission may make
recommendations relative to design, arrangement, texture, material, and similar features. The
Commission may issue a certificate of appropriateness with stipulations. Evidence of approval shall be
by certificate of appropriateness issued by the Commission. Failure of the Commission to act within
said 65 days shall constitute approval, and no other evidence of approval shall be needed. The
Commission shall keep a record of all applications for certificates of appropriateness and of all its
doings.
§ 211-8. Considerations in determining appropriateness.
If the Commission determines that the proposed erection, alteration or parking will be appropriate,
it shall issue a certificate of appropriateness. In passing on appropriateness as to exterior
architectural features, buildings or structures, the Commission shall consider, in addition to other
pertinent factors, the type and style of exterior windows, doors, light fixtures, signs, aboveground
utility structures, mechanical appurtenances and the type and texture of building materials. In
passing upon appropriateness as to exterior architectural features, the Commission shall also
consider, in addition to any other pertinent factors, the historical and architectural features involved
and the relationship thereof to the exterior architectural style and pertinent features of other
buildings and structures in the immediate neighborhood. In passing upon appropriateness as to
parking, the Commission shall take into consideration the size of such parking area, the visibility of
cars parked therein, the closeness of such area to adjacent buildings and other similar factors. No
application for a certificate of appropriateness for an exterior architectural feature, such as a solar
energy system, designed for the utilization of renewable resources shall be denied unless the
Commission finds that the feature cannot be installed without substantially impairing the historic
character and appearance of the district. A certificate of appropriateness for such a feature may
include stipulations requiring design modifications and limitations on the location of the feature
which do not significantly impair its effectiveness.
No area within an historic district shall be used for industrial, commercial, business, home industry,
or occupational parking, whether or not such area is zoned for such use, until after an application
for a certificate of appropriateness as to parking has been submitted to the Commission and
approved by said Commission. The provisions of this section shall apply to the enlargement or
alteration of any such parking area in existence on October 1, 1973.
In its deliberations, the Historic District Commission shall act only for the purpose of controlling the
erection or alteration of buildings, structures, or parking which is incongruous with the historic or
architectural aspects of the district. The Commission shall not consider interior arrangement or
use. However, the Commission may recommend adaptive reuse of any buildings or structures
within the district compatible with the historic architectural aspects of the district.
§ 211-9. Variances.
Where, by reason of topographical conditions, district borderline situations, or because of other
unusual circumstances solely with respect to a certain parcel of land and not affecting generally the
district in which it is situated, the strict application of any provisions of this chapter would result in
exceptional practical difficulty or undue hardship upon the owner of any specific property, the
Commission, in passing upon applications, shall have power to vary or modify strict adherence to this
chapter or to interpret the meaning of this chapter so as to relieve such difficulty or hardship; provided
such variance, modifications or interpretation shall remain in harmony with the general purpose and
intent of this chapter so that the general character of the district shall be conserved and substantial
justice done. In granting variances, the Commission may impose such reasonable and additional
stipulations and conditions as will, in its judgment, better fulfill the purpose of this chapter. In addition to
the filing required under the Act, the Commission shall, for each variance granted, place upon its
records and in the notice to the applicant the reasons for its determination.
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 94/200
§ 211-10. Judicial relief.
If any provision of this chapter or any action taken or ruling made by the provisions of this chapter or of
any regulation or ordinance adopted under this chapter has been violated, the Commission may, in
addition to other remedies, institute an action in the Superior Court for the judicial district wherein such
violation exists, which court shall have jurisdiction to restrain such violation and to issue orders
directing that the violation be corrected or removed. Such order may direct the removal of any building,
structure, or exterior architectural feature erected in violation of this chapter or any bylaw or ordinance
adopted under this chapter or the substantial restoration of any building, structure, or exterior
architectural feature altered or demolished in violation of this chapter or any regulation or ordinance
adopted under this chapter. Regulations and orders of the Commission issued pursuant to this chapter,
or to any regulation or ordinance adopted under this chapter, shall be enforced by the Building
Inspector, who may be authorized to inspect and examine any building, structure, place or premises
and to require in writing the remedying of any provision of the regulations or orders made under the
authority of this chapter or of any regulation or orders made under the authority of this chapter or of
any regulation or ordinance adopted under this chapter.
§ 211-11. Penalties for offenses.
The owner or agent of any building, structure, or place where a violation of any provision of this
chapter has been committed or exists, or the lessee or tenant of an entire building, entire structure, or
place where such violation has been committed or exists, or the owner, agent, lessee, or tenant of any
part of the building, structure, or place in which such violation has been committed or exists, or the
agent, architect, builder, contractor, or any other person who commits, takes part or assists in any such
violation shall be fined not less than $10 nor more than $100 for each day that such violation
continues; but if the offense is willful, the person convicted thereof shall be fined not less than $100 nor
more than $250 for each day that such violation continues. The Superior Court for the judicial district
wherein such violation continues or exists shall have jurisdiction of all such offenses, subject to appeal
as in other cases. Each day that a violation continues to exist shall constitute a separate offense. All
costs, fees, and expenses in connection with actions under this section may, in the discretion of the
court, be assessed as damages against the violator, which, together with reasonable attorney's fees,
may be awarded to the Historic District Commission which brought such action. Any funds collected as
fines pursuant to this section shall be used by the Commission to restore the affected buildings,
structures, or places to their condition prior to the violation wherever possible. Any excess shall be paid
to the municipality in which the district is situated.
§ 211-12. Appeals.
Any person or persons severally or jointly aggrieved by any decision of the Commission or of any
officer thereof may, within 15 days from the date when such decision was rendered, take an appeal to
the Court of Common Pleas for Middlesex County, which appeal shall be made returnable to such
court in the same manner as that prescribed for civil actions brought to such court. Notice of such
appeal shall be given by leaving a true and attested copy thereof in the hands of or at the usual place
of abode of the Chairman or Clerk of the Commission within 12 days before the return day to which
such appeal has been taken. Procedure upon such appeal would be the same as that defined in § 8-8
of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
§ 211-13. Exempted acts.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the ordinary maintenance or repair of any exterior
architectural feature in the historic district which does not involve a change in the appearance or
design thereof; nor to prevent the erection or alteration of any such feature which the Building
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 95/200
Inspector or a similar agent certifies is required by the public safety because of a condition which is
unsafe or dangerous due to deterioration; nor to prevent the erection or alteration of any such feature
under a permit issued by a Building Inspector or similar agent prior to the effective date of
establishment of such district.
§ 211-14. Boundaries.
The boundaries of the Middle Haddam Historic District are shown on a map entitled "Middle Haddam
Historic District Town of East Hampton Connecticut," dated August 2009 and prepared by Applied
Geographics, Inc. The following properties, identified by Assessor's Map Block and Lot Numbers, form
the boundaries of Middle Haddam Historic District and are included within the District, as are all the
properties within said boundaries:
Northerly 01C/9/8A
01C/9/6
01C/10/3
01C/10/11
01C/10/13
01C/11/1
06/11/2A
06/11/1
06/12/8
Easterly 06/12/8A
06/12/7B
06/12/7A
02/C/12/7
02/C/12/5
02C/12/4
02C/12/2
02C/12/17
02C/12/18
02C/21/34-2
02C/21/34-3
02C/21/4A
07/21/7
07/21/7B
02/18/20A
02/18/20-2A
Southerly 02/18/21-1C
02/18/20-2B
Westerly 02/18/20-2A
02/18/19B
02C/18/16
02C/18/1
02C/19A/2A
02C/19A/7A
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 96/200
A.
B.
02C/19A/6
02C/19A/4
02C/19A/1
02C/9/19
02C/9/18
02C/9/17
02C/9/12-5
02C/9/12-6
02C/9/12A
02C/9/12-7
02C/9/12-8
02C/9/12-9
02C/9/12-10
Chapter 215. Hotels
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Special Town Meeting of the Town of East Hampton 5-10-1965 (Ord. No.
13.02). Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 215-1. Registration of guests required.
The proprietor of each hotel, motel, boardinghouse or inn shall keep or cause to be kept a register
of guests containing the date and time of registration, the name of each guest, the business and/or
home address of each guest, and the date of departure. It shall be unlawful for any such proprietor
or his agent knowingly to permit any guest to use a false or assumed name or address in
connection with such registration.
Such registration shall be available for inspection by the Chief of Police, any member of the Police
Department, and any member of the State Police Department at any time.
§ 215-2. Housing of fugitives.
No such proprietor knowingly shall permit any fugitive from justice to stay in his place of business.
§ 215-3. Inspections.
The Chief of Police may inspect or cause to be inspected every motel, hotel, boardinghouse, and inn in
East Hampton as frequently as may be necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this
chapter.
§ 215-4. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be fined not more than $50 or imprisoned
not more than 60 days, or both.
Chapter 219. Housing Code
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 97/200
(1)
A.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Special Town Meeting of the Town of East Hampton 10-14-1976 (Ord. No.
10.02). Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building code — See Ch. 177.
Solid waste — See Ch. 269.
§ 219-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "East Hampton Housing Code."
§ 219-2. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this chapter:
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE
A detached structure which is not used or not intended to be used for living or sleeping by
human occupants and which is located on the same premises.
APPROVED
Approved by the local or state authority having such administrative authority.
ASHES
The residue from the burning of combustible materials and the noncombustible portion of the
refuse charged into an incinerator.
BASEMENT
The portion of the building partly underground, but having less than half its clear height below
the average grade of the adjoining ground.
CELLAR
The portion of the building partly underground, having half or more than half of its clear height
below the average grade of the adjoining ground.
CENTRAL HEATING SYSTEM
A single system supplying heat to one or more dwelling unit(s) or more than one rooming
unit(s).
DWELLING
Any enclosed space which is wholly or partly used or intended to be used for living or
sleeping by human occupants, provided that seasonal and temporary housing as hereinafter
defined and fallout or emergency shelters shall not be regarded as a dwelling.
SEASONAL DWELLING
Seasonal dwelling units not being used for living or sleeping by human occupants for
more than a total of 17 weeks during any calendar year, nor during any parts of the year
except the period from April 1 to November 1 of any year.
DWELLING UNIT
Any room or group of rooms located within a dwelling and forming a single habitable unit with
facilities which are used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating.
EXTERMINATION
The control and elimination of insects, rodents, or other pests by eliminating their harborage
places, by removing or making inaccessible materials that may serve as their food, by
poisoning, spraying, fumigating, trapping, or by any other recognized and legal pest
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 98/200
elimination methods approved by the Housing Code Enforcement officer or his authorized
representative.
FAMILY
One adult person plus one or more persons who are legally related to said person and
residing in the same dwelling unit with said person.
FLUSH WATER CLOSET
A toilet bowl flushed with water under pressure with a water sealed trap above the floor level.
GARBAGE
The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking, serving
and non-consumption and spoilage of food, exclusive of human or animal feces.
GROSS FLOOR AREA
The total area of all habitable space in a building or structure.
GUEST
Any person who shares a dwelling unit in a nonpermanent status for not more than 30 days.
HABITABLE ROOM
A room or enclosed floor space used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking, or
eating purposes, excluding bathrooms, water closet compartments, laundries, furnace rooms,
pantries, kitchenettes and utility rooms of less than 50 square feet, foyers, or communicating
corridors, stairways, closets, storage spaces, and workshops, hobby and recreation areas in
unsealed or uninsulated parts of structure below ground level or in attics, and fallout or
emergency shelters.
HEATED WATER
Water heated to a temperature of not less than 120° F.
HOUSEHOLD
A family and one or more unrelated persons, including servants and not more than two
boarders, who share the same dwelling and use some or all of its cooking and eating
facilities.
HOUSING CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER
The Director of Health or his authorized representative who shall be the official charged with
the administration of this chapter.
HOUSING OFFICIAL
The official charged with the administration and enforcement of this chapter; namely, the
Housing Code Enforcement officer or his authorized representative.
INFESTATION
The presence within or around a dwelling of any insects, rodents, or other pests.
KITCHEN
Any room containing any or all of the following equipment, or area of a room within three feet
of such equipment: sink and/or device for dishwashing, stove or other device for cooking,
refrigerator or other device for cool storage of food.
KITCHEN SINK
A sink of a size and design adequate for the purpose of washing eating, and drinking utensils,
located in a kitchen, properly connected with a cold and hot water line.
LAVATORY
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 99/200
(1)
(2)
A handwashing basin which is properly connected with both a hot and cold water line and
which is separate and distinct from a kitchen sink.
LEAD PAINT
Any pigmented, liquid substance applied to surfaces by brush, roller, or spray in which the
total nonvolatile ingredient contains more than 1% of lead, by weight, calculated as metallic
lead.
MODERATE COOKING FACILITIES
Portable electric "plug-in" or small gas appliances, and a refrigerator.
MULTIPLE DWELLING
Any dwelling containing more than two dwelling units.
OCCUPANT
Any person, over one year of age, living, sleeping, cooking, or eating in, or actually having
possession of, a dwelling unit or a rooming unit, except that in dwelling units a guest will not
be considered an occupant.
OPERATOR
Any person who has charge, care or control of a building, or part thereof, in which dwelling
units or rooming units are let.
ORDINARY SUMMER CONDITIONS
A temperature 10° F. below the highest recorded out-of-doors temperature in the locality for
the prior ten-year period.
ORDINARY WINTER CONDITIONS
An outdoors temperature of 5° F.
OWNER
Any person, who, alone or jointly or severally with others:
Shall have legal title to any dwelling or dwelling unit or rooming house with or without
accompanying actual possession thereof; or
Shall have charge, care, or control of any dwelling or dwelling unit or rooming house as
owner or agent of the owner, or an executor, administrator, trustee or guardian of the
estate of the owner. Any such person thus representing the actual owner shall be bound
to comply with the provisions of this chapter and of the rules and regulations adopted
pursuant thereto, to the same extent as if he were the owner.
PERMISSIBLE OCCUPANCY
The maximum number of persons permitted as a family or household to reside in a dwelling
unit or rooming unit based on the square foot per person in habitable rooms.
PERSON
Includes any individual, firm, corporation, association, or partnership.
PLUMBING
Includes all of the following supplied facilities and equipment: gas pipes, gas-burning
equipment, water pipes, garbage disposal units, waste pipes, water closets, sinks, installed
dishwashers, lavatories, bathtubs, shower baths, installed clothes washing machines, catch
basins, drains, vents, and any other similar supplies fixtures, together with all connections to
water, sewer, septic tank or gas lines.
POTENTIAL HAZARDOUS MATERIAL
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 100/200
(1)
(2)
Any material, including building material, containing lead and/or other toxic heavy metal
compound in concentrations dangerous to the public health as deemed by the State
Department of Health.
PREMISES
A plotted lot or part thereof or unplotted lot or parcel of land or plot of land, either occupied or
unoccupied by any dwelling or non-dwelling structure, and includes any such building,
accessory structure or other structure thereon.
PRIVACY
The ability of a person or persons to carry out an activity commenced without interruption or
interference, either by sight or sound, by unwanted persons.
RATPROOFING
A form of construction which will prevent the ingress or egress of rats to or from a given space
or building, or their gaining access to food, water, or harborage. It consists of the closing and
keeping closed of every opening in foundations, basements, cellars, and exterior and interior
walls.
REFUSE
All putrescible and nonputrescible solids (except body wastes), including garbage, rubbish,
ashes and dead animals.
ROOMING HOUSE
Any dwelling or that part of any dwelling containing one or more rooming units, in which space
is let or offered by the owner or operator to three or more persons who are not members of a
single family.
ROOMING UNIT
Any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit used or intended to be used for
living and sleeping, but not for cooking or eating purposes; provided, however, that in the
case of a rooming unit containing not more than one room and occupied by not more than two
persons, moderate cooking facilities may be permitted.
RUBBISH
Nonputrescible solid wastes (excluding ashes) consisting of both:
Combustible wastes such as wastepaper, cardboard, plastic containers, waste lumber,
dead trees, tree stumps; and
Noncombustible wastes such as tin cans, bottles and crockery, abandoned automobiles,
machinery, and other waste materials.
SAFETY
The condition of being free from danger and hazards which may cause accidents or disease.
SEPTIC TANK
An impermeable receptacle, usually underground, to which sewage is drained and retained to
effect disintegration of the organic matter by bacteria.
SPACE HEATER
A self-contained, vented, fuel-burning appliance.
SUPPLIED
Paid for, furnished, provided by, or under the control of the owner or operator.
TEMPORARY HOUSING
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 101/200
B.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
Any tent, trailer, mobile home or any other structure used for human shelter which is designed
to be transportable and is not attached to the ground, to another structure, or to any utility
system on the same premises for more than 30 consecutive days.
TOILET
A water closet, with a bowl and trap made in one piece, which is of such shape and form and
which holds a sufficient quantity of water under pressure so that no fecal matter will collect on
the surface of the bowl and which is equipped with flushing rims which permit the bowl to be
properly flushed and scoured when water is discharged through the flushing rims.
VENTILATION
The process of supplying and removing air by natural or mechanical means to or from any
space.
Meaning of certain words. Whenever the words "dwelling," "dwelling unit," "rooming house,"
"rooming unit," "premises," or "structure" are used in this chapter, they shall be construed as
though they were followed by the words "or any part thereof." Words used in the singular include
the plural, and the plural the singular; the masculine gender includes the feminine and the
feminine the masculine.
§ 219-3. Responsibilities of owners and occupants.
No owner or other person shall occupy or let to another person any vacant dwelling or dwelling
unit unless it and the premises are clean, sanitary, fit for human occupancy, and comply with all
applicable legal requirements of the State of Connecticut and the Town of East Hampton.
Every owner of a dwelling containing three or more dwelling units shall maintain in a clean and
sanitary condition the shared or public areas of the dwelling and premises thereof.
Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall maintain in a clean and sanitary condition that
part or those parts of the dwelling, dwelling unit and premises thereof that the occupies and
controls.
Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall dispose of all his rubbish in a clean, sanitary
and safe manner.
Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall dispose of all his garbage and any other
organic waste which might provide food for rodents and other vermin in a clean, sanitary and safe
manner, and if a container is used for storage pending collection, it shall be rodentproof,
insectproof, and watertight.
Every owner of a dwelling containing three or more dwelling units shall supply adequate facilities
or containers for the sanitary and safe storage and disposal of rubbish and garbage. In the case of
single- or two-family dwellings, it shall be the responsibility of the occupant to furnish such
facilities.
Every occupant of a dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit shall give the owner thereof, or his
agent or employee, access to any part of such dwelling, dwelling unit, or its premises, at all
reasonable times, for the purpose of making such repairs or alterations as are necessary to effect
compliance with the provisions of this chapter or with any lawful rule or regulation adopted or any
lawful order issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
The owner of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall be responsible for providing and fitting all screens on
windows and doors leading directly to the outdoors whenever the same are required under the
provisions of this chapter or any rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto [see § 219-7B(1)],
except where an agreement between the owner and occupant has been arranged in writing. In the
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 102/200
I.
J.
(1)
(2)
A.
B.
C.
D.
absence of such an agreement, maintenance and replacement of screens, once installed by the
owner, become the responsibility of the occupant.
Every occupant of a dwelling containing a single dwelling unit shall be responsible for the
extermination of any insects, rodents, or other pests therein or on the premises; and every
occupant of a dwelling unit in a dwelling containing more than one dwelling unit shall be
responsible for such extermination whenever his dwelling unit is the only one infested.
Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this subsection, whenever infestation is caused by
failure of the owner to maintain a dwelling in a ratproof or reasonably insectproof condition,
extermination shall be the responsibility of the owner. Whenever infestation exists in two or more
of the dwelling units in any dwelling, or in the shared or public parts of any dwelling containing two
or more dwelling units, extermination therefor shall be the responsibility of the owner.
Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall keep all plumbing fixtures therein in a clean and sanitary
condition and shall be responsible for the exercise of reasonable care in the proper use and
operation thereof.
§ 219-4. Minimum standards for basic equipment and facilities.
No person shall occupy as owner or occupant or let to another for occupancy any dwelling or dwelling
unit, for the purposes of living, sleeping, cooking or eating therein, which does not comply with the
following requirements:
Every dwelling unit shall have a room or portion of a room in which food may be prepared and/or
cooked and which shall be equipped with the following:
A kitchen sink in good working condition and properly connected to a water supply system
which is approved by the appropriate authority and which is capable of providing at all times
an adequate amount of heated and unheated running water under pressure and to a public or
private sewer system which is approved by the Housing Code Enforcement Officer.
A stove, or similar device, for cooking food and a refrigerator, or similar device, for the safe
storage of food at all times at temperatures less than 50° F., but more than 32° F., which are
properly installed with all necessary connections for safe, sanitary and efficient operation;
provided that such stove, refrigerator, and/or similar devices need not be installed when a
dwelling unit is not occupied or when the occupant is expected to provide same on
occupancy, and that sufficient space for the safe and efficient installation and operation of
said stove, refrigerator and/or similar devices is provided. Any agreement between owner and
occupant shall be in writing.
Within every dwelling unit there shall be a room which affords privacy to a person within said room
and which is equipped with a flush water closet in good working condition. Said flush water closet
shall be connected to a water system that at all times provides an adequate amount of running
water under pressure as to cause the toilet to be operated properly and shall be connected to a
public or private sewer system which is approved by the Housing Code Enforcement Officer.
Within every dwelling unit there shall be a room, which affords privacy to a person, which is
equipped with a lavatory sink. Said lavatory sink may be in the same room as the flush water
closet or in another room. The lavatory sink shall be in good working condition and properly
connected to a water supply system which is approved by the appropriate authority and which is
capable of providing at all times an adequate amount of heated and unheated running water under
pressure, and to a public or private sewer system which is approved by the Housing Code
Enforcement Officer.
Within every dwelling unit there shall be a room which affords privacy to a person within said room
and which is equipped with a bathtub or shower in good working condition. Said bathtub or shower
may be in the same room as the flush water closet or in another room and shall be properly
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 103/200
E.
A.
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
D.
connected to a water supply system which is approved by the appropriate authority and which is
capable of providing at all times an adequate amount of heated and unheated water under
pressure, and to a public or private sewer system which is approved by the Housing Code
Enforcement Officer.
Every dwelling unit shall have one or more approved means of egress leading to safe and open
space at ground level, as required by the laws of this state and this Town.
§ 219-5. Minimum standards for light, ventilation and electric
service.
No person shall occupy as owner, occupant or let to another for occupancy any dwelling or dwelling
unit, for the purpose of living therein, which does not comply with the following requirements:
Every habitable room shall have at least one window or skylight facing directly outdoors. The
minimum total window area, measured between stops, for every habitable room shall be 10% of
the floor area of such room. Whenever walls or other portions of structures face a window of any
such room and such light-obstruction structures are located less than three feet from the window
and extend to a level above that of the ceiling of the room, such window shall not be deemed to
face directly to the outdoors and shall not be included as contributing to the required minimum
total window area. Whenever the only window in a room is a skylight-type window, the total
window area of such skylight shall be equal at least 15% of the total floor area of such room.
Every habitable room shall have at least one window or skylight which can easily be opened, or
such other device as will adequately ventilate the room. The total of openable window area in
every habitable room shall be equal to at least 45% of the minimum window area size or minimum
skylight-type window size, as required in Subsection A of this section, except where there is
supplied some other device affording adequate ventilation and approved by the Housing Code
Enforcement Officer.
Every bathroom and water closet compartment shall comply with the light and ventilation
requirement for habitable rooms contained in Subsections A and B, except that no window or
skylight shall be required in adequately ventilated bathrooms and water closet compartments
equipped with a ventilation system which is approved by the Housing Code Enforcement Officer.
Where there is no electric service available from power lines which are not more than 300 feet
away from a dwelling, every dwelling unit and all public and common areas shall be supplied with
electric service outlets and fixtures which shall be properly installed, shall be maintained in good
and safe working condition, and shall be connected to the source of electric power in a manner
prescribed by the ordinances, rules and regulations of the Town. The capacity of such services
and the number of outlets and fixtures shall be as follows:
Every habitable room shall have an electric service and outlets and/or fixtures capable of
providing at least three watts per square foot of floor area.
Every habitable room shall have at least one floor- or wall-type electric convenience outlet for
each 60 feet or fraction thereof of floor area, and in no case fewer than two such outlets per
room.
Every water closet compartment, bathroom, laundry room, furnace room, and public hall shall
contain at least one supplied ceiling or wall-type electric light fixture.
Convenience switches for turning on one light in each room or passageway shall be located
so as to permit the area ahead to be lighted.
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 104/200
E.
A.
B.
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
C.
D.
Every public hall and stairway in every multiple dwelling shall be adequately lighted at all times so
as to provide at least six footcandles of light at the tread or floor level. All such lights shall be
maintained by the owner and on circuits supplied through a meter independent of meters used by
any family unit and operated by a suitable time switch. Every public hall and stairway in structures
containing not more than two dwelling units shall be supplied with conveniently located light
switches, controlling an adequate lighting system which may be turned on when needed, instead
of full-time lighting; the maintenance of such lights in structures containing not more than two
dwelling units shall be guided by whatever rental agreement exists between owner and tenant.
§ 219-6. Minimum thermal standards.
No person shall occupy as owner, occupant or let to another for occupancy any dwelling or dwelling
unit, for the purpose of living therein, which does not comply with the following requirements:
Every dwelling shall have heating facilities supplied by the owner or occupant which are properly
installed, and are maintained in safe and working condition, and are capable of safely and
adequately heating all habitable rooms, bathrooms and water closet compartments in every
dwelling unit located therein at a distance of 18 inches above floor level under ordinary winter
conditions to a temperature of at least 68° F.
Unvented flame space heaters are prohibited.
§ 219-7. General maintenance requirements.
No person shall occupy as owner, occupant or let to another for occupancy any dwelling or dwelling
unit, for the purpose of living therein, which does not comply with the following requirements:
Every foundation, floor, roof, ceiling, exterior and interior wall shall be reasonably weathertight,
watertight, and damp-free, shall be kept in sound condition and good repair, and shall be capable
of affording privacy for the occupants.
Every window, exterior door, rain gutter, rain leader, and basement hatchway or similar devices
shall be kept rodentproof and watertight and weathertight, and shall be kept in sound working
condition and good repair.
During that portion of the year when there is need for protection against mosquitoes, flies and
other flying insects, every door opening directly from a dwelling unit to outside space shall
have supplied properly fitting screens having at least 16 mesh and self-closing devices, and
every window or other device with openings to outdoor space, used or intended to be used for
ventilation, shall likewise be supplied with screens.
Every window located at or near ground level used or intended to be used for ventilation, and
every other opening located at or near ground level which might provide an entry for rodents,
shall be supplied with adequate gauge screen or such other devices as will effectively prevent
their entrance.
Every dwelling, other building or accessory structure shall be rodentproof and maintained so as to
prevent rodent harborage.
Every foundation, roof, floor, exterior and interior wall, ceiling, inside and outside stair, every
porch, and every appurtenance thereto, shall be safe to use and capable of supporting the loads
that normal use may cause to be placed thereon, and shall be kept in sound condition and good
repair. Every inside and outside stair or step shall have uniform risers and treads, and stairways
shall have handrails structurally sound of reasonable height and, where needed, balustrades
adequately spaced.
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 105/200
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
A.
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
D.
Every plumbing fixture and water and waste pipe shall be properly installed and maintained in
good sanitary working condition.
Every water closet compartment, bathroom and kitchen floor surface shall be constructed and
maintained so as to be impervious to water so as to permit such floor to be easily kept in a clean
and sanitary condition.
Every plumbing fixture and pipe, every chimney, flue and smoke pipe, and every other facility,
piece of equipment, or utility, which is present in a dwelling or dwelling unit, or which is required
under this chapter, shall be constructed and installed in conformance with the applicable local and
state codes and shall be maintained in satisfactory working condition.
No owner, operator, or occupant shall cause any supplied service, facility, equipment or utility
which is required under this chapter to be removed from or shut off from or discontinued for any
occupied dwelling or dwelling unit let or occupied by him, except for such temporary interruption
as may be necessary while actual repairs or alterations are in process, or during temporary
emergencies when discontinuance of service is approved by the appropriate authority.
All construction and materials and ways and means of egress and installation and use of
equipment shall conform to applicable state and local laws dealing with fire protection.
Every yard shall be properly graded and drained by the owner. The premises upon which a
dwelling is located shall be kept clean by the owner in the case of rooming houses and multiple
dwellings, and by the tenant in other types of dwellings.
§ 219-8. Minimum space, use and location requirements.
No person shall occupy or let to be occupied any dwelling or dwelling unit, for purpose of living therein,
which does not comply with the following requirements:
Every dwelling unit shall contain at least 150 square feet of floor space for the first occupant
thereof and at least 100 square feet of floor space for every additional occupant thereof, the floor
space to be calculated on the basis of total habitable room space.
In every dwelling unit of two or more rooms, and in every habitable room in a rooming house,
every room occupied for sleeping purposes by one occupant shall contain at least 70 square feet
of floor space and every room occupied for sleeping purposes by more than one occupant shall
contain at least 50 square feet of floor space for each occupant thereof.
At least one half of the floor area of every habitable room shall have a ceiling height of at least six
feet, six inches and the floor area of that part of any room where the ceiling height is less than five
feet shall not be considered as part of the floor area in computing the total floor area of the room
for the purpose of determining the maximum permissible occupancy thereof.
No space located partially or totally below grade shall be used as a habitable room or dwelling unit
unless:
The floor and those portions of the walls below grade are of waterproof and damp-proof
construction;
The minimum window area required in [cmz] subsection 5.01 is located entirely above the
grade of the ground adjoining such window area, or, if windows are located below grade,
there be constructed a properly drained window well whose ground area shall be equal to or
greater than the area of the window opening, the bottom of the window well shall be below the
top of the impervious masonry construction under this window, the minimum horizontal
projections of the bottom of the window well shall be equal to or greater than the vertical
dimension of this window opening, and no part of the window well opposite this window shall
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 106/200
(3)
(4)
[1]
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
B.
protrude above a line projected at a forty-five-degree angle from the bottom of the window
opening at right angles to the outer wall.
The total openable window area in each room is equal to at least the minimum as required
under § 219-5B of this chapter, except where there is supplied some other device affording
adequate ventilation and approved by the appropriate authority.
There are no pipes, ducts, or other obstructions less than six feet, eight inches above the floor
level which interfere with the normal use of the room or area.
§ 219-9. Rooming houses.
No person shall operate a rooming house or shall occupy or let to another for occupancy any rooming
unit in any rooming house, except in compliance with the provisions of every section of this chapter
other than the provisions of §§ 219-3 and 219-4. No owner or other person shall occupy or let to
another person any vacant rooming unit unless it is clean, sanitary and fit for human occupancy as
determined by the Housing Code Enforcement Officer and complies with all applicable requirements of
the Town of East Hampton.
No person shall operate a rooming house unless he holds a valid rooming house license issued by
the Housing Code Enforcement Officer, Fire Marshal and Building Inspector. The operator shall
apply to the Housing Code Enforcement Officer after the rooming house has been determined to
be in compliance by the operator with the applicable provisions of this chapter and of the fire
prevention and building codes. This license shall be displayed in a conspicuous place within the
rooming house at all times. No such license shall be transferable. Every person holding such a
license shall give notice in writing to the Housing Code Enforcement Officer within 24 hours after
having sold, transferred, given away, or otherwise disposed of ownership of, interest in, or control
of any rooming house. Such notice shall include the name and address of the person succeeding
to the ownership or control of such rooming house. Every rooming house license shall expire at
the end of one year following its date of issue, unless sooner suspended or revoked as hereinafter
provided. The fee for such and for its renewal shall be in an amount as set from time to time by the
Town Council.[1]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
At least one flush water closet, lavatory basin and bathtub or shower, properly connected to a
water and public or private sewer system approved by the Housing Code Enforcement Officer and
in good working condition, shall be supplied for each eight persons or fraction thereof residing
within a rooming house, including members of the operator's family wherever they share the use
of said facilities, provided that:
In a rooming house where rooms are let only to males, flush urinals may be substituted for not
more than one-half the required number of water closets.
All such facilities shall be so located within the dwelling as to be reasonably accessible from a
common hall or passageway to all persons sharing such facilities; at least one bathroom unit
must be provided on each floor on which guests' sleeping rooms are located.
Every lavatory basin and bathtub or shower shall be supplied with heated and unheated water
at all times.
No such facilities shall be located in a basement, except by written approval of the Housing
Code Enforcement Officer.
Cooking in a rooming unit shall be prohibited, except as provided in the definition of "rooming
unit" in § 219-2.
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 107/200
(6)
(7)
C.
D.
E.
F.
A.
B.
A.
Communal cooking and dining facilities in a rooming house shall be prohibited, except as
approved by the Housing Code Enforcement Officer in writing.
Rooming unit doors shall have operating locks to ensure privacy.
The operator of every rooming house shall change supplied bed linen and towels therein at least
once each week, and prior to the letting of any room to any occupant. The operator shall be
responsible for the maintenance of all supplied bedding in a clean and sanitary manner.
Every room occupied for sleeping purposes by one person shall contain at least 70 square feet of
floor space, and every room occupied for sleeping purposes by more than one person shall
contain at least 50 square feet of floor space for each occupant thereof.
Every rooming unit shall have one or more safe, unobstructed means of egress leading to safe
and open space at ground level, as required by the law of this state and this Town.
Every provision of this chapter which applies to rooming houses shall also apply to hotels and
motels, except to the extent that any such provision may be found in conflict with the laws of this
state or this Town.
§ 219-10. Inspection of dwellings, dwelling units, seasonal units,
rooming units and premises.
The Housing Code Enforcement Officer is hereby authorized and directed to make periodic
inspections to determine the condition of the dwellings, dwelling units, seasonal units, rooming
units and premises within this Town of East Hampton for the purpose of determining compliance
with the provisions of this chapter. For the purpose of making such inspections, the Housing Code
Enforcement officer is hereby authorized to enter, examine and survey between the hours of 8:30
a.m. and 4:30 p.m. all dwellings, dwelling units, seasonal units, rooming units and premises, or at
such other time mutually satisfactory to and agreed upon by the Housing Code Enforcement
Officer and the owner or occupant or person in charge of a dwelling, dwelling unit, seasonal unit,
or rooming unit. Such inspection, examination or survey shall not have for its purpose the undue
harassment of said owner or occupant; and such inspection, examination or survey shall be made
so as to cause the least amount of inconvenience to said owner or occupant consistent with an
efficient performance of the duties of the Housing Code Enforcement Officer. The Housing Code
Enforcement Officer is also authorized and directed to inspect seasonal housing to determine
whether or not it qualifies as seasonal housing.
The provisions of the foregoing subsection shall not authorize entry by force to make such
inspections, and in the event the owner or occupant of a dwelling, dwelling unit, seasonal unit or
rooming unit, or the person in charge thereof, shall refuse to permit entry for such an inspection,
entry for such purpose shall be allowed only through a properly issued warrant in accordance with
law. Each occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit or seasonal unit shall give the owner thereof, or
his agent or employee, access to any part of such dwelling or dwelling unit, seasonal unit, or its
premises, at all reasonable times for the purpose of making such repairs and/or alterations as are
necessary to effect compliance with the provisions of this chapter or any lawful order issued
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
§ 219-11. Enforcement.
Whenever the Housing Code Enforcement Officer determines that conditions exist which cause
any dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit or premises to fail to meet the minimum standards
provided for in this chapter or regulations pursuant thereto, he shall issue a notice setting forth the
alleged failure or failures and requiring that such failures be corrected. The notices shall:
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 108/200
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
B.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
Be put in writing.
Set forth the alleged violation or violations of this chapter, or of the rules and regulations
pursuant thereto, and describe the dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit or premises where the
violation is alleged to exist or to have been committed.
Provide a reasonable time, but not to exceed 60 days, for the correction of any violation
alleged.
Be served upon the owner, occupant or person in charge of the dwelling, dwelling unit,
rooming unit or premises by personal service as provided for in the rules of the courts of this
state; or by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, delivered to addresses only.
If one or more persons to whom such notice is addressed cannot be found after diligent effort
to do so, service may be made upon such person or persons by posting a notice in a
conspicuous place in or about the dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit or premises described
in the notice.
After the passage of the period of time allowed for the correction of any violation alleged, the
Housing Code Enforcement Officer shall reinspect the dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit or
premises described in the notice following the procedure detailed in this section.
§ 219-12. Hearings and appeals.
There is hereby created a Housing Code Appeals Committee which shall consist of five electors of
the Town who shall be appointed by resolution of the Town Council for terms of two years.
Any person aggrieved by a notice of violation addressed to such person by the Housing Code
Enforcement Officer and issued in connection with any inspection, examination, or survey
pursuant to this chapter shall be granted a hearing on such notice of violation before the Housing
Code Appeals Committee, provided that such person shall file in the office of the Housing Code
Appeals Committee a written petition bearing the petitioner's name and present address;
requesting a hearing, and setting forth the grounds therefor within 20 days after the notice of the
Housing Code Enforcement Officer was served upon such person. Within 10 days of the receipt of
such petition, the Housing Code Appeals Committee shall set a time and place for such hearing
and shall give the petitioner written notice thereof. Such notice of hearing shall be by registered or
certified mail, return receipt requested. At the hearing, the petitioner shall have the opportunity to
present such facts as shall support petitioner's contention that the notice should be modified or
withdrawn. Such a hearing shall take place within a reasonable time after the receipt of the petition
by the Housing Code Appeals Committee.
After the conclusion of the hearing a majority of the Housing Code Appeals Committee shall be
empowered to sustain, modify, or withdraw the notice of violation. Variances from the provisions of
this chapter may be granted where circumstances warrant, if in the judgment of the Housing Code
Appeals Committee no harm to the public health, welfare, and safety will result from such
variance.
The Housing Code Appeals Committee is hereby authorized to administer oaths and affirmations
to witnesses at such hearings and to take the testimony of witnesses and receive exhibits
presented in such hearings.
All proceedings at such hearings, including the findings of fact and decision, shall be reduced to
writing, and said findings and decision shall be certified and filed in the office of the Housing Code
Enforcement Officer.
Any person aggrieved by the final decision of the Housing Code Appeals Committee may appeal
to any court of competent jurisdiction, as provided by the laws of this state.
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 109/200
G.
A.
B.
Whenever, in the judgment of the Housing Code Enforcement Officer, an emergency exists which
requires immediate action to protect the public health, welfare, or safety, the Housing Code Officer
may, forthwith and without notice or hearing, cause to be issued and served an order describing
the violation and reciting the existence of the emergency. The Housing Code Enforcement Officer
may then take such action under the law as such Housing Code Enforcement Officer deems
necessary to eliminate and cure the violation. Any aggrieved person who is served with such a
notice of violation and order shall comply with its directions at once. Said aggrieved person shall,
upon request, be given a hearing by the Housing Code Appeals Committee within 24 hours of any
request for such hearing, however.
§ 219-13. Suspension of permits for rooming houses.
The Housing Code Enforcement Officer is hereby authorized to enter, inspect, examine, and
survey all rooming houses between the hours of 8:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m. Whenever, upon
inspection of any rooming house, the Housing Code Enforcement Officer finds that conditions or
practices exist which are in violation of any provision of this chapter or of any applicable rule or
regulation adopted pursuant thereto, the Housing Code Enforcement Officer shall give notice in
writing to the operator of such rooming house that unless such conditions are corrected within a
reasonable time the operator's permit shall be suspended. At the end of such period of time, the
Housing Code Enforcement Officer shall reinspect such rooming house, and if he determines that
such conditions have not been corrected, he shall issue an order suspending the operator's
permit.
Any person whose permit to operate a rooming house has been suspended by order of the
Housing Code Enforcement Officer may petition for and be granted a hearing on the matter in the
manner prescribed by § 219-12 on hearings. If no such petition for hearings is forthcoming within
10 days following the day on which a permit is suspended, said permit shall be deemed revoked,
except that at any time within 10 days following such suspension any person whose permit has
been suspended shall have the opportunity to demonstrate to the Housing Code Enforcement
Officer that his rooming house is now in compliance with this chapter and with all regulations
pursuant thereto. Where such compliance is demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Housing Code
Enforcement Officer, the suspension of the rooming house permit shall be terminated.
§ 219-14. Rules and regulations.
The Town Council is hereby authorized to make, adopt, revise and amend such rules and regulations
as it deems necessary for the carrying out of the provisions of this chapter in accordance with the
procedures established by state statutes and Town Charter.
§ 219-15. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who shall refuse or fail to obey an order of the Housing Code Enforcement Officer or the
Housing Code Appeals Committee to meet the minimum standards of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be fined not less than $50 nor more than $100. Each day's failure to comply shall constitute
a separate violation.
§ 219-16. Designation of unfit dwellings; condemnation.
The designation of dwellings or dwelling units as unfit for human habitation and the procedure for the
condemnation and placarding of such unfit dwellings or dwelling units shall be carried out in
compliance with the following requirements:
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 110/200
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
A.
Any dwelling or dwelling unit which shall be found to have any of the following defects shall be
condemned as unfit for human habitation and shall be so designated and placarded by the
Housing Code Enforcement Officer:
One which is so damaged, decayed, dilapidated, unsanitary, unsafe, or vermin-infested that it
creates a serious hazard to the health or safety of the occupants or of the public.
One which lacks illumination, ventilation, or sanitation facilities adequate to protect the health
or safety of the occupants or of the public.
One which because of its general condition or location is unsanitary, or otherwise dangerous
to the health or safety of the occupants or of the public.
Any unit condemned as unfit for human habitation and so designated and placarded by the
Housing Code Enforcement Officer shall be vacated within a reasonable time as ordered by the
Housing Code Enforcement Officer.
No dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit that has been condemned and placarded as unfit for
human habitation shall again be used for human habitation until written approval is secured from
and such placard is removed by permission of the Housing Code Enforcement Officer. The
Housing Code Enforcement Officer shall permit removal of such placard by the owner, occupant,
or person in charge of the dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit whenever the defect or defects
upon which the placarding action was based have been eliminated.
No person shall deface or remove the placard from any dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit
which has been condemned as unfit for human habitation and placarded as such, except when
such action has been authorized by the Housing Code Enforcement Officer as provided for in
Subsection C above. Whoever violates this provision shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of
not less than $25 nor more than $50.
Any person aggrieved by any order involving the placarding of a dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming
unit may request and be granted a hearing under the conditions specified in § 219-12 above.
When no corrective action is taken by the owner, occupant, or person in charge of a dwelling,
dwelling unit or rooming unit designated as unfit for human habitation for six months and when no
hearing is pending, the Housing Code Enforcement Officer shall order the structure in violation to
be demolished within a reasonable time as ordered by the Housing Code Enforcement Officer.
Nothing herein contained shall be interpreted as precluding any private right of action of any
person against an owner, occupant or person in charge of the placarded structure.
Whenever an unoccupied building, whether of the residential, commercial or industrial type,
becomes so damaged, decayed, dilapidated, unsanitary, unsafe, rat or vermin infested as to be
considered a source of danger to the life or health of persons who live in the vicinity, it shall be
declared a public nuisance by the Housing Code Enforcement officer. Said officer shall issue an
order to the owner, in writing, for the physical rehabilitation of the structure before it is reoccupied.
Whenever any such building remains unoccupied for a period of six months and is allowed to
deteriorate to the extent mentioned above, the Housing Code Enforcement officer shall issue an
order to the owner to have the structure razed within one month of said order. The failure of any
person to comply with such order shall be dealt with according to the procedure in Section 16.6
§ 219-17. Conflict of ordinances; severability; liability of
enforcement officer.
In any case where a provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict with any existing code,
ordinance or regulation of this Town existing on the effective date of this chapter, the provision
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 111/200
B.
C.
A.
B.
which establishes the higher standard for the promotion and protection of the health and safety of
the people shall prevail.
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this chapter should be
declared invalid for any reason whatsoever, such decision shall not affect the remaining portions
of this chapter, which shall remain in full force and effect, and to this end the provisions of this
chapter are hereby declared to be severable.
The Housing Code Enforcement Officer and his assistants shall be free from personal liability for
acts done in good faith in the performance of official duties.
Chapter 223. Insurance
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town of East Hampton as indicated in article histories. Amendments noted
where applicable.]
Article I. Minimum Coverage for School Bus Operators and
Ambulance Service Providers
[Adopted by the Board of Selectmen 7-23-1985 (Ord. No. 6.02); amended 9-9-1986]
§ 223-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to set minimum public liability insurance requirements for school bus
operators and ambulance service providers for or in the Town of East Hampton.
§ 223-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
AMBULANCE PROVIDER
Any person, firm, partnership, corporation or entity of any nature involved in the business of
providing ambulance transportation, whether gratuitously or for monetary payment.
SCHOOL BUS OPERATOR
Any person, firm, partnership, corporation or entity of any nature involved in the business of
supplying transportation by school bus, whether gratuitously or for monetary payment, of pupils to
and from school or school activities.
§ 223-3. Requirements.
All school bus operators doing business for or in the Town of East Hampton shall maintain a motor
vehicle liability policy reflecting liability insurance coverage with a combined single limit of not less
than $3,000,000 for each occurrence involving either bodily injury or property damage.
All ambulance providers doing business for or in the Town of East Hampton shall maintain a motor
vehicle liability policy reflecting liability insurance coverage with a combined single limit of not less
than $1,000,000 for each occurrence involving either bodily injury or property damage.
§ 223-4. Filing proof of coverage.
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 112/200
[1]
A certificate of insurance complying with the requirements of this article shall be filed with the Town
Clerk of East Hampton on or before July 1 of each year. The certificate must be issued by an insurance
company or companies licensed to do business in the State of Connecticut. The certificate of
insurance shall indicate that the Town shall receive 30 days' notice prior to any material change or
cancellation of the insurance coverage.
§ 223-5. No Town liability for failure to comply.
Notwithstanding the provisions hereof, the Town of East Hampton shall not be liable in any matter or to
any person whatsoever for the failure of any school bus operator or ambulance provider to be in
compliance herewith.
Chapter 228. Junk Dealers
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Special Town Meeting of the Town of East Hampton 5-10-1965.
Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bazaars and raffles — See Ch. 169.
Peddlers and solicitors — See Ch. 250.
Storage of vehicles — See Ch. 291.
§ 228-1. License required.
It shall be unlawful to operate or carry on the business of a junk dealer, as defined by the General
Statutes of Connecticut, as amended, within the Town of East Hampton without first having obtained a
license therefor as provided herein.
§ 228-2. Application for license; fees; state certificate of
registration required.
Applications for such license shall be made annually upon forms provided by the Chief of Police, and
shall be accompanied by a license fee as set from time to time by the Town Council. At the time such
license is issued, an additional annual fee as set from time to time by the Town Council shall be paid
for each vehicle used in connection with such business. No license shall be issued to any junk dealer
until a certificate of registration as a junk dealer, issued by the Commissioner of State Police, is
exhibited to the Chief of Police.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 228-3. Contents of license; term.
Each license issued shall designate the exact name of the junk dealer, his home and business
addresses, the trade name under which he does business, and the location of his junkyard. Each such
license shall continue for one year unless sooner revoked.
§ 228-4. Revocation of license.
Such license may be revoked by the Chief of Police and thereafter may not be renewed upon the
violation by the holder thereof of any statute relating to junk dealers, the provisions of this chapter, or of
the zoning ordinances of East Hampton relating to junkyards.
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 113/200
[1]
[1]
[1]
§ 228-5. Vehicles used in business.
Each vehicle used by a junk dealer in the conduct of his business shall bear thereon in legible
characters the name and address of the owner and proprietor thereof.
§ 228-6. Reporting requirements; maintenance of goods after
statement is filed.
Each such dealer shall keep a book in which shall be written in English a description of such articles
and the name and residence and a general description of the person from whom, and the time and
hour when, such property was received; and such book, and all articles of property mentioned therein,
and the place where such business is carried on, may be examined at any time by the Town Council or
any person designated by it. Each such dealer shall make weekly, sworn statements of all his
transactions under such license, describing the goods received and setting forth the name and
residence and a description of the person from whom such goods were received, to the Town Clerk of
the Town in which such junk dealer resides, and shall keep all goods at least five days after the filing of
such statement.
Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 228-7. Exceptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any dealer in motor vehicles, as defined in Chapter
246 of the Connecticut General Statutes, nor to any dealer in antique household furniture, china or
glassware, nor to any scrap metal processor, as defined in C.G.S. § 14-67w.
Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 228-8. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be fined not more than $50 and/or
imprisoned for not more than three months.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
Chapter 232. Littering
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town Council of the Town of East Hampton 4-23-1991 (Ord. No. 4.15).
Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Removal of animal waste — See Ch. 165, Art. I.
Mass gatherings — See Ch. 237.
Sewer use — See Ch. 264.
Solid waste — See Ch. 269.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 273.
§ 232-1. Depositing of litter prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, in person or by his/her agent, employee or
servant, to cast, throw, sweep, sift or deposit in any manner in or upon any public way or other public
place in the Town or any river, public water, drain, sewer or receiving basin within the jurisdiction of
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 114/200
[1]
[2]
[1]
East Hampton, any kind of dirt, rubbish, waste article, thing or substance whatsoever, whether liquid or
solid; nor shall any person, firm or corporation cast, throw, sweep, sift or deposit any of the
aforementioned items anywhere within the jurisdiction of East Hampton in such manner that it may be
carried or deposited, in whole or in part, by the action of the sun, wind, rain or snow into any of the
aforementioned places; provided that this section shall not apply to the deposit of material under a
permit authorized by any ordinance of East Hampton or to goods, wares or merchandise deposited
upon any public way or other public place temporarily, in the necessary course of trade, and removed
therefrom within two hours after being so deposited or to articles or things deposited in or conducted
into the Town sewer system through lawful drains in accordance with the ordinances of the Town
relating thereto.[2]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
Editor's Note: See Ch. 264, Sewer Use.
§ 232-2. Covering of vehicles transporting rubbish.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, in person or by his/her or its agent, employee or
servant, to use any vehicle to haul any kind of dirt, rubbish, waste articles or things or substance,
whether liquid or solid, unless such vehicle is covered to prevent any part of its load from spilling or
dropping at all times while such vehicle is in motion on any street or alley in the municipality; provided,
however, that the requirements herein for covering such vehicles shall not apply to vehicles carrying
brush cuttings, tree trimmings, branches, logs and similar waste material, if such matter is securely
lashed to such vehicle, to prevent spilling or dropping as aforesaid.
§ 232-3. Penalties for offenses.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined not less
than $50 nor more than $199 for each offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on
each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
Chapter 237. (Reserved)
[Former Ch. 237, Mass Gatherings, adopted 10-8-1985 by Ord. No. 9.02, as amended, was
repealed 4-14-2015. See now Ch. 271, Special Events.]
Chapter 246. Parks and Recreation
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town of East Hampton as indicated in article histories. Amendments noted
where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Consumption of alcohol in public — See Ch. 157, Art. I.
Littering — See Ch. 232.
Mass gatherings — See Ch. 237.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 287.
Peddlers and solicitors — See Ch. 250.
Article I. Operation and Use
[Adopted by the Board of Selectmen 5-17-1976]
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 115/200
§ 246-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated.
COMMISSION
The East Hampton Park and Recreation Commission or any board, commission or authority of the
Town of East Hampton as shall be empowered to operate and manage parks and recreation areas
in said Town.
PARK
Sears Park and any other park or recreation area owned or operated by the Town of East
Hampton now or in the future.
§ 246-2. Hours of operation.
[Amended 5-27-1980]
Sears Park or any other Town park shall be closed to the public and all motor vehicles from one-half
hour after sunset to one-half hour before sunrise. The Town Manager or his agent(s), subject to review
by the Park and Recreation Commission, may close any portion of a park and park lands or the use of
any of the facilities when it appears that the capacity of the area has been filled or if for any reason the
use of the same would be a danger to public safety or for the protection of the area or facility itself.
Special permission to enter Sears Park or any Town park or park lands from one-half hour after sunset
to one-half hour before sunrise may be granted by the Park and Recreation Commission under
appropriate restrictions, for special projects or purposes.
§ 246-3. Injury to buildings, shrubs, ornamental lawns, wildlife;
fires.
No person shall deface, remove, destroy or otherwise injure in any manner whatsoever any structure,
building, tree, flower, shrub, fern, moss or ornamental lawn in any park, nor shall any birds or their
nests or any other wildlife in any park be molested or disturbed at any time. No person shall set or
cause to be set any fire within five feet of any tree, building, flower or shrub in any park.
§ 246-4. Fishing regulated.
Fishing, except in restricted areas, is permitted in any park, subject to regulations issued under the
authority of § 26-112 of the Connecticut General Statutes, except that no fishing is permitted in
swimming or other restricted areas therein.
§ 246-5. Possession or drinking of alcoholic beverages.
The possession or drinking of alcoholic beverages in any park is prohibited.
§ 246-6. Pets and riding animals.
Within any park pets and riding animals, including but not limited to dogs and horses, are prohibited in
buildings, in bathing areas, in picnic areas, in the waters of bathing areas and in other areas so
designated by signs posted by the Commission; dogs and other pets are permitted in nonrestricted
recreational areas on leash only and under control of their owners and/or keepers.
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 116/200
§ 246-7. Notices and signs.
No person shall erect or post any notice or sign upon park property unless such notice or sign is
authorized by the Commission.
§ 246-8. Commercial use of lands regulated.
The use of park lands or any improvements thereon for private gain or commercial purposes is
prohibited, except by concessionaires or vendors approved by the Commission.
§ 246-9. Disposal of refuse.
No person shall leave paper, glass, garbage or other refuse on the grounds, in the buildings or on the
waters of the Town parks, but all persons shall place such refuse in the receptacles provided therefor.
§ 246-10. Dumping prohibited.
Dumping on any park lands is prohibited.
§ 246-11. Anchoring of boats.
No boats of any kind shall be fastened to any Town pier or anchored in any dock or launching area in
any park so as to prevent free access thereto.
§ 246-12. Gambling prohibited.
Gambling in any form is prohibited on park lands.
§ 246-13. Disorderly conduct.
Any form of disorderly conduct or activity creating hazards to human safety or property is prohibited in
Town parks.
§ 246-14. Designation of picnic areas.
Picnicking is prohibited in park lands except in areas designated as permissible therefor by
Commission signs.
§ 246-15. Fires.
No fires may be kindled in any park except in areas where expressly permitted by the Commission. No
fire shall be left unattended or unextinguished.
§ 246-16. Bathing.
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 117/200
Bathing in park areas is restricted to places designated as permissible therefor by Commission signs
and is further subject to the control of lifeguards, patrolmen or unit managers.
§ 246-17. Changing of clothing.
The changing of clothes in any park except in places provided for such purpose is prohibited.
§ 246-18. Tents prohibited.
Tents, full coverage screens, or similar equipment is prohibited on beach and picnic areas of park
lands.
§ 246-19. Crockery prohibited on beach.
The possession or use of crockery or glassware is prohibited on beaches of park lands.
§ 246-20. Bathing without suit prohibited.
Bathing without a bathing suit is prohibited in any park.
§ 246-21. Use of machinery or equipment within parks.
The use of motor vehicles, motorcycles or of machinery, equipment or any other apparatus that
disturbs the tranquility of other visitors or is a hazard to human safety is prohibited.
§ 246-22. Use of buildings.
No one shall use toilet buildings, bathhouses or other buildings for any purpose other than that for
which they were designed.
§ 246-23. Loss or theft of articles.
The Town shall not assume responsibility for the loss or theft of any article in any park.
§ 246-24. Removal for violation of use regulations.
The Commission or its agents is empowered to order any person from any park for violation of any
provision of §§ 246-2 through 246-22 inclusive of this article.
§ 246-25. Parking regulated.
Parking of any vehicle in any park shall be limited to such places and hours as are designated by signs
posted by the Commission or its agents. Any person who violates any posted parking regulation in any
park may be issued a Town parking citation. Proof of the registration number of any motor vehicle in
violation of any such posted parking regulation shall be prima facie evidence that the registered owner
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 118/200
[1]
[1]
A.
[1]
B.
was in violation of such regulation. Valid Sears Park stickers must be properly affixed to all vehicles
entering the park.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 246-26. Maximum speed.
Unless otherwise posted, the maximum speed of any vehicle in parks shall not exceed 10 miles per
hour.
§ 246-27. Posted regulations.
The Town Council is empowered to adopt and the Town police are empowered to enforce traffic and
parking regulations utilizing signs designating speed, stop signs, one-way traffic signs, "slow" signs,
"no parking" signs, angular parking signs and "do not enter" signs.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 246-28. Outside riding on vehicles prohibited.
Riding on the outside of cars, trucks or buses is prohibited in parks.
§ 246-29. Roads designated as closed.
No pedestrian, equestrian or operator of a motor vehicle, including but not limited to motorcycles and
automobiles, shall travel on or along any road, trail, or path, if such road, trail, or path is designated as
closed by a sign or signs posted by the Commission.
§ 246-30. Motor vehicle accidents.
The Town assumes no responsibility for motor vehicle accidents of any kind occurring on or near roads
located on park or Town property and under the control of the Commission.
§ 246-31. Removal for violation of vehicle regulations.
The Commission or its agents are empowered to remove any person or vehicle from any park for any
violation of §§ 246-26 through 246-30, inclusive, of this article.
§ 246-32. Penalties for offenses.
The Commission or its agents are empowered to order any person from any park for violation of
any provision of §§ 246-2, 246-3, 246-5, 246-13 and 246-27 of this article, each of whom may be
fined not more than $100 for each such violation.
Any person who violates any provision of §§ 246-4, 246-6, 246-7, 246-8, 246-9, 246-10, 246-11,
246-12, 246-14, 246-15, 246-16, 246-17, 246-18, 246-19, 246-20, 246-21, 246-22, 246-23, 246-
24, 246-26, 246-27 and the provisions of §§ 246-28 to 246-30, inclusive, of this article may be
fined not more than $20 for each such violation.[1]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 119/200
Article II. Tennis Court and Human Services Building
Parking Area
[Adopted by the Board of Selectmen 3-24-1987 (Ord. No. 12.03); amended by the Town Council 12-8-
1992]
§ 246-33. Restrictions on parking at tennis court parking area.
No motor vehicle may park at the tennis court parking area on North Main Street, in the Town of East
Hampton, unless the operator and passengers of the vehicle are using the tennis courts or basketball
court area.
§ 246-34. Restrictions on parking at Human Services Building.
No motor vehicle may park at the parks and recreation/human services building parking area on North
Main Street, in the Town of East Hampton, unless the operator and passengers of the vehicle have
business to conduct at/in said building.
§ 246-35. Penalties for offenses.
Violators will be subject to a parking infraction as provided by law.
Chapter 250. Peddlers and Solicitors
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Selectmen of the Town of East Hampton 8-11-1987; amended 9-
13-1988; 6-25-1991. Subsequent amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Junk dealers — See Ch. 228.
Littering — See Ch. 232.
Mass gatherings — See Ch. 237.
Parks and recreation — See Ch. 246, Art. I.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 273.
§ 250-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
PEDDLER or HAWKER
Any person or business entity, whether principal or agent, who shall go from place to place, within
East Hampton, selling or bartering, or carrying for sale or barter, or exposing therefor any goods,
wares, merchandise or things, either on foot or from any animal or vehicle.
SOLICITOR or CANVASSER
Any person, or business entity, whether principal or agent, who shall go from place to place, or
who shall call at residences either in person or by telephone within East Hampton, without the
previous consent of the occupant for the purpose of soliciting sales, subscriptions, information,
business of any kind, donations and orders for future delivery of any services, goods, wares or
merchandise, including, without limiting the foregoing, magazines and other printed matter.
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 120/200
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
C.
D.
E.
§ 250-2. Exceptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to persons who are soliciting orders of purchase for future
delivery, selling, bartering or exposing for sale or barter, goods, wares, or merchandise to regularly
established customers; to salesmen selling goods to retail or wholesale stores for resale or to industrial
establishments for processing; to the vending of any goods, sold at or upon the occasion of any public
festival or holiday of any kind under the control of persons who are in charge of such occasions; to
newsboys and those exempted under the General Statutes of the State of Connecticut from the
operation of the general regulatory power granted to towns with respect to peddling to officials or
employees of East Hampton, State of Connecticut or the federal government while on official business.
§ 250-3. License required; fees; issuance; display; revocation.
It shall be mandatory for any solicitor or canvasser and for any peddler or hawker to apply for a
license with the Chief of Police of East Hampton and to provide him with the following data in
order to procure such a license: complete identification, including date and place of birth,
residence and permanent address, physical description, prior criminal record, if any, signature,
name of employer, nature of the product or services in which he is interested, purposes in
obtaining the license, organization he represents, the nature and extent of the proposed operation
in the Town and the description and number of vehicles, if any, to be operated in connection with
such operation.
Each applicant shall pay to the Chief of Police a license fee of $25 for one month, $125 for six
months and $250 for one year. In addition to the license fee, each applicant will be charged an
application fee of $20 to cover administrative costs.
Each location, stand or vehicle to be used by a person shall be separately licensed, and the
license fee chargeable hereunder shall be paid for each such location, stand or vehicle.
Veterans, upon submission of verifiable documentation to the Chief of Police, will not be
charged the license fee, but will be charged the application fee. Bona fide public interest
groups registered in the State of Connecticut as nonprofit, and upon submission of verifiable
documentation to the Chief of Police, will not be charged the license fee but will be charged
the application fee for their group as a single applicant.
Each applicant who shows evidence of good character and who pays the fee herein provided shall
be furnished a license indicating that he or she has registered and showing the dates covered by
such registration. In the case of a business entity, such license shall be deemed furnished only to
the individual who registered in its behalf and shall not be negotiable by such individual. In all
other instances, such license shall be deemed furnished only to the individual who registered for it
and shall not be negotiable by him or her to pay other persons or business entities.
Each applicant shall at all times, while soliciting or canvassing or peddling or hawking in the Town,
carry upon his or her person the aforesaid license, and the same shall be exhibited whenever he
or she is requested to do so by any police officer or by any person solicited or with whom the
applicant has business dealings.
Any such license may be revoked by the Chief of Police because of any violation by the licensee
of any provisions of this chapter or of any other ordinance of the Town or of any state or federal
law or whenever the licensee shall cease to possess the qualifications and character required in
this chapter.
§ 250-4. Activities; locational restrictions; violations.
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 121/200
A.
B.
C.
[1]
No person or business entity licensed under this chapter shall engage in any activities or deal in
any merchandise or services as a solicitor or canvasser or peddler or hawker in East Hampton,
other than those specifically applied for and approved.
No person or business entity licensed under this chapter shall ply his vocation on any street,
sidewalk, park, public parking area or in any other public place or within 200 feet of any school in
East Hampton unless his license specifies that soliciting or peddling in such public place or places
is permitted thereunder.
Any person licensed under this chapter who shall be guilty of any fraud, cheating or
misrepresentation while acting as a solicitor or canvasser or peddler or hawker in East Hampton,
or who makes any false statements or misrepresentations for the purpose of obtaining such a
license, shall be deemed guilty of violating this chapter.
§ 250-5. Penalties for offenses.
Any person or business entity violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined not more than $199
for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed each such time a violation
occurs.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
Chapter 261. Sewer Construction
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Selectmen of the Town of East Hampton 8-23-1983 (Ord. No.
4.08). Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewer use — Ch. 264.
§ 261-1. Authority to enter into agreements for sewer or drain
construction.
The Water Pollution Control Authority is authorized to enter into agreements on behalf of the Town of
East Hampton with developers or other owners of land for the construction of sewers or drains by and
at the expense of such developers or owners, which sewers may become part of the public sewer
system under the conditions hereinafter stipulated, and the Water Pollution Control Authority is
empowered to make, from time to time, any necessary regulations stipulating the terms and conditions
of said agreement not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 261-2. Authority to sign construction agreements.
The Chairman or Vice Chairman of the Water Pollution Control Authority is authorized to sign on behalf
of the Town of East Hampton all such agreements when the same have been authorized by said
Authority.
§ 261-3. Form of agreement.
The terms and text of a standard form of agreement for work under this chapter or any variations of
said standard form to apply to any particular project thereunder shall be as approved by the Authority
Attorney.
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 122/200
§ 261-4. Terms; applicability of sewer use ordinance.
The Water Pollution Control Authority shall specify in the terms of such agreements, or on plans which
are made a part thereof, the limits, sizes and grades of the sewers or drains to be built and the nature
of and limitations on the waste or liquids to be conveyed. All the terms of and all subsequent
amendments to Chapter 264, Sewer Use, shall be applicable to work done under such agreements.
§ 261-5. Costs and expenses; deposit.
Such agreements shall provide that the full cost of construction of the sewer and all expense incidental
thereto shall be borne by the developer or owner, who shall, before commencing any work, deposit
with the Director of Finance of the Town of East Hampton, a sum deemed by the Town Manager of the
Town of East Hampton or his authorized agent, or such engineers as the Water Pollution Control
Authority may employ, to be sufficient to defray the cost of preliminary surveys, of the preparation of
designs and plans, of other expenses of preliminary engineering, of inspection, supervisory
engineering, grade, staking, measuring, testing and all other expenses of the Town incurred prior to or
during construction, or during any maintenance period stipulated, including allowances for pension,
insurance and similar costs related to payroll. Such agreements shall also provide that, in case said
deposit proves to be insufficient at any time during the progress of the work, a further deposit shall be
made upon notification by the Town Manager of said Town and that, upon acceptance of the sewer or
drain, any unexpended portion of said deposit shall be returned to the developer or owner.
§ 261-6. Indemnification of Town; insurance.
All such agreements shall provide that the developer or owner shall assume all risks and hold the Town
of East Hampton harmless from any and all claims for damage arising from the work or its conduct. To
secure such risks, adequate liability, property damage and compensation insurance in amounts fixed
by the Authority shall be required of the developer or owner, who shall furnish proper and acceptable
certificates of insurance before starting work.
§ 261-7. Bond.
The Water Pollution Control Authority, whenever in its opinion there is possibility of loss by the Town by
reason of failure of the owner or developer to complete the work contemplated in the agreement, or
any part thereof, or to comply with any maintenance requirements, may require as a part of said
agreement that adequate bond or other surety acceptable to the Town be submitted to insure
completion and maintenance of the work.
§ 261-8. Conveyance of rights-of-way.
Such agreements shall require, whenever the work is not in a duly accepted public highway, that
adequate rights-of-way be conveyed to the Town prior to the acceptance of the sewer or drain, the
terms of conveyance being subject to the approval of the Authority Attorney.
§ 261-9. Payment of connection charge in lieu of assessment.
Whenever the sewers or drains to be constructed under any such agreement connect directly or
indirectly with any sewer, the cost of which was paid for in whole or in part for assessments against
benefiting property owners a portion of which assessments consisted of benefits from the water
pollution control plant, main pumping stations and outfall sewer, or whenever the sewers or drains shall
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 123/200
A.
B.
be capped because a Town sewer outlet is not available, but which outlet may become available in the
foreseeable future, such agreements shall provide that the developer or owner, before beginning work
on the project, shall waive the Authority's usual sewer assessment procedures, and shall pay to the
Town, as a connection charge in lieu of assessment, an amount of money which the Sewer
Commission shall determine to be:
The amount which would have been assessed by reason of said benefits from said plant, main
pumping stations and outfall sewer to the property served if the sewers being constructed under
such agreement had instead been assessed; or
In the case of a capped sewer, the amount which would be assessed as an outlet benefit when in
the future the outlet sewer is constructed.
§ 261-10. Disposition of connection charges.
Connection charges payable under the provisions of § 261-9 hereof shall be paid to the Director of
Finance of the Town of East Hampton, to be added to a sewer sinking fund maintained by such
Director of Finance, to be utilized as determined by the Water Pollution Control Authority in accordance
with the provisions of § 261-11 hereof.
§ 261-11. Use of sewer sinking fund.
Such sewer sinking fund shall be utilized to pay for the cost of extensions and expansions of, and
improvements to, the East Hampton sewerage system, including survey, design, and engineering
expenses, after public hearing and upon resolution of the Water Pollution Control Authority pursuant to
C.G.S. § 7-247a, provided provision is made for returning some or all of such cost to such sewer
sinking fund from sewer benefit assessments or from connection charges levied against the properties
especially benefited by such expansions. Said sewer sinking fund may also be utilized to contribute to
sewerage system annual bond payments upon resolution duly adopted by the Water Pollution Control
Authority.
§ 261-12. Incorporation of sewer or drain into Town sewer
system.
After certification by the Town Manager or his authorized agent, or such engineers as the Sewer
Commission may employ, that any sewer or drain constructed under the terms of this chapter has been
completed in accordance with the plans, specifications and standards of the Town and that the
maintenance period fixed in the agreement has expired, and that all roadways, curbs, walks and other
surfaces and appurtenances disturbed by the work have been properly restored, or that adequate
security by bond or otherwise has been furnished to assure such restoration, the Water Pollution
Control Authority may, by resolution, incorporate said sewer or drain into the East Hampton sewer
system, to become effective as specified in such resolution.
Chapter 264. Sewer Use
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Selectmen of the Town of East Hampton 8-10-1982. Amendments
noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Excavations — See Ch. 192.
Sewer connection charges — See Ch. 200, Art. I.
Housing Code — See Ch. 219.
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 124/200
A.
B.
C.
D.
Sewer construction — See Ch. 261.
Water system construction — See Ch. 295.
Water system use — See Ch. 299.
Article I. General Provisions
§ 264-1. Intent.
This chapter establishes the procedures for making connections to the public sewer in the Town of
East Hampton (hereinafter called the "Town") sanitary sewer system. It also establishes specific limits
for pollutant discharges which by their nature or by their interaction with sewage will be detrimental to
the public health, cause damage to the public sewer or the water pollution control facility, pollute the
waters of the state, or otherwise create a public nuisance.
§ 264-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to:
Inform the public as to the technical and administrative procedures to be followed in obtaining
connection to the Town sanitary sewer system.
Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the sanitary system which will interfere with the
collection and/or treatment system.
Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the treatment system which will pass through the
system, inadequately treated, into the waters of the state or the atmosphere, or otherwise be
incompatible with the system.
Improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewaters and sludges from the system.
§ 264-3. Enactment of provisions; authority.
In furtherance of the above purposes and in order to insure proper removal and disposal of sewage
wastes and sewage waters within the Town, to insure the proper operation and maintenance of public
sanitary sewers, sewage pumping facilities maintenance of public sanitary sewers, sewage pumping
facilities within said Town and to provide for the keeping of adequate records of sewers and
appurtenances and connections thereto, this chapter regulating the construction, maintenance,
installation, use, repair, alteration and discontinuance or abandonment of sewers and private septic
systems and appurtenances and connections thereto, including pipes discharging directly or indirectly
into and through the sewers and appurtenances of the public sanitary sewer system of the Town as
provided in § 7-245 et seq. of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended, is hereby enacted.
Article II. Definitions
§ 264-4. Terms defined.
The following words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the following meanings unless the
context requires otherwise:
ACT or THE ACT
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 125/200
The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the "Clean Water Act,“ as amended, 33
U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD)
The amount of oxygen required by bacteria while stabilizing decomposable organic matter under
aerobic conditions for five days. The determination of BOD shall be performed in accordance with
the procedures prescribed in the latest edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water
and Wastewater."
BUILDING DRAIN
That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a building plumbing which receives the discharge from
soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building
sewer, which begins five feet (1.5 meters) outside the inner face of the building wall.
BUILDING SEWER
The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal. It may also be
called a "house connection." The building sewer, when used in that sense, shall include not only
the pipe extending directly from the main sewer to a point five feet from the house, building or
structure, but also pipe or pipes connecting directly or indirectly thereto, or intended to so connect
or discharge. Building sewers shall be maintained by the owners of the property served.
CATEGORICAL STANDARDS
The National Categorical Pretreatment Standards or pretreatment standards.
CHLORINE DEMAND
The amount of chlorine which must be added to waters or wastes to produce a residual chlorine in
such waters or wastes.
COMPATIBLE POLLUTANT
The biochemical oxygen demand, suspended solids, pH and fecal coliform bacteria; plus any
additional pollutants identified in the water pollution control facility's NPDES permit, where the
water pollution control facility is designed to treat such pollutants and, in fact, does treat such
pollutants to the degree required by the NPDES permit.
COMPOSITE SAMPLE
A mixture of aliquot samples obtained at regular intervals over a time period. The volume of each
aliquot is proportional to the discharge flow rate for the sampling interval. The minimum time
period for composite sampling shall be four hours.
COOLING WATER
Process water in general used for cooling purposes to which the only pollutant added is heat and
which has such characteristics that it may be discharged to a natural outlet in accordance with
federal and state laws and regulations.
DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION (DEP)
The Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection.
DRAIN LAYER or LICENSED DRAIN LAYER
An individual, partnership, or corporation to whom the WPCA shall have issued a permit as such
to install and repair sewers and building sewers during the period when such permit is valid, and
the proper agents and representatives of said drain layer. The term "drain layer" may also be
applied to the Town and State Highway Division employees, employees of public utilities, when
they are engaged in installing, altering and repairing sewers or connections and appurtenances
thereto under permit from the WPCA or its agents.
EASEMENT
An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others.
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 126/200
FLOATABLE OIL
Oil, fat, or grease in a physical state such that it will separate by gravity from wastewater by
treatment in an approved pretreatment facility. A wastewater shall be considered free of floatable
fat if it is properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the collection system.
GARBAGE
Solid wastes from the preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food and from the handling,
storage, and sale of produce.
GRAB SAMPLE
A sample which is taken from a waste stream on a one-time basis with no regard to the flow of the
waste stream and without consideration of time.
HEALTH OFFICER
The Health Officer of the Town of East Hampton.
HOLDING TANK WASTE
Waste from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers and septage hauling
trucks.
INCOMPATIBLE POLLUTANT
All pollutants other than compatible pollutants as defined in the definition of "compatible pollutant"
above.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES
Includes the liquid or water-carried wastes of any industrial process not clearly included within the
definitions of "sanitary sewage," "stormwater," "cooling water" and "subsoil drainage" herein. In
general, wastewaters carrying any quantity of oils, grease, fats, abrasives, chemicals, residues of
manufacturing processes, wastes from commercial food preserving or canning, from
slaughterhouses or meat processing plants, and similar substances, whether dissolved, in
suspension, or mechanically carried by water, shall be considered industrial waste.
INSPECTOR
The person or persons duly authorized by the WPCA to inspect and approve the installation of
sewer connections to a point five feet outside the inner face of the building wall and its connection
to the building drain.
MAY
Is permissive (see "shall").
NATIONAL POLLUTION DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) PERMIT
A permit issued pursuant to Section 402 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1341).
NATURAL OUTLET
Rivers, streams, brooks, waterways, lakes, ponds, marshes, swamps, bogs, and other bodies of
water, natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow through or border
upon the boundaries of the Town of East Hampton.
ON-PREMISES RESTAURANT KITCHEN
Kitchen facilities situated in a commercial restaurant open to the public where the food prepared
therein is consumed on the premises.
pH
The logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentrations. The concentration is the weight
of hydrogen ions, in grams, per liter of solution.
PERSON
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 127/200
Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint-stock
company, trust, estate, governmental entity or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives
or agents. The masculine gender shall include the feminine; the singular shall include the plural
where indicated by the context.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE
The wastes from the preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food, which have been shredded to
such degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in
public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension.
PUBLIC SEWER
Includes the main pipe, manholes, and other structures and equipment appurtenant thereto,
controlled and maintained by the Town for the conveyance of sanitary sewage and permitted
industrial waste and shall not be understood to include building sewers or connections between
the main sewer and individual properties. In the situation where a private connection enters the
system at a manhole, the limit of public ownership shall be the inside face of the manhole at the
point of connection.
SEWER SERVICE AREA
Includes all properties within the Town, within which a public sewer is located, or abutting on any
street, alley or right-of-way in which there is located a public sewer.
SANITARY SEWAGE
The common waste and water-carried wastes from human dwellings and from toilet and lavatory
fixtures, kitchens, laundries and similar facilities of business and industrial buildings. Except as
specifically authorized, sanitary sewage shall not include stormwater from roofs, yards, streets or
open spaces, water from land surfaces, or brooks, clean waste of overflows from springs, wells, or
subsoil drainage, large volumes of clean water from air conditioning or other cooling or
condensing facilities, clean wastewater from hydraulically operated contrivances and those wastes
included within the definition of "industrial wastes" defined above.
SEWAGE TREATMENT FACILITIES
All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of sewage.
SHALL
Is mandatory (see "may").
SLUG
Any discharge of water, sewage, or industrial waste which in concentration of any given
constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes more
than five times the average twenty-four-hour concentration or flows during normal operation.
SOLUBLE OIL
Oil which is of either mineral or vegetable origin and disperses in water or sewage at temperatures
between 0° C. and 65° C. For the purpose of this chapter, emulsified oil shall be considered as
soluble oil.
STORM SEWER or STORM DRAIN
A sewer which carries storm and surface waters and drainage, but excludes sanitary sewage, and
industrial wastes.
STORMWATER
Includes the run off or discharge of rain and melted snow or other water from roofs, surfaces of
public or private lands, or elsewhere. Stormwater shall also include "subsoil drainage" as defined
in this section.
SUBSOIL DRAINAGE
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 128/200
Includes water from the soil percolating into subsoil drains and through foundation walls,
basement floors, or from underground pipes or from similar sources.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS
The solid matter, measured in mg/liter, which may be in suspension, floatable, or settleable and is
removable by laboratory filtering as prescribed in the latest edition of Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water and Wastewater.
TOXIC POLLUTANT
Any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the
Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency under the provisions of Section 307(a) of
the Act or other acts.
USER
Any person who contributes, causes or permits the contribution of sewage into the Town sewer
system.
WATER POLLUTION CONTROL AUTHORITY (WPCA)
The East Hampton Water Pollution Control Authority as defined in Chapter 103 of the Connecticut
General Statutes, as amended.
WATER POLLUTION CONTROL FACILITY (WPCF)
An arrangement of devices for the treatment of sewage and sludge.
WATERCOURSE
A natural or artificial channel for the passage of water either continuously or intermittently.
Article III. Prohibited Deposits and Discharges; Required
Connections
§ 264-5. Prohibited deposits.
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary
manner on public or private property or discharge into any natural outlet within the Town or in any area
under the jurisdiction of said Town, any human or animal excrement, garbage, sanitary sewage,
industrial or commercial waste or any polluted water, or other objectionable waste, except in places
designated for such purposes by the Town and where suitable treatment is being provided in
accordance with provisions of this chapter. Customary agricultural utilization and disposition of animal
excrement in a sanitary manner upon public or private property shall be lawful within the Town.
§ 264-6. Prohibited discharges to natural outlets.
It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the Town, or any area under the jurisdiction
of said Town, any sewage or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided
and a permit obtained from the WPCA.
§ 264-7. Connection to public sewer required.
The owners of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human occupancy, employment,
commercial, business, manufacturing, recreation or other purposes, situated within the sewer service
area, are hereby required, each at his own expense, to install a building sewer to connect their building
drain with the public sanitary sewer in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The owner must
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 129/200
A.
B.
C.
D.
apply for a permit within 90 days of notification that he must do so. The owner must then connect to the
public sewers within 90 days of the permit application, or within 180 days of such notification,
whichever is sooner. Extensions may be granted for unusual circumstances by the WPCA, but no
extension will be granted for more than 90 additional days. Unusual circumstances may include but not
be limited to severe weather conditions.
Article IV. Private Septic Disposal Systems
§ 264-8. Private systems prohibited.
After the date that a public sewer becomes available to a property, it shall be unlawful to construct,
replace, repair or maintain any septic disposal system or other facilities intended or used for the
disposal of sewage on such property.
§ 264-9. Discontinuing use of private systems.
Any septic tanks, cesspools, and similar private sewage disposal facilities shall thereafter be promptly
abandoned, pumped out, and filled with suitable material, so as not to create a hazard to the public
health and safety, except that the private disposal system, after being pumped out, may be used for
the purpose of cellar drainage and surface drainage if the facility is in suitable condition for such use.
§ 264-10. Compliance with health regulations.
Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to affect any additional requirements that may be
imposed by the health ordinances of the Town.
Article V. Building Sewers and Connections
§ 264-11. Interference with system prohibited; compliance
required; notification of new discharges.
No unauthorized person shall open the cover of, enter or alter any manhole, meter station or
similar appurtenance of any public sewer, put anything therein or interfere therewith. No person
shall insert or place in any public sewer, manhole, meter station or other appurtenance thereof any
sticks, rubbish or other material which said sewer, manhole, meter station or appurtenance thereof
was not intended to receive.
No person shall break, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or
equipment which is part of the public sewer system of the Town.
No person shall make any connection to any public sewer of the Town or appurtenance thereof, or
to any pipe or appurtenance discharging thereto, or remove or disconnect any existing connection
thereto, except as provided in Article VIII and the sections thereof of this chapter; provided
plumbing works and fixtures within buildings and similar structures may be built and connected as
provided by Town plumbing codes, laws and regulations and by permits issued thereunder.
Any person proposing a new discharge into the public sewer system or a substantial change in the
volume or character of pollutants that are being discharged into the public sewer system shall
notify the WPCA at least 45 days prior to the proposed change or connection.
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 130/200
§ 264-12. Permit required for large discharges.
No person shall discharge to any public sewer or appurtenance thereof, from a single source, domestic
sewage in excess of 5,000 gallons per day of industrial wastes and/or cooling water without first
obtaining a permit from the WPCA and its designated representative and the DEP. A potential
discharger must submit a permit application to DEP at least 90 days prior to such contemplated
discharge.
§ 264-13. Costs and expenses; liability.
All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne
by the owner. The owner shall indemnify and save harmless the Town from any loss or damage that
may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.
§ 264-14. Independent connections required.
Each independent house or building shall have a direct connection to the public sewer serving it,
separate from any other house, building or structure set up on another parcel or lot of land. The
WPCA, in its discretion, may permit variations of this requirement upon receipt of a written request to
that effect from owners of all the land in any way concerned.
§ 264-15. Use of old sewers.
Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on
examination and test by WPCA or its designated representative, to meet all requirements of this
chapter.
§ 264-16. Material and work specifications.
The WPCA shall from time to time establish standard requirements or specifications to regulate the
sizes, materials, methods and workmanship to be used in the construction of sewers, drains, building
sewers, and other similar work and appurtenances thereto connected or intended to be connected or
to discharge, directly or indirectly, into any public sewer of the Town. Such standard requirements shall
provide minimum requirements as to size, depth, slope or rate of grade for such pipes, shall regulate
the kinds of pipe, fittings, methods of laying, jointing, materials used, manner of connecting to
preexisting sewers, and general considerations as to location and other pertinent features. Any such
requirements or specifications, as the same may from time to time be amended, are hereby made a
part of this chapter. Until different requirements or specifications are established, the materials and
procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM and WPCF. Manual of Practice No. 9
shall apply.
§ 264-17. Applicability of building and plumbing codes.
The requirements of Town building and plumbing codes shall be observed with respect to piping and
fixtures inside or immediately adjacent to buildings and within the areas of jurisdiction of said codes,
subject only to the general requirements of this chapter. Pipes more than five feet outside the inner
walls of any building or similar structure shall conform to the requirements of this chapter as to permits,
materials and workmanship.
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 131/200
§ 264-18. Soil vent pipe requirements.
No building shall be connected to a public sewer unless the plumbing system of said building has a soil
vent pipe extended to a point above the roof. The WPCA may require that no running trap, main house
trap or other device, which might prevent the free flow of air throughout the whole course of the
building sewer, house drain and said soil vent pipe, be allowed.
§ 264-19. Elevation of building sewer.
Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the
basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public
sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and
discharged to the building sewer. Duplex lift systems shall be provided for commercial and industrial
buildings. Plans and specifications of the lift station shall be submitted to DEP. Copies of the DEP
approval must be submitted to the WPCA before a connection permit will be issued.
§ 264-20. Runoff into public sewer prohibited.
No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway drains, or
other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building drain which in turn is connected directly or
indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
§ 264-21. Connection of building sewer to public sewer.
The attachment of the building sewer to the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the
building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the Town, or the procedures
set forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM and WPCF Manual of Practice No. 9. All such
connections shall be made gastight and watertight. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and
materials must be approved by the WPCA or its designated representative before installation.
§ 264-22. Notification of WPCA prior to connection.
The inspector or representative of the WPCA shall be notified not less than 24 hours in advance of the
time any work is started on any connection to any public sewer of said Town; or to any existing pipe or
similar structure connected to a public sewer, and such connection shall be made only in the presence
of said inspector and representative and according to his directions. Said inspector shall be afforded all
reasonable opportunity to oversee the construction of all parts of any building drain connected directly
or indirectly, or intended to be so connected, to any public sewer of the Town and to obtain and record
the location and other pertinent facts with respect to such building drain. No public sewer shall be
opened or any way disturbed except in the presence of an authorized representative of the WPCA.
The same requirement shall apply to repairs or alterations to sewers or pipes discharging thereto.
§ 264-23. Protection of excavations.
All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so
as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed
in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the Town.
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 132/200
A.
B.
§ 264-24. Approval of plumbing and connection; revocation of
permit for failure to comply.
A connection to the public sewer will be made only after the building's plumbing has been approved by
the WPCA or its designated representative in order to insure that minimum standards are met for the
installation. A house trap and fresh air vent shall be required for the building, and all plumbing shall be
in good working order. No trench containing a building drain or connection to the sanitary sewer shall
be backfilled until the WPCA or its designated representative has completed an inspection of the
approved work. The water level in the trench shall be maintained at a level below the sewer connection
before the cap is removed and while the connection is being made and until such time as it has been
inspected, approved and backfilled. Permits to connect to the public sewer may be revoked and
annulled by the WPCA or its designated representative for such cause and at such time as he may
deem sufficient. All other parties in interest shall be held to have waived the right to claim damages
from the Town or its agents on account of such revocation.
§ 264-25. Demolition or abandonment of buildings connected to
public sewer.
When any building or other structure previously served by a connection to any public sewer is
demolished, destroyed, abandoned or altered so that any portion of any abandoned plumbing
system which is directly or indirectly connected to any public sewer is no longer used, the open
end of such building drain which discharges directly or indirectly into a public sewer shall be
promptly closed and sealed off so that no wastes not otherwise permitted to enter the public sewer
shall be so discharged thereto. The WPCA shall be notified of such abandonment or
discontinuance and of the closing and sealing of such building drain and its representative
afforded an opportunity to see such work performed.
All of said work shall be done by the person or party who demolishes the building or structure or
who alters such system so as to make such closing and sealing necessary, and, in the event of
the failure of such person or party to do so, shall be done by the owner, lessee or tenant of the
premises to the satisfaction of the WPCA, all without expense to the Town.
§ 264-26. Record of connections.
The WPCA or its authorized representative shall keep a record of all connections made to public
sewers under this chapter and all repairs and alterations made to sewer and building sewers
connected to or discharging into public sewers of the Town or intended so to discharge. Licensed drain
layers and others shall assist the WPCA to secure data needed for such records.
Article VI. Use of Public Sewers
§ 264-27. Prohibited discharges to sanitary sewers.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof
runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process water to
any sanitary sewer.
§ 264-28. Discharge of stormwater and unpolluted and
uncontaminated waters to storm sewers.
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 133/200
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically
designated as storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the WPCA or its designated
representative. Uncontaminated cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged on
approval of the WPCA or its designated representative and DEP to a storm sewer or natural outlet.
§ 264-29. Prohibited discharges to WPCF.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any pollutant or wastewater which will interfere
with the operation or performance of the WPCF. These general prohibitions apply to all such users of a
WPCF whether or not the user is subject to National Categorical Pretreatment Standards or any other
federal or state pretreatment standards or requirements. A user shall not contribute the following
substances to any WPCF:
Any liquids, solids, or gases which by reason of their nature or quantity are, or may be sufficient
either alone or by interaction with other substances to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any
other way to the WPCF or to the operation of the WPCF. At no time shall two successive readings
on an explosion hazard meter, at the point of discharge into the sewage collection system (or at
any point in the system), be more than 5% nor any single reading over 10% of the lower explosive
limit (LEL) of the meter.
Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid, or gas.
Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids, or gases in sufficient quantity,
either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment
process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a toxic effect in the receiving waters of
the WPCF, or to exceed the limitation set forth in a categorical pretreatment standard. A toxic
pollutant shall include but not be limited to any pollutant identified pursuant to Section 307(a) of
the Act.
Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or having any other corrosive property capable
of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and personnel of the WPCF. The upper
limit of pH for any industrial wastewater discharge shall be established under the discharger's
state discharge permit.
Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow
in sewers, or other interference with the proper operation of the WPCF such as, but not limited to,
ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood,
unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails and paper dishes,
cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground or garbage grinders.
Any noxious or malodorous sewage, gases, or solids which either singly or by interaction with
other sewage are sufficient to prevent entry into the public sewers for their maintenance and
repair.
Any substance which may cause the WPCF's effluent or any other product of the WPCF, such as
residues, sludges, or scums, to be unsuitable for reclamation process where the WPCF is
pursuing a reuse and reclamation program. In no case shall a substance discharged to the WPCF
cause the facility to be in noncompliance with sludge use or disposal criteria, guidelines, or
regulations developed under Section 405 of the Act, any criteria, guidelines, or regulations
affecting sludge use or disposal developed pursuant to the Resource Conservation and Recovery
Act, Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, or state criteria applicable to the sludge
management method being used.
Any substance which will cause a WPCF to violate its NPDES permit or the receiving water quality
standards.
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 134/200
I.
J.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the
wastewater treatment processes employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that
the wastewater treatment effluent cannot meet the requirements of DEP, which has jurisdiction
over discharge to the receiving waters.
Any water or wastes which, by interaction with other water or wastes in the public sewer system,
release obnoxious gases, form suspended solids which interfere with the collection system, or
create a condition deleterious to structures and treatment processes or which may cause the
effluent limitations of the DEP permit for the wastewater treatment plant to be exceeded.
§ 264-30. Discharge limitations.
The following described substances, materials, waters, or waste shall be limited in discharges to
concentrations or quantities which will not harm either the sewers, wastewater treatment process, or
equipment, will not have an adverse effect on the receiving stream or will not otherwise endanger life,
limb, public property, or constitute a nuisance. The WPCA or its designated representative may set
limitations lower than the limitations established in the regulations below, if in his opinion they are
necessary to meet the above objectives. In forming his opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes,
the WPCA or its designated representative will give consideration to such factors as the quantities of
subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers,
nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability
of wastes in the sewage treatment plant, and other pertinent factors. The limitations or restrictions on
materials or characteristics of wastes or wastewaters discharged to the sanitary sewer which shall not
be violated without approval of the WPCA or its designated representative are as follows:
Wastewater having a temperature higher than 150° F. (65° C.).
Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease, or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of
100 mg/l floatable oil not to exceed 20 mb/l or containing substances which may solidify or
become viscous at temperatures between 32° F. and 150° F. (0° C. and 65° C.) and free in excess
of 25 mb/l.
Wastewater from industrial plants containing floatable oils, fat, or grease.
Any garbage that has not been properly shredded (see the definition of "properly shredded
garbage" in Article II, § 264-2). Garbage grinders may be connected to sanitary sewers from
homes, hotels, institutions, restaurants, hospitals, catering establishments, or similar places where
garbage originates from the preparation of food in kitchens for the purpose of consumption on the
premises or when served by caterers.
Any waters or wastes containing metallic ions and salts thereof, including but not limited to iron,
chromium, copper, zinc, cyanides, nickel, lead, tin, silver, mercury, and similar objectionable or
toxic substances, whether neutralized or not, or wastes exerting an excessive chlorine
requirement will be subject to the following: submission of technical information and appropriate
engineering data to the DEP regarding the nature and strength of the proposed waste, including
appropriate pretreatment, if necessary, to be reviewed and approved by DEP prior to initiation of
the discharge.
Any waters or wastes containing odor-producing substances exceeding limits which may be
established by the WPCA or its designated representative.
Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits
established by the WPCA or its designated representative in compliance with applicable state or
federal regulations.
Materials which exert or cause:
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 135/200
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
I.
J.
(1)
A.
Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not limited to, Fullers earth,
line slurries, and lime residues) or of dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium
chloride and sodium sulfate).
Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning
solutions).
Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirements in such quantities as to
constitute a significant load on the WPCF.
Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting "slugs" as defined herein.
Overflow from holding tanks or other receptacles storing organic wastes.
Sewage with concentrations of pollutants in excess of the following limits:
Pollutant
Concentration
(parts/million mg/l)
Arsenic as A 0.05
Barium as B 5.0
Boron as B 5.0
Cyanides as CN (amenable) 0.1
Fluride as F 20.Q
Chromium (total) 1.0
Chromium (Cr + 6) 0.1
Magnesium as Mg 100.0
Manganese as MN 5.0
Copper as Cu 1.0
Zinc as Zn 1.0
Cadmium 0.1
Lead 0.1
Tin 2.0
Silver 0.1
Mercury 0.01
Nickel 1.0
NOTE: All metals are to be measured as total metals.
§ 264-31. Requirements for wastes exceeding discharge
limitations.
If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be discharged, to the public sewers,
which waters or wastes contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in
§ 264-30 of this article, and which in the judgment of the WPCA or its designated representative
may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment, or receiving waters,
or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the WPCA or its
designated representative may:
Reject the discharge of the waters or wastes;
s
a
o
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 136/200
(2)
(3)
(4)
[1]
B.
A.
Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers;
Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or
Require additional payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the wastes.
If the WPCA or its designated representative permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste
flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the requirements
of all applicable codes, ordinances, and laws. The WPCA or its designated representative shall
have the right to reject the discharge of any water or wastes; or require more stringent effluent
limitations than required by the user's Section 22a-430 permit.[1]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 264-32. Grease, oil and particle separators.
Grease, oil, and gross particle separators shall be provided when, in the opinion of the WPCA or its
designated representative, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing
grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients; except that
such separators shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All separators shall be
of a type and capacity approved by the WPCA or its designated representative, and shall be located so
as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. In maintaining these separators, the
owner shall be responsible for the proper removal and disposal by appropriate means of the captured
material and shall maintain records of the dates and means of disposal, which are subject to review by
the DEP. Any removal and hauling of the collected materials shall be performed by a waste disposal
firm which possesses a valid permit from the DEP under § 22a-454 of the Connecticut General
Statutes, as amended.
§ 264-33. Maintenance of preliminary treatment or flowequalizing
facilities.
Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided for any wastes or waters, they
shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his expense.
§ 264-34. Sampling structures.
When required by the WPCA or its designated representative, the owner of any property serviced by a
building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable structure, together with such necessary
meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer, to facilitate observation, sampling and
measurement of the wastes. Such structure, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located,
and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the WPCA or its designed
representative. The sampling structure shall be located at a point along the industrial waste stream
where a representative sample of the industrial wastewater may be obtained prior to its being diluted
by domestic sewage in the building sewer. This structure shall be installed by the owner at his
expense, and shall be maintained by him as to be safe and accessible at all times.
§ 264-35. Monitoring of waters and wastes.
All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which
reference is made in this chapter shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of
Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by the American
Public Health Association, and shall be determined at the control structure provided, or upon
suitable samples taken at said control structure. In the event that no special structure has been
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 137/200
[1]
B.
[1]
required, the control structure shall be considered to be the nearest downstream structure in the
public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out
by customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and
to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb and property. (The particular analyses involved
will determine whether a twenty-four-hour composite of all outfalls of a premises is appropriate or
whether a grab sample or samples should be taken. Normally, but not always, BOD and
suspended solids analyses are obtained from twenty-four-hour composite of all outfalls, whereas
pHs are determined from periodic grab samples.) Sampling methods, locations, times, durations,
and frequencies are to be determined on an individual basis subject to the stipulations and general
conditions of the discharger's state discharge permit.
All industries discharging into a public sewer shall perform such monitoring of their discharges as
required by the WPCA or its designated representative and/or by the DEP in any state discharge
permit issued pursuant to § 22a-430 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended, including,
but not limited to, installation, use and maintenance of monitoring equipment, keeping records and
reporting the results of such monitoring to the WPCA or its designated representative. Such
records shall be made available upon request of the WPCA or its designated representative or
other agencies having jurisdiction over discharges to the receiving waters.[1]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 264-36. Agreements for discharge of special wastes.
No requirement contained in this article shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or
arrangement between the WPCA and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual
strength or character may be accepted by the WPCA for treatment, subject to payment therefor, by the
industrial concern. No such agreements shall contravene any requirement of existing state or federal
laws and are compatible with any user charge and industrial cost recovery system in effect.
§ 264-37. DEP permit required for industrial discharges.
Prior to initiating any type of industrial waste discharge to the sanitary sewer, the industrial or
commercial concern must comply with all the requirements of the DEP, Water Compliance Unit, in
obtaining a permit. These requirements include compliance with the provisions of § 22a-430 of the
Connecticut General Statutes and the DEP regulations and procedures.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 264-38. Applicability of federal standards.
Upon the promulgation of the federal categorical pretreatment standard for a particular industrial
subcategory, the federal standard, if more stringent than limitations imposed under this chapter for
sources in that subcategory, shall supersede the limitations imposed under this chapter.
§ 264-39. Dilution to meet standards prohibited.
No user shall increase the use of processed water in an attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or
complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in the
federal categorical pretreatment standards, or in any other specific pollutant limitations which may be
developed by the DEP.
§ 264-40. Protection from accidental discharges.
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 138/200
A.
B.
Each user shall provide protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other
substances regulated by this chapter. Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials
shall be provided and maintained at the owner's or user's own cost and expense. The DEP may
require that plans showing facilities and operating procedures be submitted for review and approval
prior to construction of the facilities.
§ 264-41. Notification of accidental discharges; liability for
damages.
Within five days following an accidental discharge, the user shall submit to the WPCA or its designated
representative and the DEP a detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge and the
measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not
relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of
damage to the WPCF, fish kills, aquatic plants, or any other damage to persons or property; nor shall
such notification relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties, or other liability which may be imposed by
this chapter or other applicable law.
§ 264-42. Emergency notification procedures.
A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising
employees whom to call in the event of a dangerous discharge. Employers shall ensure that all
employees are advised of the emergency notification procedures.
§ 264-43. Termination of disposal authorization.
Any industry in violation of the provisions of this chapter may have its disposal authorization
terminated.
Article VII. Drain Laying for Building Sewers
[Amended 1983]
§ 264-44. Licensing; revocation of license.
The Town, acting through the WPCA, may license as a drain layer any person who possesses a
valid drain layer license issued under Chapter 393 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as
amended, who shall have applied to it on forms to be provided for that purpose, and who shall
have furnished the surety bond and insurance required by Article IX hereof.
In the event that the Town shall find that any drain layer performing work governed by this chapter
has failed to conform to the requirements of this chapter, or to the conditions of any permit issued
hereunder, the Town, acting through the WPCA, may suspend such drain layer's East Hampton
license under Subsection A hereof, at the same time requesting suspension or revocation of such
drain layer's license under said Chapter 393 by the State of Connecticut. Such suspension shall
remain in effect until the first to occur of: (1) determination by the WPCA that said improperly
performed work has been corrected by said drain layer, or (2) notification of the WPCA by the
state, after required state procedures, that said drain layer's license under said Chapter 393 has
not been suspended, or has been restored.
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 139/200
A.
B.
C.
D.
A.
B.
C.
§ 264-45. Construction and repair of sewers and drains by
authorized personnel required.
No person other than those described in Article VII (§ 264-44, 264-46 or 264-48) shall construct, repair,
alter or remove any sewer, building drain, building sewer or sewer line connected to or with or
discharging directly or indirectly to or into any public sewer of said Town or intended so as to discharge
at some future time, either in a public street or in public or private land.
§ 264-46. Authorized sewer installation and maintenance
personnel.
The following may, as indicated, construct, repair, alter, or remove building sewers, subject to
supervision and approval by the WPCA:
Regular forces of a contractor employed by the Town operating under orders of the WPCA and in
the performance of work for said Town.
Regular forces of the Town and/or the State Highway Division, Department of Transportation,
operating under and subject to a permit for the particular job to be issued by said WPCA or its
designated representative and while engaged in the regular work and operations of said Town, or
State Highway Division, Department of Transportation.
Regular forces of any public utility corporation authorized by state law to construct, maintain and
operate pipes or ducts within public highways within said Town, while engaged in work incidental
to the regular structures of said utility company and operating under and subject to the conditions
of a permit for the particular job issued by said WPCA or its designated representative.
Drain layers licensed pursuant to § 264-44 hereof.
§ 264-47. Work done by plumbers.
The limitations as to persons who may construct, alter or repair building drains and building sewers as
provided in § 264-45 shall not restrict the usual work of plumbers or others when operating in
accordance with local plumbing and building codes of the Town when they are working on pipes within
or not more than five feet outside the walls of a building or similar structure; provided no plumber or
other person shall make any connection to a public sewer of said Town without a permit therefor, even
if said sewer is located under or immediately adjacent to any building or similar structure; and provided
all fixtures within said building or structure and all use made of them shall conform to the requirement
of this chapter as to what may and may not be permitted to be discharged in public sanitary sewers.
§ 264-48. Work done by owners of single-family residences.
Nothing herein contained shall prohibit the owner of a single-family residence occupied or to be
occupied by him from personally installing the building sewer on his own property, provided the
following conditions are met:
Approval of plans and final approval by the WPCA or its designated representative shall be
obtained;
A permit shall be secured as herein provided before the work is performed;
Permit fees shall be paid, and applications made for inspections; and
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 140/200
D.
[1]
All work shall be performed by the owner personally in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter.
§ 264-49. WPCA assistance.
The WPCA or its designated representative may assist in the installation, repair and alteration of
connections to public sewers and of building connections by furnishing such information as may be in
its possession and proper to be furnished to the party performing such work.
§ 264-50. Reimbursement of Town for WPCA assistance.
The WPCA may, in any case where the quantity or expense of work by Town forces incidental to the
construction, repair of inspection of any sewer connection warrants such a requirement, require that
the owner of property concerned or the drain layer shall reimburse the Town for the cost of services of
Town employees engaged in work or inspections incidental to said sewer connection. The WPCA or its
designated representative may make a suitable provision for such reimbursement a condition
precedent to the issuance of any permit for construction, alteration or repair of such sewer or sewer
connection, subject to such directions as the WPCA may issue.
§ 264-51. Protection of sewers from damage.
Adequate precautions shall be taken to exclude from public sewers all water or other materials which
may constrict, damage or wrongfully fill any sewer into which they may discharge directly or indirectly.
To that end, the open ends of sewer or drain connections shall be kept closed or protected during
construction and during periods when work on any incomplete job is suspended.
Article VIII. Permits
§ 264-52. Permit required for excavation or construction.
No person, other than those working for and under the direction of the Town, shall make any
excavation for or construct, install, lay, repair, alter, or remove any sewer, building drain, building
sewer, sewer connection, or appurtenance thereof or connect to such sewer within the Town, which is
in any way connected to or discharges directly or indirectly to or into any public sanitary sewer of said
Town, or is intended at some future time to be so connected or so discharged, until said person or
party shall have applied for and secured from the WPCA or its designated representative a permit for
doing such work. Such permits may be issued only to those qualified to perform such work as provided
in §§ 264-44 and 264-48 of this chapter.
§ 264-53. Permit required for connection to public sewer.
A person intending to connect a building drain from his property to the public sewer shall first apply for
and obtain a permit from the WPCA in the manner set forth in § 264-54 hereafter. There shall be
multiple classes of building sewer permits as required by the WPCA. Upon approval of the application
and plan, a permit shall be issued to have the work performed by the stated drain layer. In the event
the premises changes ownership before the work is completed, or if another drain layer is chosen to
perform or finish the work, the original permit becomes void and a new permit must be obtained by the
new parties in interest. A permit and inspection fee as determined by the WPCA shall be paid to the
WPCA at the time the application is filed.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 141/200
A.
(1)
B.
§ 264-54. Application requirements and contents.
Every application for a permit shall be made in writing on forms to be provided by the WPCA for that
purpose and shall be signed by the owner of the premises to be served and by the drain layer or other
qualified person or party, or an authorized agent thereof. The application shall state the name and
business address of the drain layer (in the case of partnerships and trade names, both the name under
which the firm does business and the names of all individual members of the firm), the location and
ownership of the property to be served by the building sewer in question, the post office address of
said property owner, a brief description of the work to be done, and shall contain an agreement that the
permittee will do the work in accordance with the requirements of Town laws, ordinances, regulations
and permits as those laws, etc., may apply to the particular locations or work and will indemnify and
save said Town and others harmless from damages, loss, damage claims, etc., in accordance with the
terms of the drain layer's certificate of insurance provided for in § 264-59 thereof. The permit
application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information considered
reasonably necessary by the WPCA or its designated representative. The WPCA or its designated
representative shall require as a prerequisite to the issuances of any permit that he be furnished
evidence that (a) any and all necessary permits, etc., to open public streets, public or private grounds
or property have been or will be issued; (b) that the agent of the applicant is properly authorized to sign
the application in question; (c) that the devices used or provisions made to prevent the entry into public
sanitary sewers of any substances forbidden entry by this chapter will be provided, maintained and
operated as required by Article V and VI hereof; and any other information or proof pertinent to the
particular job in question.
§ 264-55. Permit fee; permits nontransferable; display of permit.
Any person who applies for a permit to connect into a public sanitary sewer or sewer line shall pay the
prescribed fee for each such permit. Permits shall not be transferable or assignable by the permittee.
Permits shall be kept on the premises where and at all times when work is in progress and shall be
shown to any proper person asking to see the same. All persons operating under such permits shall be
held responsible for conformity to the requirements thereof and this chapter.
§ 264-56. Revocation of permit upon violation.
Any permit, in whole or in part, may be suspended, canceled or terminated by the WPCA or its
designated representative on written notice to the permittee for violation of the conditions thereof or for
the violation of the requirements of this chapter.
§ 264-57. Connection plans and construction drawings.
In the case of a proposed sewer connection from an industrial building, commercial building,
commercial complex, apartment house, apartment house complex, or residential subdivision or
any building other than a normal residential building, the Town shall be provided with a suitable
plan and the proposed method of connection to the public sewer. Such plan shall be submitted to
the WPCA prior to the time when the permit is needed in order to allow the WPCA sufficient time
to investigate properly the proposed design of connection and make any recommendation that the
WPCA may deem advisable.
The owner of the subject premises, or his agent, at his expense, shall furnish to the WPCA a
complete set of construction drawings with a professional engineering seal thereto affixed that
shall comply with the following specifications:
Cover sheet. Name of development or project name of engineering consultant who has drawn
prints, date, general plot plan layout.
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 142/200
(a)
(b)
(c)
(2)
(1)
(a)
(b)
(2)
A.
Plan and profile sheets.
Proposed sewers shall have a plan on the upper half of sheet with following: all
underground utilities shown, mete stones, property lines, street lines, buildings, rights-ofway,
and any other information pertinent to the construction of the proposed sanitary
sewer.
Sewer profile to be a forty-scale grid system with the sewer line darkened considerably;
other underground utilities shall be indicated on profile sheet.
Title block as per specification at the office of the WPCA.
§ 264-58. Responsibility of drain layer for work.
Each drain layer licensed in accordance with § 264-44 hereof shall be responsible for the proper
performance of all work performed under the permits issued to him and for the conduct of all work and
all materials furnished on work by his employees or agents.
Article IX. Drain Layer Responsibilities
§ 264-59. Indemnification of Town.
Each drain layer licensed by the Town pursuant to Article VII, § 264-44, hereof and performing services
for the holder of a permit issued pursuant to Article VIII hereof ("performing drain layer"), and holder of
a permit issued pursuant to Article VII, § 264-48, hereof ("private owner-installer") shall at all times
indemnify, defend and hold harmless the Town from and against any and all claims, losses, damages,
expenses and liabilities which the Town may suffer or for which the Town may be held liable by reason
of injury (including death) to any person or damage to any property arising out of or in any manner
connected or related to work performed or done under the permit referred to in this § 264-59 caused in
whole or in part by the acts or omissions of the performing drain layer and/or private owner-installer,
any contractor employed by either one of them, or both, or any subcontractor or materialman, or
anyone directly or indirectly employed by them or any of them while engaged in the performance of
any work covered by said permits and during any maintenance period specified in this chapter.
§ 264-60. Insurance requirements; authorization required for
blasting.
Each performing drain layer shall, in part, secure his obligations to the Town by maintaining, at his
own expense with an insurance company licensed to do business in Connecticut, at least the
following forms of insurance:
Owner's protective liability and property damage insurance for and in the name of the Town
and covering all claims against the Town arising out of any work done for or under a permit
issue by the Town hereunder. The performing drain layer and his insurance company waive
governmental immunity as a defense and will not use the defense of governmental immunity
in the adjustments of claims or the defense of any suit, action or claim brought against the
Town.
Comprehensive general liability insurance, including the following coverages:
Premises-operations coverage;
Products-completed operations coverage;
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 143/200
(c)
(d)
(e)
(3)
(4)
B.
C.
D.
Contractual liability insurance insuring the hold harmless obligations set forth in § 264-59
of this chapter;
Independent contractors insurance;
Endorsement eliminating the exclusion with respect to underground property damage
liability coverage.
Comprehensive automobile liability insurance providing coverage for all owned and
nonowned vehicles.
Workmen's compensation and employer's liability insurance as provided by Connecticut law
and custom. Employers liability insurance (coverage B) shall not be written in an amount less
than $100,000.
Minimum amounts of all coverage as described in Subsection A(1), (2) and (3) above shall not be
less than $3,000,000 bodily injury liability per occurrence and $50,000 property damage liability
per occurrence. The minimum amounts of all such insurance shall not be less than stated above,
but the stipulation of minimum amounts or the acceptance by the WPCA of certificates indicating
these limits of coverage in no way limits the liability of the applicant to any such amounts.
The performing drain layer and/or the private owner-installer or their agents shall not engage in
any blasting activities in the furtherance of their work hereunder within the Town unless specific
written authorization has been granted by the Town.
Certificates of such insurance on forms provided by and satisfactory to the WPCA or its
designated representative shall be submitted in duplicate before the work is begun. Work shall not
be continued after expiration of any of the above forms of insurance until the same have been
renewed. If the WPCA or its designated representative so requires, original policies or certified
copies thereof shall be submitted in lieu of certificates.
§ 264-61. Bond.
Every performing drain layer shall file with the WPCA a satisfactory bond issued by a surety company
authorized to transact such business in the State of Connecticut in a form provided by and satisfactory
to the WPCA. The bond shall be in an amount not less than $5,000 to be determined by the WPCA or
its designated representative conditioned that the performing drain layer substantially and properly
perform all work to be done under the permits issued in a workmanlike manner and upon his using
proper materials; that the performing drain layer shall reimburse the Town for any expense to said
Town or its agents arising from any injury or damage to any sewer or other property of said Town or by
reason of any violation by the applicant or his agents or employees of any requirement of this chapter;
that the performing drain layer shall restore the portion of any street or public place in which the
performing drain layer may have made an excavation incidental to work under said license to as good
condition as it was prior to said work, and also shall keep said street or public place in like good
condition to the satisfaction of the proper public officer in charge thereof for a period of not less than
one year after said restoration; that the performing drain layer shall reimburse the Town or the state for
the expense of repairs to such street or public place made necessary by reason of the excavation
made by the performing drain layer; and that the performing drain layer shall comply in all respects
with the rules, regulations, laws, ordinances, etc., relative to work in such streets or public places and
with the terms of the permits which may be issued to the performing drain layer.
Article X. Enforcement
§ 264-62. Work performed to allow inspection or to bring sewer
into compliance.
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 144/200
If any person shall construct, install, alter or repair any sewer or connection to any public sewer of the
Town in violation of the requirements of this chapter, or, having obtained a permit as provided by this
chapter, shall construct, install, alter or repair a sewer or connection thereto without having given the
WPCA or its authorized representative ample notice, time, opportunity and assistance, during their
regular working hours, to inspect such sewer or connection and the work and materials used thereon,
said WPCA or its authorized representative may, in its or his discretion, order or direct the person who
constructed such sewer, etc., and the owner of any property in which said sewer, etc., may be located
or which may be served thereby, or in whose interest and employ said work was done, to uncover and
fully expose any or all portions of such sewer connection and afford said inspector adequate
opportunity to examine and inspect such sewer, etc., and to secure such records thereof as may be
proper. If such sewer or connection and the appurtenances thereof shall be found not to be in full
accord with the requirements of this chapter and the standards established under its provisions, then
said WPCA may order and direct such person, owner or lessee, to make such changes in, or addition
to, or remove portions of, appurtenances of such sewer, etc., as may be necessary to insure that such
sewer, etc., will conform to the requirements of this chapter and of the standards established under its
provisions. All of such work shall be performed by said person, owner or lessee without delay and
without expense to the Town.
§ 264-63. Investigation of violations; compliance required.
If the WPCA shall have evidence that a sewer or any part or appurtenance thereof, which is connected
to or discharges into any public sewer of the Town, has been constructed, repaired or altered or is or
has been used, operated or maintained, or that substances are being or recently have been
discharged through the same in violation of the requirements of this chapter or of the standards
established under its provisions, said WPCA or its authorized representative shall inquire into the
matter. Said WPCA may require that the owner, lessee or tenant of the property where such sewer,
etc., may be located or of property served by such sewer, etc., assist said WPCA and its
representatives in such inquiry and permit them to examine such sewer, etc., and observe the manner
in which sewer, etc., is used, operated or maintained and the wastes discharged through the same. If
said WPCA shall find on such inquiry that there exists good reason to believe that the requirements of
this chapter have not been or are not being complied with, it may require that the owner, lessee or
tenant of said property furnish said WPCA with adequate proof that said requirements are being
conformed to said requirements and will continue to be complied with. If it shall appear that said
requirements have not been or are not being conformed to or complied with or that good reason exists
to believe that they may not thereafter be conformed to or complied with, said WPCA may order and
require that such owner, lessee or tenant shall immediately take such measures and provide and install
such appurtenances to make such changes in such sewer, etc., or the manner of using and
maintaining the same as will insure that said requirements will be conformed to or complied with
thereafter. All assistance, proof, changes and new appurtenances required by this section to be
furnished or provided by the owner; lessee, or tenant of property in question shall be promptly
furnished by such owner, lessee or tenant without expense to the Town.
§ 264-64. Disconnection for violations.
If any person, after proper order or direction from the WPCA, fails to take the remedial steps or perform
the acts required under § 264-62 or 264-63 of this chapter, or fails thereafter to use, operate and
maintain any connection with the public sewers of the Town, or appurtenance thereof, as required by
this chapter, the WPCA, by its agents and in such manner as it may choose, may disconnect the
building sewer which was wrongfully connected, altered, repaired or used, or through which improper
wastes were discharged into the public sewer system of the Town. In disconnecting such building
sewers, the WPCA may, if necessary, interfere with or cut off sewerage from other portions of the
property where such violation of this chapter has occurred or of any adjacent property which is served
by such house connection.
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 145/200
A.
B.
If the WPCA shall have disconnected a building sewer from the public sewer system, as above
provided, said WPCA may collect the cost of making such disconnection from any person
responsible for, or willfully concerned in, or who profited by such violation of the requirements of
this chapter.
If the WPCA has disconnected any property from the public sewer system, as above provided, it
may thereafter refuse to permit the restoration of the former connection or of any new connection
to the property concerned in the violation of this chapter until the claim of the WPCA for the cost of
making such disconnection and the reasonable overhead and any legal expense incurred by the
WPCA in connection therewith shall have been paid in full plus interest.
Article XI. Powers and Authority of Inspectors
§ 264-65. Entry for purposes of inspection.
The WPCA or its designated representative bearing proper credentials and identification shall have the
right to enter and inspect any part of any premises served, directly or indirectly, by the sewers or drains
of said Town upon which there may be reason to believe that violations of the requirements of the rules
and regulations have occurred or are likely to occur, for the purpose of ascertaining facts as to such
violation or suspected violation, or of obtaining samples of wastes, substances, or waters being
discharged, or of inspecting devices provided to exclude such prohibited discharges.
§ 264-66. Compliance with safety rules.
While performing the necessary work in private properties referred to in § 264-65 above, the WPCA or
its designated representative shall observe all safety rules, applicable to the premises established by
the user.
§ 264-67. Entry onto easements.
The WPCA and other duly authorized employees of the Town bearing proper credentials and
identifications shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the Town holds a duly
granted easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying within said easement. All
entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of
the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved.
Article XII. Penalties
§ 264-68. Notice of violation and time for correction.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter, except the actions described in § 264-72
herein, shall be served by the Town with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing
a time limit for the nature of the violation and providing a time limit for the satisfactory correction
thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all
violations.
§ 264-69. Penalties for offenses.
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 146/200
[1]
Any person who continues to violate any provision of this chapter beyond the time limit provided for in
§ 264-68 may be fined not more than $100. Each day that any violation of this chapter continues or
each day that person continues to discharge prohibited wastes or substances into any public sanitary
sewer shall be deemed a separate offense for the purpose of applying the above penalty.
§ 264-70. Expenses, loss or damage incurred by Town.
Any person who is found to be in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall become liable to
the Town for any expense, loss or damage occasioned the Town by reason of such violation.
§ 264-71. Penalties for violating state provisions.
Any person who is found to be in violation of § 22a-430 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as
amended, shall be subject to a monetary penalty or forfeiture under § 221-438 of the Connecticut
General Statutes.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 264-72. Liability for damaging or destroying system
components.
Any person who willfully or recklessly breaks, damages, destroys, or injures any structure,
appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the public sanitary sewer system shall be subject to the
penalties imposed under § 53a-117 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
Article XIII. Validity
§ 264-73. Severability.
If any provision, requirement, or section of this chapter shall be judged invalid or unenforceable, such
adjudication shall not affect the validity of any other provision hereof, but all other provisions, sections
and requirements of this chapter shall be deemed valid and effective and shall remain in full force and
effect.
Article XIV. Appeals
§ 264-74. Time limit for appeal; requirements.
Any person who may be aggrieved by an interpretation of any provision of this chapter made by any
Town official, employee or representative or by an order issued by any Town official, employee or
representative under authority conferred by this chapter, or by any requirement of this chapter, or by
any classification of any sewer or drain made by any Town official, employee or representative may,
within 15 days after such interpretation, order, classification or requirement, appeal therefrom to the
WPCA. Any such appeal shall be in writing, addressed to and filed with the WPCA, setting out the
matter in reasonable detail and completeness. Said WPCA shall consider any such appeal made to it
and, if so requested by any person interested therein, shall afford all interested parties an opportunity
to be heard by the WPCA or by a committee thereof, within 15 days of the filing of such an appeal.
§ 264-75. Decision on appeal.
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 147/200
The WPCA shall, within 30 days after the filing of such appeal, make such decision in the matter of the
appeal as may to it appear proper, and give notice thereof to the appellant, and, in its discretion, may
alter the interpretation, order or requirement of the Town official, employee or representative in whole
or in part. Until such time as said WPCA shall have received and considered an appeal and shall have
voted to change such interpretation, order or requirement, such interpretation, order or requirement
shall be observed and remain in full force and effect.
Chapter 269. Solid Waste
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town of East Hampton as indicated in article histories. Amendments noted
where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Littering — See Ch. 232.
Article I. Use and Operation of Refuse Disposal Area
[Adopted by the Board of Selectmen 8-23-1983 (Ord. No. 4.11)]
§ 269-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning ascribed to
them in this section:
PERSON
Any institution, public or private corporation, individual, partnership or other entity.
REFUSE
All solid wastes of a community, including garbage, trash, ashes, offal, rubbish, small dead
animals, street cleanings, brush, grass clippings, trees, building materials and solid market and
industrial wastes.
REFUSE DISPOSAL AREA
Any area of land owned, rented, or leased by the Town, now or in the future, which is specifically
set aside for the disposal and/or transfer of refuse.
TOWN
The Town of East Hampton, a municipal corporation located in Middlesex County of the State of
Connecticut.
§ 269-2. Hours of operation.
The refuse disposal area shall normally be open to the public for the disposal of refuse from 7:30 a.m.
to 3:00 p.m., Tuesday through Saturday, except as provided under § 269-3.
§ 269-3. Days closed.
The refuse disposal area shall be closed or opened for the disposal of refuse on legal holidays and
such other day, days or hours that the Town Manager may designate.
§ 269-4. Use by nonresidents; permit required.
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 148/200
[1]
[1]
A person who neither resides nor has a place of business in the Town may dispose of refuse in the
refuse disposal area, provided that said refuse is a direct result of work, operations, or business
undertaken by him, whether by contract or otherwise, in the Town, and that said person obtains a
permit from the Town Manager, each such permit requiring payment of a fee as set from time to time
by the Town Council and expiring after 10 days; except that nonresident refuse collectors shall be
governed by the provisions of § 269-6.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 269-5. Use by residents; licensing of collectors; insurance.
Any person, whether or not he resides or has a place of business in the Town, may dispose of refuse in
the refuse disposal area, provided he is licensed by or employed by the Town of East Hampton as a
refuse collector. Said license shall require an annual fee to be due on or before July 1 of each year for
vehicles in an amount as set from time to time by the Town Council. In addition, each refuse collector
will be required on or before July 1 each year to provide the Town Manager with proof of public liability
insurance for personal injury and property damage in an amount not less than $100,000 per person
and $300,00 per occurrence, along with $50,000 property damage coverage.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 269-6. Use by refuse collectors.
Any person, whether or not he resides or has a place of business in the Town, may dispose of refuse in
the refuse disposal area provided he is licensed by or employed by the Town of East Hampton as a
refuse collector.
§ 269-7. Nonlocal refuse.
No person, whether or not he resides or has a place of business in the Town, may dispose of refuse in
the refuse disposal area when such refuse is the direct result of work, operations, or business
undertaken by him, whether by contract, or otherwise, in a location or area outside the Town. However,
the Town Manager, upon approval of the Town Council, may enter into agreement with another
municipality or agency for convenience, and may negotiate fees for the use of the refuse disposal area.
§ 269-8. Tree trunks, stumps, bulky waste, demolition materials.
No person may dispose of tree trunks or stumps, measuring eight inches or more in diameter at the
butt or largest end, at the refuse disposal area. Other bulky waste material, demolition materials, junk
motor vehicles and farm machinery are not permitted in the refuse disposal site. Acceptable bulky
waste shall include large and/or heavy waste items such as empty refrigerators with doors off, washing
machines, stoves, household furniture, etc., and other similar material that cannot be broken down.
§ 269-9. Refuse prohibited.
The Town Manager may prohibit the disposal of any refuse or hazardous waste (as defined by
appropriate state or federal laws or regulations) by any person in the refuse disposal area when said
refuse is of such nature and quantity as to be in his opinion dangerous to the public health, welfare or
safety, or prejudicial to the proper operation of the refuse disposal area. Prohibited materials shall
include, but not be limited to, explosives, pathological and biological waste, infected material,
chemicals, radioactive materials, any kind of material containing hot coals or fire, oil sludges, highly
inflammable substances, cesspool or other human wastes, human and animal remains, motor
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 149/200
[1]
vehicles, by-product wastes such as rubber, leather and plastics, farm and other large machinery,
liquid wastes, nonburnable construction material and demolition debris.
§ 269-10. Placement of refuse in disposal area.
Any person disposing of refuse in the refuse disposal area shall dispose of such refuse by dumping or
otherwise in specific locations as determined by, and under the supervision of, the custodian of the
refuse disposal area. No refuse or junk may be tossed over the fence or left on the roadside adjacent
to the refuse disposal area at any time.
§ 269-11. Scavenging prohibited.
Scavenging at the refuse disposal area is prohibited.
§ 269-12. Trespassing; vehicle identification stickers.
No person shall enter or be permitted within the refuse disposal area except during the hours when the
area is open to the public and the custodian is on duty. Vehicles using the refuse disposal area shall be
required by the Town Manager to obtain a windshield sticker to permit entry to the site.
§ 269-13. Covered loads.
Any vehicle carrying refuse to the refuse disposal area shall carry such refuse, either by covering it or
protecting it or in some suitable manner, so that such refuse shall not blow or fall off the vehicle and
create an unsightly roadside condition.
§ 269-14. Maintenance of area.
The custodian of the refuse disposal area shall compact refuse for transit, segregate materials and
maintain the disposal area in accordance with state and local regulations.
§ 269-15. Penalties for offenses.
Violations of any provisions of this article shall be an infraction. Any person who violates any provisions
of this article shall be fined an amount not to exceed $100 for each offense. Each day on which an
offense occurs shall be deemed a separate offense.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
Article II. Storage, Collection and Disposal
[Adopted by the Town Council 3-12-1991 (Ord. No. 4.12)]
§ 269-16. Findings.
The accumulation, collection, removal and disposal of solid waste must be controlled by the Town of
East Hampton for the protection of the public health, safety, and general welfare. It is consequently
found and declared that:
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 150/200
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
The Town of East Hampton is authorized by law to regulate the disposition of solid waste
generated within its boundaries and to collect a charge therefor and to license refuse collectors;
and
The Town of East Hampton is also authorized by C.G.S. § 22a-209 to designate the area where
solid waste generated within its boundaries shall be disposed of; and
The Town of East Hampton has executed the Municipal Service Agreement, requiring it to cause
all solid waste generated within its boundaries and which meets the contractual standards to be
delivered to the Mid-Connecticut System; and
The public health, safety and general welfare of the Town of East Hampton will be best served by
requiring the delivery of such solid waste to the Mid-Connecticut System for processing by the
Mid-Connecticut System and the generation of electricity; and
The enactment of this article is in furtherance of the municipality's regional Solid Waste
Management Plan.
§ 269-17. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
AUTHORITY
The Connecticut Resources Recovery Authority established pursuant to Chapter 446e of the
Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
CONTRACTUAL STANDARDS
For solid waste delivered to the Mid-Connecticut System, the contractual standards are as follows:
It must be solid waste emanating from within the corporate boundaries of the Town of East
Hampton;
It must not be of such a quantity, quality, or other nature as to materially impair the operation
or capacity of the Mid-Connecticut System or any portion thereof, normal and reasonable
wear and usage expected;
It must not be of such quantity, quality or other nature as to materially impair the strength or
durability of the structures, equipment or works which are part of the Mid-Connecticut
Systems or any portion thereof;
It must not be of such quantity, quality or other nature as to create flammable or explosive
conditions in the Mid-Connecticut Systems or any portion thereof;
It must not contain chemical or other properties which are deleterious, as determined by the
Authority, or capable of causing material damage to any part of the system or to personnel;
and
It must not include any hazardous waste.
DISPOSAL CHARGE
The amount of money to be charged for each ton of solid waste delivered to the Mid-Connecticut
System as established by the procedures authorized in the Municipal Service Agreement.
HAZARDOUS WASTE
Pathological, biological, cesspool or other human wastes, human and animal remains, radioactive,
toxic, and other hazardous wastes which, according to federal, state or local rules or regulations
from time to time in effect, require special handling in their collection, treatment or disposal,
including those regulated under 42 U.S.C. §§ 6921 to 6925 and regulations thereunder adopted by
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 151/200
(1)
(2)
A.
[1]
B.
C.
the United States Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to the Resource Conservation Act of
1976, 90 Stat. 2806, 42 U.S.C. § 6901, such as cleaning fluids, crank-case oils, cutting oils,
paints, acids, caustics, poisons, drugs, fine powdery earth used to filter cleaning fluid and refuse of
similar nature.
MID-CONNECTICUT SYSTEM
The system for processing of solid waste and the recovery of energy therefrom constructed by the
Authority pursuant to the Municipal Service Agreement.
MUNICIPAL SERVICE AGREEMENT
The Municipal Solid Waste Management Services Contract between the Town of East Hampton
and the Authority, dated as of 1981.
REFUSE COLLECTOR
Includes any person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of collecting and transporting
commercial, household or industrial solid waste for hire within the Town of East Hampton.
SOLID WASTE
Unwanted or discarded materials consistent with the meaning of that term pursuant to § 22a-
260(7) of the Connecticut General Statutes, excluding semi-solid or liquid materials collected and
treated in a sewerage system.
SUPERINTENDENT
The Superintendent of Public Works.
§ 269-18. License required for refuse collection.
All solid waste accumulated in the Town of East Hampton shall be collected, conveyed and disposed of
by the Town of East Hampton or by persons licensed by the Town of East Hampton to perform such
work in accordance with the provisions of this article and in accordance with other local, state or
federal regulations, as may apply. No solid waste collected from outside the Town of East Hampton
shall be disposed of under a license or registration issued pursuant to this article.
§ 269-19. Licensing of refuse collectors; registration of vehicles.
Licensing and registration authority designated. The Superintendent shall be the licensing and
registration authority for refuse collectors, vehicles and containers. The Superintendent shall grant
a license within a reasonable period of time following the filing of a proper application and
payment of the prescribed fees, as outlined in Subsections B and D below, unless it is found that
one or more of the following conditions prevail:
The applicant has been irresponsible in the conduct of solid waste collection and hauling
operations based upon previous suspensions and/or revocations of licenses; or
The applicant lacks suitable equipment with which to collect solid waste in a safe and
nuisance-free manner and in compliance with this article.
License required. Each refuse collector shall apply annually, on or before July 1, for a license from
the Superintendent on such form or forms as shall be prescribed to engage in the business of
solid waste collection in the Town of East Hampton. An annual licensing fee as set from time to
time by the Town Council shall be paid prior to the issuance of any such license.[1]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
Registration of vehicles and containers. Each licensed refuse collector shall obtain a separate
registration for each vehicle used to collect, transport and/or deposit solid waste in the Town of
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 152/200
[2]
D.
E.
F.
G.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
East Hampton or its system.
Registration term, fee, renewal. All registrations shall be issued for a term not to exceed one year
and shall be renewable on or before July 1 each year. The registration fee for each vehicle and/or
container with a capacity of 10 or more cubic yards and for each vehicle and/or container of a
capacity of less than 10 cubic yards shall be as set from time to time by the Town Council.
Containers of less than one cubic yard shall not be subject to the registration and fee requirement.
[2]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
Reinspection upon sale or transfer of vehicle during registration year. Whenever a duly registered
vehicle is sold or transferred to another refuse collector licensed in the Town of East Hampton
during the registration year, said vehicle shall be reinspected within seven days of such transfer
date, but no additional fees shall be required.
Display of registration. The registration issued shall be conspicuously displayed on the left front of
the body of each vehicle or container so licensed, or as may be directed.
License nontransferable. Licenses are not transferable. When any licensee shall sell or transfer all
or part of his business to any refuse collector not licensed in the Town of East Hampton, he shall
first notify the Superintendent in writing, no less than 10 days prior to the sale date, and the
transferee shall, at the same time, make application for a license to operate in the Town of East
Hampton.
§ 269-20. Residential refuse collection policy.
The Town of East Hampton shall be responsible for licensing residential refuse haulers, who shall
engage in collection of refuse in accordance with the following conditions:
Refuse shall only be removed when it is properly placed along a Town-owned or state-owned
public right-of-way or in the right-of-way of an approved subdivision road not presently accepted.
Requests for an exception to the above must be submitted to the Superintendent by July 1 of each
year.
Refuse shall only be removed when it is stored in Town-approved containers.
Refuse shall be removed from one- and two-family residential structures along public streets.
Exceptions may be granted for noncommercial properties upon written applications to the
Superintendent. Requests for extensions must be submitted to the Superintendent by February 1
of each year.
Refuse shall not be allowed to accumulate, and pick-up service must be provided on a regular and
continuing basis in accordance with the policy set forth by the Superintendent.
Refuse shall be placed at curbside in accordance with the policy set forth by the Superintendent.
Refuse may not be placed at curbside prior to 4:00 p.m. the day before pickup.
Refuse containers must be removed from curbside no later than 7:00 a.m. the day after pickup.
Items designated as recyclables shall be placed at curbside in accordance with Article III of this
chapter.
Refuse shall not include any item listed as recyclable or any item deemed unacceptable by the
Connecticut Resources Recovery Authority.
The following refuse shall be considered not acceptable for collection:
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 153/200
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
K.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
A.
B.
Material which has not been prepared, bound, containerized and/or placed for collection in
accordance with the rules and regulations of the Town of East Hampton.
Materials and waste resulting from the repair of buildings or structures, such as earth, stone,
concrete, plaster, mortar and roofing material, trees or tree stumps over six inches in
diameter, junkyard wastes, dangerous material or substances such as poisons, acids,
caustics, sanitary wastes, infected materials, explosives or radioactive material, auto-car
bodies, fine powdery earth used to filter cleaning fluid or refuse of similar nature.
Body wastes or solid industrial wastes.
Bulky waste which has a dimension in excess of six feet and/or exceeds 300 pounds in
weight.
All other material deemed unacceptable by the Connecticut Resource Recovery Authority.
Any refuse or rubbish left in public view, not in accordance with the provisions of this article, shall
be deemed a public nuisance and a violation of the article.
§ 269-21. Revocation or suspension of license or registration.
General. A license to engage in solid waste collection in the Town of East Hampton and to use the
Mid-Connecticut System or other refuse facilities provided by the Town of East Hampton is a
privilege, not a right. Failure to comply with the provisions of this article shall be grounds for
revocation or suspension of any license or registration issued under the provisions of this article,
in addition to any other penalty imposable by law.
Notice requirement. Revocation or suspension shall only become effective 10 calendar days after
receipt of written notice from the Superintendent.
Request for review, filing, effect of failure to file. If a refuse collector objects to the
Superintendent's action described in Subsection B above, to revoke or suspend his license or
registration, he may, within five calendar days of receipt of said notice, file a written request for
review with the Town Manager. Failure to timely file such request for review shall make the
Superintendent's action final and binding upon the refuse collector.
Effect of timely filing. Timely filing of such request for review shall operate as an automatic stay of
the Superintendent's action.
Hearing. The Town Manager shall, within 15 days, hear and decide the matter. Such hearing shall
be private, except, however, such hearing may be public if so requested, in writing, by the refuse
collector. The decision of the Town Manager shall be final and binding upon the refuse collector.
Refusal of permission to use Mid-Connecticut System. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary
herein, the Superintendent shall have power to refuse permission to a refuse collector to use the
Mid-Connecticut System when, in his opinion, such refuse collector has violated this article or any
other applicable rule or regulation.
§ 269-22. Promulgation of rules and regulations.
The Superintendent shall administer the licensing of any refuse collector engaged in the collecting
and transporting of solid waste in the Town of East Hampton.
The Superintendent shall, when considering an application for a solid waste collection license,
including renewal, ascertain that the applicant has adequate liability insurance, as required in the
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 154/200
C.
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
D.
Solid Waste Permitting Disposal and Billing Regulations of the Authority.
The Superintendent may promulgate additional collection and disposal procedures from time to
time as he deems proper, but such rules shall not be inconsistent with this article. Any such
procedure, however, must first be approved by the Town Manager.
§ 269-23. Refuse collector's responsibilities and obligations.
Prohibition on delivery. No licensee shall deliver any solid waste meeting the contractual
standards to any final place other than the Mid-Connecticut System unless the Mid-Connecticut
System is incapable of accepting such solid waste at the time of delivery, in which event such solid
waste shall be delivered to the place designated by the Superintendent.
Construction and maintenance of vehicles and containers. All vehicles registered to collect and
transport solid waste to the Mid-Connecticut System shall be automatic unloading vehicles of a
watertight construction and shall be maintained free of obnoxious odors and accumulated solid
waste. Any such vehicle with a capacity in excess of 10 cubic yards shall be of a closed
construction. A container utilized primarily for non-liquid solid waste need not be of watertight
construction and shall be completely enclosed and maintained free of obnoxious odors and
accumulated solid waste. If any such vehicle shall have a capacity of less than 10 cubic yards, it
may have an open top, provided that it be covered when it is in motion, to prevent the escape of
solid waste.
§ 269-24. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating the terms of this article shall be fined not more than $100 for each offense, in
addition to any other penalty which may be imposed by law.
Article III. Recycling
[Adopted by the Town Council 3-12-1991 (Ord. No. 4.13)]
§ 269-25. Findings.
The accumulation, collection, removal and disposal of solid waste must be controlled by the Town of
East Hampton for the protection of the public health, safety and general welfare. It is consequently
found and declared that:
The Town of East Hampton is authorized by law to regulate the disposition of solid waste
generated within its boundaries and to collect a charge therefor, and to license refuse collectors;
and
The Town of East Hampton is also authorized by Connecticut General Statutes to designate the
area where solid waste generated within its boundaries shall be disposed of and to assist in the
statewide recycling efforts; and
The Town of East Hampton has executed the Municipal Service Agreement requiring it to cause all
solid waste generated within its boundaries and which meets the contractual standards to be
delivered to the Mid-Connecticut System; and
The public health, safety and general welfare of the Town of East Hampton will be best served by
reducing the amount of solid waste by encouraging and requiring the recycling of certain
materials; and
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 155/200
E.
F.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
A.
B.
C.
A.
The enactment of this article is seen as a cost-saving method for the Town and its citizens and as
a way to preserve the quality of our environment;
The Town of East Hampton is required by P.A. 87-544, P.A. 90-220 and P.A. 90-249 to make
provisions for the separation of recyclables from solid waste generated within the boundaries of
the Town of East Hampton.
§ 269-26. Definition of recyclables.
Recyclables are any discarded material which may be reclaimed and which are considered saleable
and/or reusable by the Town of East Hampton or are designated as recyclable pursuant to the
Connecticut General Statutes or regulations of the Commissioner of the Environmental Protection of
the State of Connecticut. For purposes of this article, the following are considered recyclables:
Newspaper, clean and unsoiled, including newsprint, all newspapers, advertisements,
supplements, comics and enclosures;
Glass jars and bottles, and all types of metals, including cans (aluminum and other metals);
Corrugated boxes, cardboard, cardboard cartons;
Waste motor oil;
Plastic polyethylene terephthalate and high-density polyethylene;
Leaves;
Car batteries;
Office paper, computer paper;
Scrap metal;
Other items which may now or in the future be designated as recyclable by the Superintendent of
Public Works or the Commissioner of the Department of Environmental Protection.
§ 269-27. Separation of recyclables; maintenance of containers.
All recyclables shall be separated from nonrecyclables in the following manner. No person shall
dispose of recyclables except in accordance with this article.
Clean and unsoiled newspaper shall be separated from other rubbish and placed into designated
recycling containers as defined by the Superintendent of Public Works;
Glass jars and bottles and all types of metals shall be separated from other rubbish and combined
in recycling containers as defined by the Superintendent of Public Works. These recyclables must
be rinsed clean, with the lids, corks and tops removed.
All recycling containers must be kept clean and in such a place so as not to constitute a nuisance
or otherwise be objectionable.
§ 269-28. Collection of recyclables.
All residents shall be required to separate recyclables and to place them at curbside or at
designated locations for pickup. Recyclables shall be collected or transported to designated sites
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 156/200
B.
C.
D.
[1]
from residential properties at least twice a month, according to the policy set forth in the office of
the Superintendent of Public Works.
All businesses, institutions, and other nonresidential property owners shall make provisions for
recycling of corrugated, newspaper, computer paper, white office paper, scrap metal, waste motor
oil, PET, HDPE, glass jars, and metal food containers. Amounts of each material recycled shall be
reported to the Superintendent of Public Works twice per year.
All refuse collectors licensed to perform service in the Town of East Hampton shall provide for
collection of recyclables from residences not less than twice per calendar month; and from
businesses, institutions or other properties not less than once per week or as necessary.
All recyclables collected from residential property shall be delivered to the Mid-Connecticut
System or such other location as the Superintendent of Public Works may direct.
§ 269-29. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating any provision of this article or the regulations enacted hereunder shall be fined
not more than $1,000 for each offense. In addition, the Town of East Hampton reserves the right to
refuse to collect garbage, rubbish or other refuse where the spirit or letter of this article or the
regulations enacted hereunder are ignored. The Superintendent of Public Works shall have full
discretionary authority in deciding all disputed questions arising under the provisions of this article or
the regulations enacted hereunder.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
Chapter 271. Special Events
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town Council of the Town of East Hampton as indicated in article histories.
Amendments noted where applicable.]
Article I. Public Safety
[Adopted 6-9-2015]
§ 271-1. Purpose.
The provisions of this article are to ensure the public's health, safety, welfare and property during the
instance of a special event. No part of this regulation shall create an undue burden on any nonprofit,
civic organization, for-profit business, or religious organization. The Town of East Hampton has many
organizations that hold special events that require additional notification of all the branches of
emergency services and regulatory agencies in order to ensure safety.
§ 271-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
EMERGENCY SERVICES
Refers to the East Hampton Police Department, Fire Department and Ambulance Association.
HOST
The individual(s) and/or organization(s) that sponsors the special event.
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 157/200
[1]
A.
B.
C.
D.
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
B.
REGULATORY AGENCIES
Shall include but is not limited to the Health Department, Building Department and Fire Marshal.
SPECIAL EVENT
Any public gathering, other than the normal operation of the hosting organization, of more than
1,000 persons assembled at one time for one particular event.
§ 271-3. Exceptions.
No organization or business shall be assessed a fee for their application. Family events and reunions
shall be exempt from the provisions of this article.
§ 271-4. Application.
The host must complete a special events application form[1] and provide it to the Town Manager's
office a minimum of five business days prior to the event occurring. There will be no fee associated
with the application and all applications shall be approved unless identified below in § 271-5 or the
event is deemed unsafe or in violation by a head of any of the emergency services and/or regulatory
agency in accordance with any Connecticut General Statute.
Editor's Note: A copy of the special events application form is on file in the Town offices.
§ 271-5. Penalties for offenses.
In the instance the host(s) fails to provide an application form in the following format will be followed for
penalties:
First offense: written warning.
Second offense: fine of $50.
Third offense: fine of $100.
Fourth offense: denial of any future application for one calendar year from the date of the event.
§ 271-6. Appeal.
In the instance that a fine is levied on the host of an event, they will have the opportunity to appeal
the fine. Appeals will be directed, in writing, to the Town Manager's office and will be heard by an
appeals review committee consisting of:
The Town Manager;
A Council member from each of the represented political parties appointed by the Council
Chair;
The Chiefs of the Fire Department, Police Department and Ambulance Association.
The appeals review committee decision shall be made in writing and will be final and binding.
Chapter 273. Streets and Sidewalks
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 158/200
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town of East Hampton as indicated in article histories. Amendments noted
where applicable.]
Article I. Street Naming
[Adopted by the Board of Selectmen 10-16-1989 (Ord. No. 5.02)]
§ 273-1. Authority to name; notice of meeting required.
The Town Council shall have the authority to name streets in the Town of East Hampton, provided any
proposed naming of any streets shall not be considered at any meeting of the Town Council unless
notice thereof and of the time and place of such meeting has been published in a newspaper having a
substantial circulation in the Town of East Hampton.
Article II. Use of Town Property and Rights-of-Way
[Adopted by the Board of Selectmen 12-13-1980 (Ord. No. 5.03)]
§ 273-2. Authority; purpose.
The Town Council enact this article pursuant to the authority of § 7-148 of the Connecticut General
Statutes and toward the advancement of the public health, safety and welfare, expressly for the
purpose of guaranteeing the safety of travelers, and the free and unfettered use of Town property
where the Town has determined the same to be permissible.
§ 273-3. Approval required.
No person, association, corporation, or other entity shall be permitted to erect, construct, repair, place,
replace, plant, keep or maintain any structure, fence, stand, barricade, sign, or other object except
mailboxes, whether temporary or permanent in nature, upon any Town right-of-way and/or within six
feet of the edge of the traveled portion of any Town road, or upon any Town property, without first
obtaining written approval from the Town Manager.
§ 273-4. Obstructions prohibited.
[Added 8-22-1989]
No person, association, corporation, or other entity shall be permitted to obstruct any public sidewalk,
public walkway or public passageway by placement of any object thereon or permit any plant or tree to
obstruct same. The Superintendent of Public Works shall direct any entity deemed in violation of this
section to remove said object or planting within five days of receipt of written notification. Failure to act
upon notification shall permit the Superintendent of Public Works to remove the offending object or
planting and bill the offending entity and/or lien said property for the costs of removal, in addition to the
penalties described in § 273-5.
§ 273-5. Penalties for offenses.
A violation of this article shall subject the violator or violators to a fine of $100 as provided by § 7-
148(c)(6)(C)(v) of the Connecticut General Statutes. Each day of willful noncompliance with this article
shall be considered a separate violation hereof.
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 159/200
[1]
A.
B.
Article III. Snow and Ice on Streets
[Adopted by the Town Council 3-8-1994 (Ord. No. 5.04)]
§ 273-6. Deposit of snow and ice on streets prohibited.
No person shall plow, throw, put or cause to be thrown or put any snow or ice from any private property
or from any area in the rear of said private property or in the area between a private dwelling house or
structure and the legally laid-out sidewalk, into any public highway in the Town.[1]
Editor's Note: Former § 2, providing for the adoption of this article as an emergency measure to
terminate 61 days after adoption, was deleted 12-12-2006.
§ 273-7. Penalties for offenses; enforcement.
The penalty for violation of this article shall be an infraction and shall be enforced by the East Hampton
Police Department. Any violation of this article shall be subject to a maximum penalty of $90 for each
violation.
Article IV. Snow and Ice on Sidewalks
[Adopted by the Town Council 4-13-2010]
§ 273-8. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
SIDEWALK
Any gravel, brick, cement, asphalt, or other material constructed or paved as a path or walkway for
the use, convenience and safety of the general public and which adjoins public streets.
§ 273-9. Standards adopted.
The provisions of C.G.S. § 7-163a are hereby adopted effective May 6, 2010.
§ 273-10. Liability of Town.
Notwithstanding the provisions of C.G.S. § 13a-149 or any other general statute or special act, the
Town of East Hampton shall not be liable for personal injury or property damage caused by the
presence of ice or snow on a public sidewalk unless the Town of East Hampton is the owner or person
in possession and control of land abutting such sidewalk. Nothing in this section shall insulate the
Town of East Hampton from liability for its affirmative acts with respect to public sidewalks.
§ 273-11. Certain sidewalks maintained by Town.
List of sidewalks which the Town will maintain:
North Maple Street, beginning at West High Street (Route 66) and ending at High School;
Hills Avenue, beginning at North Maple Street and ending at North Main Street;
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 160/200
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
L.
M.
N.
O.
P.
Q.
R.
S.
T.
U.
V.
W.
X.
Y.
Z.
AA.
BB.
North Main Street, beginning at 11 North Main Street (Theater Square) and ending at Hills
Avenue;
North Main Street, beginning at East High Street (Route 66) and ending at Lake Drive;
Lake Drive, beginning at North Main Street and ending at Mott Hill Road;
East High Street, beginning at North Main Street and ending at Carrier Road;
East High Street, beginning at Main Street and ending at Lake View Street (Route 196);
Lake View Street (Route 196), beginning at East High Street (Route 66) and ending at Summit
Street (Route 196);
Summit Street (Route 196), beginning at Lake View Street (Route 196) and ending at sign post in
walk at 25 Summit Street;
Summit Street (Route 196), beginning at 23 Summit Street (Route 196) and ending at Main Street;
Bevin Boulevard, beginning at Summit Street (Route 196) and ending at rear school entrance;
Summit Street (Route 196), beginning at 4 Summit Street (Route 196) and ending at Main Street;
Walnut Avenue, beginning at Main Street and ending at 25 Walnut Avenue;
South Main Street, beginning 27 South Main Street and ending at Colchester Avenue (Route 16);
Main Street, beginning at Colchester Avenue (Route 16) and ending at 56 Main Street;
Main Street, beginning at 105 Main Street (Senior Center/Library) and ending at 97 Main Street;
Main Street, beginning at 93 Main Street and ending at East High Street (Route 66);
Barton Hill Road, beginning at Main Street and ending at west property line of 26 Barton Hill Road;
Barton Hill Road, beginning at east property line of 42 Barton Hill Road and ending at Maple
Street;
Maple Street, beginning at Barton Hill Road and ending at West High Street;
West High Street, beginning at Maple Street and ending at Main Street;
Governor Bill O'Neill Drive, beginning at West High Street (Route 66) and ending at driveway loop;
Edgerton Street, beginning at Main Street and ending at Smith Street;
Chatham Fields Road, beginning at Edgerton Street and ending at cul-de-sac;
Smith Street, beginning at Edgerton Street and ending at Walnut Avenue;
Viola Drive, beginning at Smith Street and ending at Viola Drive (loop);
Valli Drive, beginning at Viola Drive and ending at cul-de-sac; and
Skinner Street (Route 196), beginning at 25 Skinner Street (Route 196) and ending at Main Street.
§ 273-12. Duty and liabilities of adjacent property owners.
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 161/200
A.
B.
The owner or person in possession and control of land abutting a public sidewalk shall have the same
duty of care with respect to the presence of ice or snow on such sidewalk toward the portion of the
sidewalk abutting his property as the municipality had prior to the effective date of this article adopted
pursuant to the provisions of C.G.S. § 7-163a and shall be liable for personal injury or property
damage caused by a breach of said duty.
§ 273-13. Limitation on actions.
No action to recover damages for injury to the person or to property caused by the presence of ice or
snow on a public sidewalk against a person who owns or is in possession and control of land abutting
a public sidewalk shall be brought but within two years from the date when the injury is first sustained.
Article V. Snow Removal from Sidewalks
[Adopted by the Town Council 4-13-2010]
§ 273-14. Removal of snow from sidewalks required.
All owners, entities, or persons in possession and control of property that adjoins any public
sidewalk shall remove the snow and ice accumulated on it within 24 hours after the cessation of a
snow or ice storm. Ice that has formed on a public sidewalk due to refreezing of standing water or
moisture shall be removed or the slippery condition abated within 24 hours of such refreezing of
water or moisture.
The Public Works Department shall ensure that snow and ice is removed from all sidewalks
abutting Town-owned property, except for such sidewalks as are the responsibility of the Board of
Education of the Town of East Hampton. Where the property owner, entity, or person in control of
property abutting a public sidewalk has failed to remove snow and/or ice within 24 hours after the
cessation of a snow or ice storm, the Director of Public Works may cause to have such snow
and/or ice removed from said sidewalks, with the cost of such removal being charged to the
property owner, person, or entity in possession and control of property abutting said public
sidewalk. The cost of such removal to be charged to the property owner, person, or entity in
possession and control may include the cost of Department manpower and equipment and/or the
cost of private contractors hired by the Town to facilitate the removal of snow and ice as aforesaid.
Chapter 278. Taxation
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town of East Hampton as indicated in article histories. Amendments noted
where applicable.]
Article I. Property Tax Exemptions
[Adopted by the Board of Selectmen 1977 (Ord. No. 1.08)]
§ 278-1. Effective date of exemptions.
The exemptions authorized by Subsections (7), (8), (9), (10), (11), (12), (13), (14), (15), and (16) of
§ 12-81 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended, shall be effective as of the date of
acquisition of property on the Grand List of the Town of East Hampton to which the exemption applied.
§ 278-2. Reimbursement of tax-exempt organizations.
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 162/200
The East Hampton Collector of Revenue, upon proper application being made and approved in
accordance with this article, shall reimburse the tax-exempt organization for any tax paid by it for a
period subsequent to the date of acquisition of the property to which the exemption applies or for any
tax paid by the prior owner of such property for a period subsequent to such acquisition date for which
such tax-exempt organization reimbursed such prior owner on the transfer of title to such property.
§ 278-3. Application for reimbursement.
In order to qualify for reimbursement pursuant to § 278-2 hereof, the tax-exempt organization must
make application on forms to be furnished by the Tax Assessor, together with such documentary proof
of date of acquisition, tax adjustment and other material facts as may be required by the Tax Assessor
and the East Hampton Town Council in order to consider and approve such application.
§ 278-4. Applicability.
This article shall apply to the Grand List of the Town of East Hampton of October 1, 1975, and
subsequent years.
§ 278-5. Statutory authority.
This article is adopted pursuant to § 12-81b of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
Article II. Solar Energy Systems Exemption
[Adopted by the Board of Selectmen 1977 (Ord. No. 1.09)]
§ 278-6. Exemption authorized; statutory authority.
The Town of East Hampton hereby authorizes the property tax exemption for solar energy heating or
cooling systems set forth in § 12-81(56)(a), (b) and (c) of the Connecticut General Statutes.
Article III. Sewer Assessment Payment Deferrals
[Adopted by the Board of Selectmen 4-26-1983 (Ord. No. 4.06)]
§ 278-7. Eligibility for payment plan option.
Any owner of real property who is eligible for tax relief for elderly taxpayers under the provisions of
C.G.S. §§ 12-129b and 12-170aa may apply to the Water Pollution Control Authority for approval of a
plan of payment of such property owner's assessment other than as provided under C.G.S. § 7-253.
§ 278-8. Payment of interest charges only.
Said plan may include an option to pay only the annual interest charge as provided in C.G.S. § 7-253
on any deferred payments or outstanding balance of principal of said assessment.
§ 278-9. Disposition of balance upon transfer of property.
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 163/200
A.
Any such plan shall provide that the outstanding balance of principal of said assessment shall become
due upon any transfer of title to the property subject to such assessment or upon the death of such
property owner.
§ 278-10. Effective date of plan; annual review.
Said plan shall become effective upon the approval of the Water Pollution Control Authority, and shall
be subject to annual review and reapproval by the Water Pollution Control Authority.
Article IV. Exemption for Ambulance-Type Vehicles
[Adopted by the Town Council 1-8-1991 (Ord. No. 6.03); amended in its entirety at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
§ 278-11. Exemption granted; effective date.
Any ambulance-type motor vehicle which is used exclusively for the purpose of transporting any
medically incapacitated individual, except any such vehicle used to transport any such individual for
profit, shall be exempt from personal property taxation pursuant to § 12-81c of the Connecticut General
Statutes. This is to be effective retroactive to the October 1, 1990, Grand List.
Article V. Exemptions for Volunteer Fire and Ambulance
Personnel and Civil Preparedness Director
[Adopted by the Town Council 5-22-2001 (Ord. No. 1.11)]
§ 278-12. Purpose.
This article is adopted in recognition of the benefits provided to the Town of East Hampton by the
dedicated service of the Town's volunteer fire and ambulance personnel and Civil Preparedness
Director.
§ 278-13. Exemption granted; amount; interlocal agreements.
Pursuant to § 12-81w of the Connecticut General Statutes, the Town of East Hampton hereby
authorizes an annual abatement that is to be applied to the real estate or motor vehicle taxes of a
volunteer fire fighter, paramedic, ambulance driver, EMT or the Civil Preparedness Director, owed to
the Town of East Hampton in an amount up to but not to exceed $1,000. The Town may enter into
interlocal agreements with other municipalities for the purpose of providing property tax relief to
volunteers who live in one municipality but who volunteer their services in another municipality.
§ 278-14. Eligibility.
Members of the East Hampton Volunteer Fire Department, the East Hampton Ambulance Association
and the Civil Preparedness Director shall be eligible when meeting the following criteria:
Volunteer fire fighter: member must be considered active in accordance with the bylaws of the
East Hampton Volunteer Fire Department, Article 6, Section 6, Paragraph A, attached.[1]
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 164/200
[1]
[2]
B.
C.
A.
B.
Editor's Note: The bylaws of the East Hampton Volunteer Fire Department are on file in the Town
offices.
Volunteer Ambulance Association member: member must meet the minimum responsibilities of full
members, as outlined in Articles 1 and 2 of the East Hampton Ambulance Association bylaws,
attached.[2]
Editor's Note: The East Hampton Ambulance Association bylaws are on file in the Town offices.
Volunteer Civil Preparedness Director: as appointed by and meeting minimum responsibilities, as
assigned by the Town Manager.
§ 278-15. Certification.
Annually on or before the end of the first week of January each year, the Chief of the East Hampton
Volunteer Fire Department and the Administrative Officer of the East Hampton Ambulance Association
shall submit to the Collector of Revenue a list of members of their organizations who are eligible, as
defined in § 278-14. This list shall contain names and addresses of each member who is eligible. The
Town Manager shall provide the Collector of Revenue, by January 1 of each year, with the name and
address of the appointed Civil Preparedness Director.
§ 278-16. Abatement schedule.
Abatements shall be applied to the real estate and/or motor vehicle taxes owing to the Town of East
Hampton for the Grand List previous to the January deadline as follows:
If a member has met eligibility requirements for one consecutive year, the member shall be
entitled to a property tax abatement in an amount not exceeding $1,000 for that year.
A person who is eligible in more than one category referenced in this article shall be entitled to
only one tax abatement in an amount not exceeding $1,000.
§ 278-17. Retirement benefit.
A member who has served a minimum of 20 years, has reached the age of 55 and attends one quarter
of the company/department meetings (unless excused by a physician) shall be entitled to a property
tax abatement as outlined in § 278-16 as long as he/she continues to reside and own real or personal
property in the Town of East Hampton. The Chief of the East Hampton Volunteer Fire Department and
the Administrative Officer of the East Hampton Ambulance Association shall submit to the Collector of
Revenue, concurrently with the list required under § 278-15 of this article, a list of the names and
addresses of retired members of their organizations who are eligible for this benefit.
§ 278-18. Applicability; effective date.
This article shall be first applicable to the taxes due on the Grand List of October 1, 2000, and shall be
effective 21 days after publication. With respect to the Grand List of October 1, 2000, the lists of
members required to be submitted pursuant to §§ 278-14 and 278-16 of this article shall be submitted
no later than June 15, 2001.
Article VI. Exemption for Buildings Used in Farming
[Adopted by the Town Council 9-23-2008]
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 165/200
§ 278-19. Exemption granted; amount.
Pursuant to the authority granted under C.G.S. § 12-91(c), as amended, any building used actually and
exclusively in farming as defined in C.G.S. § 1-1 or any building used to provide housing for seasonal
employees of such farmer, upon proper application being made in accordance with this article, shall be
exempt from property tax to the extent of an assessed value of $100,000.
§ 278-20. Exclusions.
This exemption shall not apply to the residence of any farmer.
§ 278-21. Application for exemption.
Within 30 days after the assessment date, each individual farmer, group of farmers, partnership or
cooperation shall make written application for the exemption provided in § 278-19 of this article to the
Assessor, including therewith a notarized affidavit certifying that such farmer, individually or as part of a
group, partnership or corporation, derived at least $15,000 in gross sales from such farming operation,
or incurred at least $15,000 in expenses related to such farming operation, with respect to the most
recently completed tax year of such farmer prior to the commencement of the assessment year for
which such application is made, on forms prescribed by the Commissioner of Agriculture. Failure to file
such application in said manner and form within the time prescribed shall be considered a waiver of the
right to such exemption for the assessment year.
Article VII. Property Tax Relief for Certain Elderly
Homeowners
[Adopted by the Town Council 2-10-2009]
§ 278-22. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Ordinance Concerning Property Tax Freeze Relief
for Certain Elderly Homeowners."
§ 278-23. Legislative authority.
This article is enacted pursuant to the provisions of C.G.S. § 12-170v and C.G.S. § 12-170w of the
State of Connecticut.
§ 278-24. Findings and purpose.
The Town Council of the Town of East Hampton finds that it is fair and equitable and in the best
interests of the Town of East Hampton to provide property tax relief to certain eligible elderly
homeowners as permitted by state law. Accordingly, pursuant to the authority granted to municipalities
by C.G.S. § 12-170v and C.G.S. § 12-170w, the Town of East Hampton seeks to improve the quality of
life for its senior residents and encourage continued residence and property ownership in the Town of
East Hampton by establishing this "Ordinance Concerning Property Tax Relief for Certain Elderly
Homeowners."
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 166/200
(1)
(2)
(3)
[1]
[2]
[3]
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(4)
A.
§ 278-25. Applicability and benefits.
Eligible homeowners.
Effective July 1, 2009, and applicable to assessment years commencing on or after October
1, 2008, an owner of real property in the Town of East Hampton or any tenant for life or for a
term of years liable for property taxes to the Town of East Hampton under § 12-48 of the
Connecticut General Statutes who meets the qualifications stated in this subsection shall be
entitled to pay the tax levied on such property, calculated in accordance with the provisions of
Subsection B of this section for the first year the claim for such tax relief is filed and approved
in accordance with the provisions of this section and § 278-26 of this article, and such person
shall be entitled to continue to pay the amount of such tax or such lesser amount as may be
levied in any year during each subsequent year that such person meets such qualifications,
and the surviving spouse of such owner or tenant, qualified in accordance with the
requirements pertaining to a surviving spouse in this subsection, or any owner or tenant
possessing a joint interest in such property with such owner at the time of such owner's death
and qualified at such time in accordance with the requirements in this subsection, shall be
entitled to continue to pay the amount of such tax or such lesser amount as may be levied in
any year, as it becomes due each year following the death of such owner for as long as such
surviving spouse or joint owner or joint tenant is qualified in accordance with the requirements
in this subsection.
After the first year a claim for such tax relief is filed and approved, application for such tax
relief shall be filed biennially on a form prepared for such purpose by the assessor of the
Town of East Hampton.
Any such owner or tenant who is qualified in accordance with this section and any such
surviving spouse or joint owner or joint tenant surviving upon the death of such owner or
tenant, shall be entitled to pay such tax in the amount as provided in this section for so long
as such owner or tenant or such surviving spouse or joint owner or joint tenant continues to
be so qualified.
To qualify for the tax relief provided in this section a taxpayer shall meet all the following
requirements:
On December 31 of the calendar year preceding the year in which a claim is filed, be:
Seventy years of age or over;
The spouse of a person, 70 years of age or over, provided such spouse is domiciled
with such person; or
Sixty-two years of age or over and the surviving spouse of a taxpayer who at the
time of such taxpayer's death had qualified and was entitled to tax relief under this
section, provided such surviving spouse was domiciled with such taxpayer at the
time of the taxpayer's death.
Occupy such real property as his or her home;
Either spouse shall have resided within East Hampton for at least five years before filing
the claim under this section and § 278-26 of this article;
The taxable and nontaxable income of such taxpayer, the total of which shall hereinafter
be called "qualifying income," in the tax year of such homeowner ending immediately
preceding the date of application for benefits under the program in this section, was not
in excess of limits set forth in § 12-170aa of the 2006 supplement to the Connecticut
General Statutes, as adjusted annually, evidence of which income shall be submitted to
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 167/200
(5)
(6)
(1)
(2)
(3)
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
C.
the assessor of the Town of East Hampton in such form and manner as the assessor
may prescribe.
The amount of any Medicaid payments made on behalf of such homeowner or the spouse of
such homeowner shall not constitute income.
The income of the spouse of such homeowner shall not be included in the qualifying income
of such homeowner for purposes of determining eligibility for tax relief under this section, if
such spouse is a resident of a health care or nursing home facility in this state, and such
facility receives payment related to such spouse under the Title XIX Medicaid program.
Amount of tax.
The tax on the real property for which the benefits under this section are claimed shall be the
lower of the tax due with respect to the homeowner's residence for the assessment year
commencing October 1 of the year immediately preceding the year in which the initial claim
for tax relief is made, or the tax due for any subsequent assessment year.
If title to real property is recorded in the name of the person or the spouse making a claim and
qualifying under this section and any other person or persons, the claimant hereunder shall
be entitled to pay the claimant's fractional share of the tax on such property calculated in
accordance with the provisions of this section, and such other person or persons shall pay the
person's or persons' fractional share of the tax without regard for the provisions of this
section.
For the purposes of this section, a "mobile manufactured home," as defined in § 12-63a of the
Connecticut General Statutes, shall be deemed to be real property.
Transfer of property.
If any person with respect to whom a claim for tax relief in accordance with this section and
§ 278-26 of this article has been approved for any assessment year transfers, assigns, grants
or otherwise conveys subsequent to the first day of October, but prior to the first day of
August in such assessment year, the interest in real property to which such claim for tax relief
is related, regardless of whether such transfer, assignment, grant or conveyance is voluntary
or involuntary, the amount of such tax relief benefit, determined as the amount by which the
tax payable without benefit of this section exceeds the tax payable under the provisions of this
section, shall be a pro rata portion of the amount otherwise applicable in such assessment
year to be determined by a fraction, the numerator of which shall be the number of full months
from the first day of October in such assessment year to the date of such conveyance and the
denominator of which shall be 12.
If such conveyance occurs in the month of October the grantor shall be disqualified for such
tax relief in such assessment year.
The grantee shall be required, within a period not exceeding 10 days immediately following
the date of such conveyance to notify the assessor thereof, or in the absence of such notice,
upon determination by the assessor that such transfer, assignment, grant or conveyance has
occurred, the assessor shall determine the amount of tax relief benefit to which the grantor is
entitled for such assessment year with respect to the interest in real property conveyed and
notify the tax collector of the reduced amount of such benefit.
Upon receipt of such notice from the assessor, the tax collector shall, if such notice is
received after the tax due date in the municipality, no later than 10 days thereafter, mail or
hand a bill to the grantee stating the additional amount of tax due as determined by the
assessor.
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 168/200
(5)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
A.
Such tax shall be due and payable and collectible as other property taxes and subject to the
same liens and processes of collection, provided such tax shall be due and payable in an
initial or single installment not sooner than 30 days after the date such bill is mailed or handed
to the grantee and in equal amounts in any remaining, regular installments as the same are
due and payable.
§ 278-26. Application.
Requirements; deadlines for filing.
No claim shall be accepted under § 278-25 of this article unless the taxpayer or authorized
agent of such taxpayer files an application with the assessor of the Town of East Hampton, in
such form and manner as the assessor may prescribe, during the period from February 1 to
and including May 15 of any year in which benefits are first claimed, including such
information as is necessary to substantiate such claim in accordance with requirements in
such application. The responsibilities of the assessor regarding the processing of applications
may be delegated by the assessor to the Department of Social Services of the Town of East
Hampton.
An extension to August 15 may be granted in the case of extenuating circumstance due to
illness or incapacitation as evidenced by a physician's certificate to that extent, or if it is
determined there is good cause for doing so.
The taxpayer shall present to the assessor a copy of such taxpayer's federal income tax
return and the federal income tax return of such taxpayer's spouse, if filed separately, for such
taxpayer's taxable year ending immediately prior to the submission of the taxpayer's
application, or if not required to file a federal income tax return, such other evidence of
qualifying income in respect to such taxable year as may be required.
Each such application, together with the federal income tax return and any other information
submitted in relation thereto, shall be examined and a determination shall be made as to
whether the application is approved.
Upon determination that the applying homeowner is entitled to tax relief in accordance with
the provisions of § 278-25 of this article and this section, the homeowner and the municipal
tax collector shall be notified of the approval of such application.
The municipal tax collector shall determine the maximum amount of the tax due with respect
to such homeowner's residence and thereafter the property tax with respect to such
homeowner's residence shall not exceed such amount.
After a taxpayer's claim for the first year has been filed and approved such taxpayer shall file
such an application biennially.
In respect to such application required after the filing and approval for the first year, the
assessor shall notify each such taxpayer concerning application requirements by regular mail
not later than February 1 of the assessment year in which such taxpayer is required to
reapply, enclosing a copy of the required application form.
Such taxpayer may submit such application by mail, provided it is received not later than
March 15 in the assessment year with respect to which such tax relief is claimed.
Not later than April first of such year the assessor shall notify, by certified mail, any such
taxpayer for whom such application was not received by said March 15 concerning
application requirements, and such taxpayer shall submit not later than May 15 such
application personally or, for reasonable cause, by a person acting in behalf of such taxpayer
as approved by the assessor.
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 169/200
(1)
(2)
B.
C.
D.
A.
Penalties for false applications.
Any person knowingly making a false application for the purpose of claiming property tax
relief under § 278-22 of this article and this section shall be fined not more than $500.
Any person who fails to disclose all matters relating thereto or with intent to defraud makes a
false statement shall refund to the municipality all tax relief improperly taken.
The Town of East Hampton will establish a lien on such property in the amount of the total tax
relief granted with interest of 0%. Any such lien shall have a priority in the settlement of such
person's estate.
Any such property tax relief granted to any such resident in accordance with the provisions of
§ 278-25 of this article and this section shall not disqualify such resident with respect to any
benefits for which such resident shall be eligible under the provisions of §§ 12-129b to 12-129d,
inclusive, of the 2006 supplement to the Connecticut General Statutes, §§ 12-129n and 12-170aa
of the 2006 supplement to the General Statutes, and any such property tax relief provided under
this section shall be in addition to any such benefits for which such resident shall be eligible under
said §§ 12-129b to 12-129d, inclusive, and §§ 12-129n and 12-170aa.
§ 278-27. Severability of provisions.
Should any court of competent jurisdiction declare any section or clause or provision of this article to
be unconstitutional or ultra virus, such decision shall affect only such section, clause or provision so
declared unconstitutional and shall not affect any other section, clause or provision of this article.
§ 278-28. Construal of terms.
Whenever used, the singular number shall include the plural, the plural the singular, and the use of
either gender shall include both genders.
§ 278-29. When effective.
Following its adoption by the Town Council, this article shall become effective on the 21st day after
publication in a newspaper having circulation within the Town.
Article VIII. Disabled Veterans Exemption
[Adopted by the Town Council 1-26-2010]
§ 278-30. Exemption granted; conditions.
Pursuant to the authority of § 12-81(21)(C) of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended, the
dwelling house and the lot whereupon the same is erected, belonging to or held in trust for any
citizen and resident of the Town of East Hampton, occupied as such person’s domicile, shall be
fully exempt from local property taxation, provided such person is a veteran who served in the
United States Army, Navy, Marine Corps, Coast Guard, Air Force, or activated National Guard,
and such person has received financial assistance for specially adapted housing under the
provisions of Section 2101 (formerly Section 801) of Title 38 of the United States Code and has
applied such assistance toward the acquisition or modification of such dwelling.
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 170/200
B.
C.
A.
B.
C.
D.
A.
The within exemption, subject to the same conditions as aforesaid, shall also be allowed on the
dwelling house and lot owned by the veteran and spouse while occupying such premises as a
residence, or, if the veteran has died, by the surviving spouse of the veteran while occupying such
premises as a residence until such time as said surviving spouse may remarry.
Additionally, the individual(s) who qualify for this tax exemption shall have resided within East
Hampton for at least five years before filing the claim under this section.
§ 278-31. Effective date.
This exemption shall be effective commencing with the assessment list of October 1, 2010.
Article IX. Business Incentive Program
[Adopted by the Town Council 10-8-2013; amended in its entirety 9-25-2018]
§ 278-32. Purpose.
The purpose of the Business Incentive Program is, in accord with the Town's Plan of Conservation and
Development (POCD), to attract new businesses to the Town, promote the expansion of existing
businesses (including home-based businesses relocating into commercial, industrial, and design
development zones), and to encourage the rehabilitation and reuse of vacant commercial and
industrial buildings. It is the intent of the Town:
To assist in the creation of jobs for local residents;
To create long-term tax base growth through the appropriate replacement, reconstruction,
expansion or remodeling of existing business facilities;
To encourage the construction of new commercial and industrial facilities in accord with the Future
Land Use Plan found in the Town's POCD; and
To encourage substantial investment in new machinery, equipment and other personal property
subject to taxation within the Town.
§ 278-33. Program implementation by Town.
Subject to C.G.S. §§ 12-65b and 12-65h, the Town of East Hampton (the "Town") shall, by affirmative
vote of its legislative body, enter into a written agreement with any party owning or proposing to
acquire an interest in real property, or an interest in real property upon which is located or proposed to
be located: an office use; retail use; manufacturing use; warehouse, storage or distribution use;
structured multilevel parking use necessary in connection with a mass transit system; information
technology; recreation facilities; transportation facilities; or mixed-use development, as defined in
Subdivision (72) of C.G.S. § 12-81, fixing the assessment of the real property and all improvements to
be constructed thereon, which is the subject of the agreement in accordance with the provisions of
§ 278-40 of this article.
§ 278-34. Duties of Economic Development Commission.
The East Hampton Economic Development Commission ("EDC" or the "Commission") shall
provide any property owner or lessee with general information concerning the Business Incentive
Program (the "program") and prepare and supply interested parties with an application to
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 171/200
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
A.
B.
A.
B.
participate in the program and any other information that may be reasonably requested by an
interested party. An "interested party" is one who owns or proposes to acquire an interest in real
property as defined in C.G.S. § 12-65b and who is considering replacement, reconstruction,
expansion, or remodeling of existing business facilities located or to be located in East Hampton.
The EDC may perform research about any party applying to participate in the program and may
request of any such party any relevant information that, in the opinion of the EDC, bears upon
consideration of the application. The EDC shall obtain from the Tax Assessor an evaluation of the
impact of any proposed abatement of taxes on the applicable Grand List and an estimate of the
impact on future Grand Lists.
§ 278-35. General requirements.
Applications properly filed with the Town will be considered for the program, provided:
The applicant must possess a good environmental practices history and be able to
demonstrate adequate financial strength to finance the proposed capital improvements and
expansions to the real property and machinery and equipment purchases that would be the
subject of the agreement.
The proposed use is located in an appropriate zone as defined by East Hampton's Zoning
Regulations.
The proposed use receives approvals, licenses, and permits of the East Hampton Planning
and Zoning Commission and of other East Hampton, State of Connecticut and federal
agencies, boards, commissions, and officials having jurisdiction with respect to the project, as
required.
No real estate property tax or other tax or fee or municipal charge due East Hampton by the
applicant, the businesses, or any other business organization or entity owned or controlled by
the applicant is unpaid at the time the application is submitted or at any time thereafter.
If the applicant is relocating its business to East Hampton, the applicant should provide a fiveyear
history of tax assessments and payments to the municipality or municipalities and/or
other political subdivisions in which its business was operated.
The project must have a clear economic benefit to East Hampton, as described by the
applicant on the application.
Notwithstanding the results of any scoring under § 278-39, if the project does not constitute a net
benefit to the Town - economically, civically, or in quality of life - the Economic Development
Commission may decline to refer the application to the Council for consideration.
§ 278-36. Application procedure.
All tax incentive requests shall be made in writing on a form referred to as the "Business Incentive
Program Application" ("the application"), published and provided by the EDC and approved by the
Town Council ("Council"). The application and all accompanying documentation shall be submitted
in duplicate at the office of the Clerk. Upon receipt by the Clerk, one copy of the application and
materials shall be provided to the EDC for preliminary review, and the Clerk should provide notice
to the Council that an application has been submitted. "Receipt by the Clerk" means an application
and all accompanying documentation required in accordance with all applicable provisions of this
article is submitted.
The following time frames for action are not mandatory, but the EDC and the Council should strive
to meet them: From the date of receipt by the Clerk of the application, the EDC shall have 45 days
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 172/200
A.
B.
C.
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
A.
to review the application, request additional information and meet with the applicant and/or the
applicant's representative. Provided the applicant has submitted all of the information required in
the application, by this article, and by the EDC, the EDC will, within 30 days thereafter, report its
findings to the Council. The Council will place the report on the agenda of the next regularly
scheduled Council meeting for discussion and action. If the Council approves the report, the Town
Manager and the applicant shall enter into a written agreement (consistent with the proposed
agreement in § 278-44.1.)
§ 278-37. Assessment of property subject to agreement.
The East Hampton Assessor shall, in the Assessor's sole discretion, determine the assessment of the
real property or the personal property and any and all improvements constructed or to be constructed
on or in the real property which is the subject of the agreement.
§ 278-38. Application scoring guidelines.
The purpose of this article is to encourage economic growth in the Town that is in accord with the
POCD in effect at the time of the given application. The POCD reflects the strongest expression of
the Town's intentions for its future development, character, and quality of life. Accordingly, there is
room for flexibility in scoring under criteria listed in § 278-39 of this article.
When scoring a new application, the members of the EDC should strive for consistency and
transparency. Like applications should receive like treatment. It is appropriate - even essential - for
the EDC to consult the scoring of previously granted applications when scoring a new application.
Consistency between like applications must be balanced, however, with the goals of the POCD in
effect at the time. Where no similar application has been submitted, care should be taken to score
the new application relative to the goals of the POCD and relative to the merits of any previous
application.
Only the EDC shall approve or deny an application for consideration by the Council, and its
decision is not appealable. When approving or denying an application, the EDC should issue a
written statement showing the scoring and explaining its reasoning. Projects recommended to the
Council must evince a clear net benefit to the Town. It is recognized that evaluation of an
application under this article requires a blend of quantitative and qualitative reasoning; the
Commission shall strive to make that reasoning plain.
§ 278-39. Scoring criteria categories.
Location; corporation; TIF District.
Location. Only projects within those areas zoned "Commercial," "Industrial," or "Design
Development" according to the Zoning Map for the Town of East Hampton (see POCD) are
eligible for consideration under this article. Points under this section may be awarded for
properties located in the following priority areas:
Village Center: Properties located in the Village Center District as defined by the Zoning
Map for the Town of East Hampton are eligible for a maximum of 10 points.
Cobalt Center: Properties located on Route 66 between its junction with Old Depot Hill
Road and its junction with Old Middletown Road are eligible for a maximum of seven
points.
Corporation: any company, firm, business, or concern operating as a single legal entity.
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 173/200
(3)
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
C.
D.
E.
(1)
(2)
F.
TIF District: as defined by the Town's Tax Increment Financing (TIF) District Plan.
Maximum points: 10
Use. In accord with the needs identified by the POCD and as appropriate to the site and location
in Town, the following uses may qualify for points: transient housing (hotels/motels), rental
housing, workforce housing, light industrial/light manufacturing, health care and medical services,
high-technology businesses, retail, and dining. Projects for these uses may be awarded five
points. At the EDC's discretion, "high-needs" uses under these categories may be awarded up to
10 points.
Maximum points: 10
Brownfields.
East Hampton contains a number of sites designated as "brownfields" by the USEPA.
Brownfields are real property, the expansion, redevelopment, or reuse of which may be
complicated by the presence or potential presence of a hazardous substance, pollutant, or
contaminant. Cleaning up and reinvesting in these properties protects the environment,
reduces blight, and takes development pressures off green spaces and working lands — all of
which are goals of East Hampton's POCD.
Any application that proposes to remediate and commit to reuse a brownfield as designated
by the EPA or the State of Connecticut is eligible for 10 points.
Depending upon the project, financing and other factors, the Town may also seek to partner
with the applicant for federal grant funding or supply other in-kind considerations.
Maximum points: 10
Use of a vacant property. The applicant may be awarded five points if proposing to occupy a
building which has been unoccupied for a period greater than 12 months at the time the applicant
signed a lease or closed on the property. If, in the opinion of the EDC, the property can be
considered "blighted," 10 points may be awarded.
Maximum points: 10
Number of jobs created. Points may be awarded based upon the number of nonseasonal full-timeequivalent
positions (FTEs) the business will generate:
FTEs Points
1-5 5
5-10 7
More than 10 10
Maximum points: 10
Cost of services to the Town.
A project or use proposed by an applicant may require the Town to assume an extraordinary
cost beyond normal maintenance and upkeep. For example: a chemical manufacturer may
require the Town to retrain and potentially re-equip its fire protection services. If the
Commission determines such is the case, no points may be awarded under this category.
If no such cost exists, five points may be awarded.
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 174/200
(3)
(4)
G.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(1)
(2)
H.
I.
The Commission may ask the applicant to pay for a fiscal impact analysis, to be conducted by
a consultant approved by the Commission.
The applicant may be given the opportunity to show that the Commission's determination of
the cost to the Town is in error; however, the Commission makes the final determination.
Maximum points: 5
Design of the building or renovation. The Commission may award 10 points when the applicant
can show that the design of the structure is in compliance with current Town Building Design
Guidelines for its zone.
Maximum points: 10
Sustainable building.
The Commission may award two points for each of the following and up to 10 points total:
If the investment will result in the business generating at least 20% of its own energy
requirements.
If the investment will result in the business feeding energy back into the grid.
If the project meets at minimum LEED Gold standard or equivalent. (As of this writing,
LEED is the dominant evaluation system in the United States market and the one favored
for use by the GSA.)
If the project requires a public transportation node such as a bus stop.
If the project supplies a recharge station for electric vehicles.
Water-saving fixtures throughout.
"Sustainability" characteristics and measures are constantly evolving, and the Commission
may update this list periodically as it sees fit.
Maximum points: 10
Amount invested.
Points Investment
15 $3M or larger investment in construction or renovations
14 $1M or larger investment in construction or renovations
13 $800k or larger investment in construction or renovations
12 $500k or larger investment in construction or renovations
11 A business new to that parcel investing over $300k or a business
existing on that parcel investing at least $250k in construction or
renovations
10 A business new to that parcel investing over $200k or a business
existing on that parcel investing at least $100,000 in construction or
renovations
Maximum points: 15
Total Available Points: 90
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 175/200
A.
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
D.
E.
F.
A.
§ 278-40. Tax incentive tiers and implementation.
Depending upon the number of points an application receives, it may be denied or, subject to a
vote by the Council, provided with one of tiers of tax abatement as follows:
Points Benefit
Fewer than 24 Denied
25-44 Third-tier benefit: 70% of fixed assessment abated for 2 years, or
50% of fixed assessment abated for 4 years
45-69 Second tier benefit: 70% of fixed assessment abated for 3 years, or
50% of fixed assessment abated for 5 years
More than 70 Highest benefit: 100% of fixed assessment abated for Years 1-3,
70% of fixed assessment abated for Years 4-5, 50% of fixed
assessment abated for Year 6
The Town may abate real estate property taxes based on increased real property tax assessments
up to but not more than the percentages shown above.
The fixed assessment period shall commence the first fiscal year for which a tax list is prepared on
the October 1 immediately following the issuance of a certificate of occupancy by the appropriate
building official for construction of the buildings or manufacturing facilities or other structures and
all improvements in or on the real property which is the subject of the agreement. Notwithstanding
anything written in this article, the Town may, in its sole discretion, offer to enter into an agreement
with the applicant for the abatement of taxes of a lesser percentage and/or fewer years.
On a case-by-case basis, the Town may provide other incentives in addition to the incentives
provided by C.G.S. §§ 12-65b and 12-65h or in lieu thereof as follows:
Waiver of building permit fees;
Waiver of filing fees with land use agencies; or
Provision of in-kind services such as construction of access roads, or road widening,
construction of storm drains and culverts, sidewalks, or curbing, extension of water and/or
sewer lines or other public improvements.
Machinery and equipment defined in Subdivision (72) of C.G.S. § 12-81 and intended to qualify for
tax relief pursuant to C.G.S. § 12-65h shall have, for federal income tax purposes, a depreciable
useful life of five or seven years.
Construction shall commence within six months of, and not prior to, approval by the Town and
shall be completed no later than 24 months from the date of approval by the Town. The times for
commencement and completion of the construction are mandatory, except the applicant's
performance may be excused when the applicant is prevented from performing by causes beyond
the applicant's control, including natural disasters or other calamities or a local, state or national
declared state of emergency.
§ 278-41. Default by owner or lessee; recapture of abated taxes.
Abatement of taxes under this article constitutes a municipal subsidy to the successful applicant.
In the event that the applicant fails to meet negotiated benchmarks or other requirements as
described herein, they shall, by the terms of the agreement, be required to repay all abated
amounts, consistent with C.G.S. § 12-146 as of the date of default.
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 176/200
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
B. In addition to the specific timing benchmarks noted in § 278-40, the Town is encouraged to
establish relevant benchmarks to be met by a successful applicant related to the nature of the
business or the project. At a minimum, they must include the following triggers:
In the event the owner or lessee of the real property: (a) at any time fails to pay real estate
and/or personal property taxes when due and payable; (b) fails to commence or complete on
time the construction of all improvements upon the property which is the subject of the
agreement; (c) within 10 years of the date of the agreement, the applicant becomes insolvent
or bankrupt or files any debtor proceedings or others file such debtor proceedings against the
owner or lessee, in any court, in any jurisdiction, state or federal, and does not withdraw such
filing within 90 days or such other proceedings have not been dismissed or withdrawn by such
other parties within 90 days or makes an assignment for the benefit of creditors or if the
property or lease is taken under a writ of execution or becomes the subject of foreclosure
proceedings; (d) abandons at any time the real property or, in the case of the lessee, purports
to assign its lease without the express consent of the Town as set forth in § 278-42 of this
article; or (e) fails to perform any obligation of owner or lessee or attain any benchmark set
under the terms of the agreement; such event shall constitute a material default of the
agreement, and the Town may terminate the agreement on the giving of written notice
whereupon:
The right of the owner and/or lessee under the terms of the agreement shall cease and
come to an end; and
The property owner and/or lessee shall be obligated to repay the Town the amounts of all
tax abatements retroactive to the due date of the first abated tax payment plus interest at
the rate set and payable pursuant to the provisions of C.G.S. § 12-146, all waived fees, if
any, and all actual costs to the Town in providing in-kind considerations to the property
owner and/or the lessee.
In the event of failure to pay a tax when due and if such delinquency continues for six months
and one day, the Town shall terminate the agreement whereupon (i) the right of the owner
and/or lessee to receive the tax abatement and any other considerations granted under the
terms of the agreement shall by terminated; and (ii) the property owner and/or lessee shall be
obligated to repay the Town the amounts of all tax abatements retroactive to the due date of
the first abated tax payment plus interest at the rate set and payable pursuant to provisions of
C.G.S. § 12-146, all waived fees, if any, and all actual costs to the Town in providing in-kind
considerations to the property owner and/or the lessee.
§ 278-42. Recapture terms.
It is of no benefit to East Hampton to drive an applicant in default into further economic straits by virtue
of an onerous repayment plan. Terms for the recapture of abated taxes as described in § 178-41
should be calculated to ensure the recapture of the highest possible percentage of public funds, taking
into account the fiscal reality of the applicant, the circumstances of the default, and the state of the
project.
§ 278-43. Assignment of agreement.
The agreement between the Town and the applicant shall not be assigned by the applicant to any
person(s) or business organization or entity or estate or trust without the express consent of both the
Council and the EDC, which shall signify their consents by an affirmative vote taken at a separate
meeting of each body duly noticed for the stated purpose. A conveyance of real property or a transfer
of ownership of the business or substantially all of the assets of the business which is the subject of
the agreement to a person or business organization or entity that is not owned or controlled by the
applicant shall not constitute a valid assignment of the agreement or vest any rights under the
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 177/200
agreement in the grantee of the real property or transferee of the business or of the assets of the
business or allow for enforcement of any obligations of the Town against the Town by the grantee or
transferee, including, but not limited to, any remaining tax abatements under the terms of the
agreement. A "controlled entity" means a business which is 80% or more owned by the grantor or
transferor.
§ 278-44. Amendments to applicable statutes.
All references in this article to C.G.S. § 12-65b or 12-65h or 12-81 or any other section of C.G.S. made
herein shall include all amendments to such statutes enacted and signed into law subsequent to the
effective date of this article.
§ 278-44.1. Proposed agreement.
FORM OF AGREEMENT
TOWN OF EAST HAMPTON
AGREEMENT REGARDING REAL
PROPERTY TAX ASSESSMENT
__________
EAST HAMPTON, CONNECTICUT
This Agreement is entered into this ___ day of _____ by and between the TOWN OF EAST
HAMPTON, a municipal corporation and body politic having its corporate limits located within the
County of Middlesex and State of Connecticut (hereinafter the "Town"), and ____________________
of East Hampton, Connecticut ("Company"), a Connecticut corporation with a principal place of
business at ______________________________, East Hampton, Connecticut.
WITNESSETH:
WHEREAS, Company is responsible to pay all real property taxes associated with the real property
known as _________________ East Hampton, Connecticut ("the Real Property"); and
WHEREAS, Company intends to make improvements to the land and structures on the Real
Property, including the construction of approximately _____ square feet of commercial office building
and associated site improvements located on the Real Property (the "Facility"); and
WHEREAS, the estimated costs to be invested by Company in making the above-described
improvements to and constructing the Facility on the Real Property will be a minimum of
$__________; and
WHEREAS, the Town, acting by and through its duly authorized Tax Assessor, will assess and value
the Real Property and personal property on the Grand List of October 1, 2018.
WHEREAS, the Town wishes to assist Company in its plans to add real property and personal
property value to the Town's tax base; and
WHEREAS, the Town wishes to assist Company to develop its __________________ plans to be
submitted and approved to the Planning and Zoning Commission; and
WHEREAS, in consideration of the above, the Town is willing to provide tax relief to Company
pursuant to the East Hampton Business Incentive Program Ordinance as a Tier ___ tax abatement
for a period of _____ years commencing with the first date that tax payments are due under the
Grand List following the date of issuance of the Certificate of Occupancy for the Facility (the
"Abatement Term"); and
NOW, THEREFORE, in consideration of the foregoing, the parties hereby covenant and agree that:
1. Cost of Improvements: The costs for the improvements shall equal or exceed $__________ in
construction costs. Company will install and properly account to the Town for all taxable
personal property assets added to or installed in the Facility.
2. Certificate of Occupancy: Company will commence construction within six months, and not prior,
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 178/200
to this Agreement and complete construction and obtain a Certificate of Occupancy not later
than 24 months from the date of this Agreement. Company shall actively operate or cause said
Facility to operate as __________ at the Real Property for not less than the Abatement Term
from the date of the Certificate of Occupancy.
3. Employment: Company shall use its best efforts to employ or cause to be employed at least ___
full-time and ___ part-time employees at said Facility throughout the Abatement Term.
4. Reduction of Assessment: Commencing with the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy, the
Real Property tax assessment shall be established on the Grand List for the period following the
issuance of the Certificate of Occupancy, and the Town shall grant to Company a ___%
reduction in its Real Property assessment such that the net effect of the reduced assessment
reduces the tax liability for the Real Property in the amount of $________ over the _______ year
period according to a schedule attached hereto as Exhibit A, including the above-described
Improvements and the construction of the Facility (the "Abatement").
5. Abatement Period: The Abatement Term shall be for a period of _____ years commencing with
the first date that tax payments are due under the Grand List following the date of issuance of a
Certificate of Occupancy for the Facility; provided, however, that if such assessment is changed
by any future Town revaluation, the tax payments due under the new assessed value of the Real
Property shall be adjusted for the remainder of the Abatement Term in accordance with the
terms of the Abatement set forth in Paragraph 4 above.
6. Tax Payment: Company shall maintain all tax obligations owed by it to the Town current and in
good standing during the Abatement Term.
7. Certification of Value of Site Improvements: Company shall be required to provide proof via
affidavit of an appropriate officer within one year after the commencement of operations at the
Facility as to a) the actual value of the site improvements and that said improvements are
substantially in conformance with the provisions hereof as to the scope of construction; b) the
cost of construction (a minimum of $_____.00); and c) the number and type (full-time or parttime)
of employees employed at such Facility.
8. Ongoing Employment Obligations: Notwithstanding anything herein contained to the contrary,
Company and the Town acknowledge and agree that, while Company shall make every goodfaith
effort to maintain and employ at least _____ full-time and _____ part-time employees
during the Operating Term, economic circumstances, financial considerations, and employee
transience may make it impossible to maintain precisely the level of employment described
herein. Accordingly, Company and the Town acknowledge that variations in the numbers of
employees will occur and may continue for unspecified periods of time during the Operating
Term of this Agreement. Company will, upon request, disclose to Town its employment statistics
no more than once per year. Subject to the above requirement of good faith and Company's
cooperation in disclosing all efforts made to comply with the employment parameters stated
herein, such variations shall not otherwise constitute a default of this Agreement, provided the
Facility is operating in accordance with applicable law and Company is in compliance with the
terms of this Agreement in all other respects.
9. Default: The following events shall constitute an event of default: Company at any time fails pay
real estate and/or personal property taxes when due and payable; or Company fails to
commence or complete on time the construction of all improvements upon the property which is
the subject of the agreement; or Company, within 10 years of the date of the Agreement,
becomes insolvent or bankrupt or files any debtor proceedings or others file such debtor
proceedings against the owner or lessee in any court, in any jurisdiction, state or federal, and
does not withdraw such filing within 90 days, or such other proceedings have not been
dismissed or withdrawn by such other parties within 90 days; or Company makes an assignment
for the benefit of creditors; or Company property or lease is taken under a writ of execution or
becomes the subject of foreclosure proceedings; or Company abandons at any time the real
property or in the case of the lessee purports to assign its lease without the express consent of
the Town as set forth in this Ordinance; or Company fails to perform any obligation of owner or
lessee or attain any benchmark set under the terms of this Agreement. In such event of default,
the Town shall provide notice to the Company of such event of default, and the Company shall
have 30 days from such notice within which to cure such default. In the event Company fails to
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 179/200
cure the default with 30 days of such notice, then this Agreement shall be null and void, and the
Company shall reimburse the Town for all tax relief provided to Company, retroactive to the due
date of the first abated tax payment, plus interest at the rate set and payable pursuant to the
provisions of Conn. Gen. Stat. § 12-146, or other applicable statute, plus all prior waived fees, if
any, plus all actual costs to the Town in providing in-kind considerations to the Company, and
the Town shall be under no obligation to grant further tax relief hereunder.
10. Legal Action to Enforce the Terms: In the event that the Town must resort to legal action to
enforce the terms of this Agreement, any amount determined by a Court of competent
jurisdiction to be due from Company shall be subject to interest at the rate of 18% per annum.
Such interest shall accrue from the postmark date for the notice of default described in
Paragraph 9. In addition, the Town shall be entitled to recover from Company all costs of
collection, including reasonable attorneys' fees, incurred in enforcing this Agreement.
11. No Further Abatement: Company acknowledges and agrees that the Abatement offered
pursuant to this Agreement is not binding upon the Town and shall not continue, beyond the
_____ year Abatement Term agreed to herein.
12. No Admission as to Values: Company and the Town acknowledge and agree that the values
placed upon the Real Property, the Facility, and/or the Improvements as a result of the
Abatement shall not now or at any other time be construed as an admission by any party or as
evidence of any kind as to the true fair market value of the Real Property, the Facility, and/or the
Improvements.
13. Notices: All notices hereunder are to be sent by the Town to Company at the following address
or to such other address as requested by the Company or its successors or assigns:
__________, East Hampton, CT 06424 Attention: _____. All such notices shall be sent via
certified mail, return receipt requested, or overnight mail service. Notices are deemed effective
upon delivery. Any refusal to accept such delivery shall still constitute the delivery of proper
notice.
14. Assignment: Company may not assign or otherwise transfer its rights or obligations under this
Agreement without the prior written authorization of the Town Council and Economic
Development Commission, which shall signify their consents by an affirmative vote taken at a
separate meeting of each body duly noticed for the stated purpose. A conveyance of the Real
Property or a transfer of ownership of the Company business or substantially all of the assets of
the Company to a person or business organization or entity that is not a "controlled entity" which
is owned or controlled by the Company shall not constitute a valid assignment of the Agreement
or vest any rights under the Agreement in the grantee of the Real Property or transferee of the
Company or the assets of the Company or allow for enforcement of any obligations of the Town
against the Town by the grantee or transferee, including, but not limited to, any remaining tax
abatements under the terms of the Agreement. A "controlled entity" means a business which is
80% or more owned by the Company as grantor or transferor.
15. Release of Liability: Company and/or its successors or assigns releases the Town and its
agents, servants and employees from any and all liability, of whatever nature, legal or equitable,
which may have arisen or which may arise in connection with this Agreement, including the
implementation hereof.
16. Indemnification: Company and/or its successors or assigns shall defend and indemnify the Town
and any of its agents, servants and employees against any action, claim or suit of any nature
whatsoever, arising from the Town's being a party to this Agreement and/or any undertaking of
its obligations hereunder.
17. Execution: This Agreement has been executed by the parties' respective agents, duly
authorized and acting in his or her official capacity.
18. Amendment: This Agreement may be amended only by mutual consent of the parties, and any
amendments to this Agreement shall be in writing and shall be duly executed and dated by the
respective parties.
19. Complete Agreement: This Agreement represents the entire and complete understanding and
agreement of the parties, and any and all prior written or oral agreements not otherwise
contained in this Agreement shall be and are hereby null and void and of no force or effect.
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 180/200
20. Choice of Law and Venue: In the event that litigation or other dispute resolution process arises,
all litigation and dispute resolution shall take place in the State of Connecticut, Judicial District of
Middlesex, and the Agreement shall be construed in accordance with Connecticut law, without
regard to its conflict of law provisions.
21. Notice of Tax Abatement: Upon the execution of this Agreement, a copy of this Agreement or a
proper "Notice of Tax Abatement Agreement" shall be filed upon the land records of the Town
with respect to the Real Property.
22. Special Conditions: In addition to all other terms and conditions of this Agreement, the Town's
obligations under this Agreement are conditioned on the following ("the Conditions"):
(a) Project Financing: Company demonstrates to the reasonable satisfaction of the East
Hampton Finance Director that it has private financing and state and federal grants in place
in an amount sufficient to undertake and complete the project;
(b) Property Maintenance: Company demonstrates that it has maintenance contracts in place to
keep the property maintained during the period of construction;
(c) Non-Transferable: As set forth in Paragraph 14 herein, Company acknowledges and affirms
that this tax abatement is non-transferable and any transfer of the tax abatement to a nonrelated
entity shall be an event of default; and
(d) _____ [other specific terms]
In the event that the Company fails to satisfy the Conditions set forth in this Special Conditions
paragraph, this Agreement shall be null and void and the Real Property as improved shall be
assessed in accordance with the Connecticut General Statutes without regard to the terms and
conditions of this Agreement.
SIGNATURES FOLLOW
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto have hereunto set their hands and seals as of the day
and year first written above.
Witnessed By: COMPANY:
_____________________________________
By: _____________________________
Its CEO, Duly Authorized
_____________________________________
Witnessed By: TOWN:
_____________________________________
By: _____________________________
Its Town Manager, Duly Authorized
_____________________________________
Article X. Retention of Excess Payments and Waiver of Tax
Bills
[Adopted 1-23-2018]
§ 278-45. Retention of excess payments.
Tax payments made to the Town of East Hampton in excess of the amount due, whether for principal,
legal interest, penalty, or fees, shall be retained by the Town where the amount of excess payment is
less than $5 pursuant to the provisions of § 12-129 of the Connecticut General Statutes.
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 181/200
A.
B.
§ 278-46. Waiver of tax bills.
Any property tax due to the Town of East Hampton in the amount less than $5 shall be waived
pursuant to the provisions of § 12-144c of the Connecticut General Statutes.
Article XI. Low-Income Veterans Exemption
[Adopted 1-22-2019]
§ 278-47. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to provide additional property tax relief for low-income veterans or their
spouse consistent with Connecticut General Statutes § 12-81f(a)(b)(c) and in recognition of their
service to our country.
§ 278-48. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation of this article:
EXEMPTION
A benefit provided to an individual on their property tax.
LOW INCOME
Those individuals falling within the limits of income as identified by the Office of Policy and
Management yearly Qualifying Income Table provided under § 12-81l of the Connecticut General
Statutes.
VETERAN
Any resident who served honorably on active duty in the Armed Forces of the United States of
America and is entitled to an exemption from property tax in accordance with Connecticut General
Statutes § 12-81(19).
§ 278-49. Application.
The Town of East Hampton, by majority vote of its Town Council, does hereby allow for a local
option additional low-income veterans exemption, in an amount of $20,000 of the assessed value,
in accordance with § 12-81f of the Connecticut General Statutes.
Applicants for this exemption must file with the Office of the Assessor biannually in accordance
with Connecticut General Statutes § 12-81f(d).
Chapter 282. Towing
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town Council of the Town of East Hampton 5-23-2000 (Ord. No. 8.07).
Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 287.
Storage of vehicles — See Ch. 291.
§ 282-1. Definitions.
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 182/200
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
(1)
G.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
BUSINESS
The business of offering the services of a vehicle wrecker or towing service whereby disabled
motor vehicles are towed or otherwise removed from the place where disabled by use of a vehicle
so designed for that purpose.
PERSON
Any person, firm, association, partnership, corporation, company or organization of any kind.
WRECKER
A vehicle designed for the purpose of towing or otherwise removing a disabled motor vehicle. A
wrecker vehicle shall be deemed to be any vehicle approved for that purpose and use by the State
Department of Motor Vehicles.
§ 282-2. Wrecker List; selection and assignment of wrecker
services.
The Chief of Police shall prepare and maintain one list of licensed wreckers who shall be eligible
to provide wrecker services in the Town at the scene of accidents or emergencies, to be called the
"Town Wrecker List."
The Town Wrecker List shall include only licensed wrecker services that meet the following
criteria:
Wrecker services must have their principal place of business within the Town of East
Hampton.
Each wrecker service must be licensed or registered by the Department of Motor Vehicles of
the State of Connecticut as a new or used car dealer or as a general repairer.
All persons operating any vehicle licensed under these rules must be properly licensed by the
State to operate such wrecker or towing equipment.
Each wrecker service shall be listed on the Town Wrecker List in alphabetical order. Each wrecker
service shall be entitled to one place on the Town Wrecker List, irrespective of the number of
vehicles owned by it. Assignment from the Town Wrecker List shall be made on a rotation basis as
set forth in this chapter.
The Chief of Police, or his designee, shall be in charge of the administration and assignment of
wreckers. He shall at all times keep and maintain exact records of all calls and dispatches
pursuant to this chapter, which shall be available for public inspection during regular business
hours.
No licensee, employee or owner of a garage or a repair shop holding a license shall go to the
scene of an accident or emergency unless dispatched to the scene by an authorized member of
the Police Department or the operator of the disabled motor vehicle.
Under no circumstances shall any member of the East Hampton Police Department solicit
business at the scene of an accident or emergency for any wrecker service.
Selection and assignment of wrecker services; response time.
When the operator or owner of any motor vehicle disabled at the scene of an accident or
emergency is present and conscious, such operator or owner, or the agent of either of them,
shall be entitled to select whatever wrecker service he desires, and a vehicle from said
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 183/200
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
wrecker company shall be dispatched by the Police Department. Such information shall be
entered in a log maintained by the dispatcher.
When an operator or owner, or the agent of either of them, is not present at the scene, is
unconscious, or is in any way unable to make a choice or has no preference, the dispatcher
of the Police Department shall be notified of the situation and the type of wrecker needed.
Such information shall be entered in a log maintained for that purpose by the dispatcher. The
dispatcher shall then dispatch to the scene the requisite number of wrecker vehicles. An entry
shall be made in the log reflecting the date and time, the licensee notified, the identity of the
licensee and the employee that received the dispatch call and such additional information as
the Chief of Police shall deem necessary. Each licensee shall be called in turn in the order in
which it is listed upon the Town Wrecker List, but no more than one wrecker vehicle shall be
dispatched from each licensee at any one time.
Failure of a licensee to respond to the scene of an accident or emergency within 20 minutes
(when considered reasonable) of the time of dispatch will be deemed to be an unreasonable
delay and the next licensee on the Town Wrecker list will be called. Each refusal to respond or
unreasonable delay shall be deemed a passed call. Accumulation of three passed calls in any
calendar year will result in automatic suspension from the Town Wrecker List for a period of
60 days.
Whenever, in the discretion of the investigating officer or officers, death, serious bodily injury,
and/or serious traffic congestion are likely to occur or have occurred, unless the scheduled
wrecker is able to respond immediately, a request shall be made to the dispatcher to dispatch
a vehicle from that wrecker which is able to respond immediately. The wrecker dispatched in
such an emergency shall then be placed at the end of the Town Wrecker List.
Whenever a motor vehicle is disabled at the scene of an accident or emergency and is owned
or operated by a firm which maintains its own towing facilities, it shall be permissible to
summon the firm's wrecker vehicle, provided such wrecker vehicle is available without
unreasonable delay.
If the garage or repair shop requested by the owner or operator of the disabled vehicle or the
agent of either of them is not open for service or if the owner or operator, or the agent of
either of them, is unable to make a selection on account of personal disability or absence
from the scene, the vehicle will be taken to the premises of the wrecker service called for
service to await further instructions from the owner or operator, or the agent of either of them.
In the event a garage or repair shop refuses to respond to a rotation call for towing or
otherwise removing a disabled motor vehicle, that garage or repair shop will be placed on the
bottom of the rotation list, and the garage or repair shop that does subsequently respond to
that call on the rotation basis will not lose place on the rotation list.
No vehicle which has been involved in an accident shall be towed from the scene by any
wrecker until the accident has been thoroughly investigated and the vehicle released for
removal by an East Hampton police officer.
Wreckers on the Town Wrecker List shall be in good repair at all times and shall be made
available for inspection by the Chief of Police or his agent, upon request. Any wrecker not in
good repair or safe operating condition will be removed from the Town Wrecker List until
corrected.
§ 282-3. Duties of wreckers.
The license of each wrecker must comply with all requirements of the General Statutes of the state and
the regulations of the Department of Motor Vehicles.
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 184/200
[1]
A.
B.
§ 282-4. Rates.
The licensee of each wrecker shall charge such rates for services rendered under these rules as
recommended by the Department of Motor Vehicles of the state.
§ 282-5. Permit required for placement on Wrecker List.
No wrecker shall be placed on the Town Wrecker List without first obtaining a permit from the Chief of
Police. Such permit shall be in writing and carried upon the vehicle(s) at all times. A fee as set from
time to time by the Town Council shall be charged for the permit, which shall be valid for one year,
beginning January 1, unless sooner revoked by the Chief of Police.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 282-6. Application for placement on Wrecker List.
Application for placement on the Town Wrecker List shall be made upon forms to be designed by the
Chief of Police and approved by the Town Manager/Town Council, and such forms may require such
information as is reasonable necessary for the enforcement of this chapter.
§ 282-7. Insurance required.
Policies of insurance shall be of the nature and type and in the same amounts of coverage as are
required of the Connecticut General Statutes and the regulations of the Department of Motor
Vehicles in order that such a wrecker truck might be licensed by the state.
A copy of the wrecker service's insurance shall be attached to all applications. Said copy will be
kept on file at the Police Department.
§ 282-8. Removal of vehicle by assigned wrecker service.
A wrecker called to the scene of an accident must remove the car regardless of age or condition.
Failure to comply will result in removal from the rotation list for one month.
§ 282-9. Special equipment.
Police officers at the scene of an accident will determine if special equipment is needed and, if so, will
notify the dispatcher.
§ 282-10. Effective date.
This chapter shall take effect on January 1, 2001.
Chapter 287. Vehicles and Traffic
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town of East Hampton as indicated in article histories. Amendments noted
where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Towing — See Ch. 282.
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 185/200
Storage of vehicles — See Ch. 291.
Article I. Winter Parking
[Adopted by the Board of Selectmen 11-22-1988 (Ord. No. 6.01)]
§ 287-1. Parking restricted.
No person shall park any vehicle on any street and/or public right-of-way during snowstorms and/or
snow plowing operations.
§ 287-2. Penalties for offenses.
Anyone violating this article shall be subject to a penalty of $20 for each violation, payable to the
general fund.
§ 287-3. Towing of vehicles in violation.
Notwithstanding any of the above, the Police Department may order the towing of any vehicle
obstructing traffic or snowplowing operations during and after a snowstorm.
§ 287-4. Enforcement.
The East Hampton Police Department shall have the authority to enforce this article.
Article II. Fire Zones
[Adopted by the Board of Selectmen 11-22-1988 (Ord. No. 9.03)]
§ 287-5. Establishment.
The Fire Marshal of the Town of East Hampton is hereby directed and authorized to establish fire zone
areas within or near any public or private street, highway or passway, when in his judgment, necessary
for the safety of the general public, and for the orderly access of fire and other emergency equipment.
Such areas shall be restricted "NO PARKING ZONES."
§ 287-6. Filing of designations with Town Clerk; designation of
zones; enforcement.
Wherever the Fire Marshal establishes a fire zone, with the approval of the Board of Fire
Commissioners, he shall file a copy of his orders with the Town Clerk's office. Such restricted areas
shall be clearly marked, at the owner's expense, "NO PARKING-FIRE ZONE — TOW AWAY ZONE."
The enforcement of this article shall be the responsibility of the Chief of Police and whomsoever he
may delegate.
§ 287-7. Penalties for offenses; towing rates.
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 186/200
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
Violators of this article shall be fined $5, payable to the East Hampton Police Department within 14
days. Violators who fail to pay within this period shall be fined an additional penalty of $5 for every
fourteen-day period thereafter that the fine remains unpaid. Towing and storage costs shall conform to
rates as established by state regulations and shall be paid by the owner of the towed vehicle.
Article III. Hearing Procedure for Parking Violations
[Adopted by the Town Council 6-28-1994 (Ord. No. 6.04)]
§ 287-8. Statutory authority.
The Town of East Hampton hereby establishes a hearing procedure for parking violations pursuant to
§ 7-152b of the Connecticut General Statutes.
§ 287-9. Hearing officers.
The Town Manager, as Chief Executive Officer of the Town, shall appoint one or more hearing officers
to conduct hearings pursuant to § 7-152b(b) of the Connecticut General Statutes.
§ 287-10. Applicability of state law.
All sections of § 7-152b(a) through (g) of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended from time to
time, shall be applicable under this article.
Article IV. Parking Violations
[Adopted by the Board of Selectmen 1-26-1988 (Ord. No. 8.04); amended by the Town Council 5-27-
2003]
§ 287-11. "No parking" places.
At all times, it shall be unlawful to park any vehicle in any of the following places, except when
necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or
traffic control device:
No vehicle shall be parked all night in a municipal parking lot, including parking lots at all Town
public buildings.
No vehicle shall be parked on a public road/street so as to face oncoming traffic.
No vehicle shall be parked in excess of posted or metered times.
No vehicle shall be double parked.
No vehicle shall be parked in a posted "NO PARKING" zone.
No vehicle shall be parked so as to obstruct any driveway.
No vehicle shall be parked in a load/unload zone.
No vehicle shall be parked on any public road(s) during winter storms and snow removal
operations.
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 187/200
I.
J.
K.
L.
M.
N.
(1)
(2)
A.
B.
No vehicle shall be parked so as to obstruct any fire hydrant.
No vehicle shall be parked on a public road/street less than 25 feet from a corner.
No vehicle shall be parked on a sidewalk.
No vehicle shall be parked in a crosswalk.
No vehicle shall be parked in a posted fire lane.
No vehicle shall be parked in a handicapped parking space without a permit.
§ 287-12. Penalties for offenses; enforcement.
The following penalties shall be imposed upon anyone permitting any vehicles to stand in any of
the above-listed places:
Penalty amounts.
Number of Penalties Fine
1 to 10 $20
11 to 12 $40
13 to 14 $90
Each violation listed above is payable to the general fund of the Town of East Hampton.
The East Hampton Police Department shall have the authority to enforce this article.
§ 287-13. Hearing procedure.
The hearing procedure for parking violations established pursuant to Article III of this chapter shall
apply following the imposition of any penalty under this article.
Chapter 291. Vehicles, Storage of
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Selectmen of the Town of East Hampton 9-1978 (Ord. No. 13.05).
Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Junk dealers — See Ch. 228.
Towing — See Ch. 282.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 287.
§ 291-1. Unsheltered storage of vehicles and junk prohibited;
exception for certain collectors.
Unsheltered storage of old, unused, stripped, junked, and other motor vehicles not in good and safe
operating condition, and of any motor vehicle not registered with the State of Connecticut, and of any
machinery, or parts thereof, or implements, and/or equipment and personal property of any kind which
is no longer usable for the purposes for which it was manufactured, hereinafter collectively described
as "said personalty," for a period of 30 days or more, except in licensed junkyards, within the limits of
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 188/200
A.
B.
C.
the Town of East Hampton is hereby declared to be a nuisance and dangerous to the public health and
safety, if said personalty is visible from the street or highway. Except as otherwise specifically
prohibited by state statutes, a bona fide antique and/or classic motor vehicle collector may maintain
one or more vehicles, whether currently registered or unregistered, or whether operable or inoperable,
in outdoor storage on private property, if every such vehicle and outdoor storage area is maintained in
such manner as not to constitute a health hazard and is located away from public view, or screened
from ordinary public view, by means of a suitable fence, trees, shrubbery, opaque covering or other
appropriate means.
§ 291-2. Abatement of nuisances.
The owner, owners, tenant, tenants, lessees and/or occupants of any lot within the limits of the Town of
East Hampton upon which such storage is made, and the owner, owners, and/or lessees of said
personalty involved in said storage, hereinafter referred to collectively as "owners," shall, upon written
notice, jointly and severally, promptly abate said nuisance by removing the same into completely
enclosed buildings usable for such storage purposes, if within the limit of the Town of East Hampton, or
otherwise remove the same to a location without said limits.
§ 291-3. Removal by Town; sale of unclaimed property.
Whenever said owners fail to abate said nuisance, after written notice, the Town of East Hampton, in
addition to all other rights and remedies allowed to it under Connecticut law, and by this chapter, may
remove said personalty to a location of its selection, the expenses therefor to be billed to said owners,
jointly and severally, said bill to be recoverable in a suit at law. When said personalty has been
removed and placed in storage by the Town of East Hampton, as provided for herein, said personalty
may be sold by the Town of East Hampton after reasonable time has elapsed and after written notice
of sale has been given to said owners. The proceeds from said sale are to be first applied to pay the
cost of said abatement, and if insufficient, the owners of said personalty shall remain liable for said
insufficiency. If the proceeds from said sale exceed the cost of abatement, the balance thereto shall
first be paid to said owners, if possible, or deposited in the treasury of the Town of East Hampton.
§ 291-4. Enforcement.
The health or zoning enforcement official or his duly appointed agent to be designated from time to
time by the Town of East Hampton shall enforce the provisions of this chapter in accordance with the
Connecticut General Statutes.
§ 291-5. Exceptions.
Licensed garages, service stations and new or used car lots and such uses shall continue to be
regulated by the provisions of the East Hampton Zoning Regulations or by the Connecticut
General Statutes.
This chapter shall not apply to house trailers or mobile homes which are operable, capable of
being registered, and fit for occupancy.
This chapter shall not apply to operable unregistered motor vehicles owned by persons serving in
the Armed Forces of the United States outside the State of Connecticut. Such persons shall be
required to submit evidence satisfactory to the Building Inspector to qualify for the exception.
§ 291-6. Penalties for offenses.
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 189/200
[1]
Any person who violates § 291-2 of this chapter shall be fined not more than $100 for each offense.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
Chapter 295. Water System Construction
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town of East Hampton as indicated in article histories. Amendments noted
where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Water system use — See Ch. 299.
Article I. Community Water Systems
[Adopted by Ord. No. 4.09A]
§ 295-1. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, as used in this article, shall have the following meanings unless the
context requires otherwise:
COMMUNITY WATER SYSTEM
A system that serves at least 25 residents pursuant to Section 19-13-B102 of the Regulations of
Connecticut State Agencies, as same may be amended from time to time.
COMPLIANCE CYCLE
The nine-calendar-year cycle during which monitoring must occur pursuant to Section 19-13-B102
of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies, as same may be amended from time to time.
§ 295-2. Authority to enter into agreements for installation of
water and fire protection systems.
The Water Pollution Control Authority is authorized to enter into agreements on behalf of the Town of
East Hampton with developers or other owners of land for the installation of community water systems
and public fire protection systems by and at the expense of such developers or owners, which
community water systems and public fire protection systems may become part of the Town's public
water system under the conditions hereinafter stipulated, and the Water Pollution Control Authority is
empowered to make, from time to time, any necessary regulations stipulating the terms and conditions
of said agreement not inconsistent with the provisions of this article.
§ 295-3. Authority to sign installation agreements.
The Chairman or Vice Chairman of the Water Pollution Control Authority is authorized to sign on behalf
of the Town of East Hampton all such agreements when the same have been authorized by said
Authority.
§ 295-4. Form of agreement.
The terms and text of a standard form of agreement for work under this article or any variations of said
standard form to apply to any particular project thereunder shall be as approved the Water Pollution
Control Authority Attorney.
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 190/200
§ 295-5. Specifications; applicability of water system use
ordinance.
The Water Pollution Control Authority shall specify in the terms of such agreements, or on plans which
are made a part thereof, the specifications of the community water system and public fire protection
system to be built and any applicable conditions which must be satisfied prior to the Town's
acceptance of the community water system and public fire protection system into the Town's public
water system. All the applicable terms of and all subsequent amendments to Chapter 299, Water
System Use, shall be applicable to work done under such agreements.
§ 295-6. Costs and expenses; deposit.
Such agreements shall provide that the full cost of installation of the community water system and
public fire protection system and all expenses incidental thereto shall be borne by the developer or
owner who shall, before commencing any work, deposit with the Director of Finance of the Town of
East Hampton a sum deemed by the Town Manager of the Town of East Hampton or his authorized
agent, or such engineers as the Water Pollution Control Authority may employ, to be sufficient to
reimburse the Water Pollution Control Authority for all costs of construction, inspection, and all other
expenses of any kind incurred by the Water Pollution Control Authority prior to or during construction,
or during any warranty or maintenance period required by the Water Pollution Control Authority. Such
expenses shall include, but shall not be limited to, allowances for pension, insurance and similar costs
related to payroll. Such agreements shall also provide that, in case said deposit proves to be
insufficient at any time during the progress of the work, a further deposit shall be made upon
notification by the Town Manager of said Town and that, upon acceptance of the community water
system and public fire protection system into the Town's public water system, any unexpended portion
of said deposit shall be returned to the developer or owner.
§ 295-7. Approvals from other agencies required.
Such agreements shall also provide that the developer or owner shall be exclusively responsible to
obtain any and all applicable regulatory approvals and/or certificates for said community water system
and public fire protection system prior to installation, including, but not limited to, approvals and/or
certificates from the Department of Public Health of the State of Connecticut and the Department of
Public Utility Control, as applicable, and any and all municipal land use commission approvals, as
applicable.
§ 295-8. Payment of charge to offset future operating costs.
Such agreements shall also provide that the developer or owner, before beginning work on the project,
shall pay to the Town, as a charge to offset the Town's future operating costs associated with said
community water system and public fire protection system, an amount of money which shall be
established by the Water Pollution Control Authority.
§ 295-9. Indemnification of Town; insurance.
All such agreements shall provide that the developer or owner shall assume all risks and hold the Town
of East Hampton harmless from any and all claims for damage arising from the work or its conduct. To
secure such risks, adequate liability, property damage and compensation insurance shall be required
in such amounts as deemed sufficient by the Water Pollution Control Authority.
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 191/200
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
A.
§ 295-10. Incorporation of water system of fire protection system
into Town water system.
After certification by the Town Manager or his authorized agent, or such engineers as the Water
Pollution Control Authority may employ, that any community water system and public fire protection
system installed under the terms of this article have been completed in accordance with the plans,
specifications and standards of the Town and that the maintenance period fixed in the agreement has
expired and that adequate security by bond has been furnished to assure the proper functioning of said
system for at least the duration of one complete compliance cycle, as defined herein, the Water
Pollution Control Authority may, by resolution, incorporate said community water system and public fire
protection system into the Town of East Hampton public water system, to become effective as
specified in such resolution.
Article II. Acceptance of Public Water Systems Under
Certificate of Public Convenience and Necessity
[Adopted 3-3-2009]
§ 295-11. Purpose; intent.
With numerous proposed public water systems (PWS) coming before the Town it is imperative that
certain regulations be in place to assure continuity and standardized operations between systems. To
assure this and to protect the Town the following regulations shall be the basis for a certificate of public
convenience and necessity for any public water systems to be owned and operated by the Town of
East Hampton through its WPCA.
§ 295-12. Water service provider; transfer of ownership.
As the WPCA will be the water service provider for any proposed new public water system in the
Town's ESA, it shall have input into and approve the developer's plans for water supply, treatment
and distribution. The developer shall keep the WPCA informed of the status of its water supply,
treatment and distribution plans at all times, and in addition, all water supply, treatment and
distribution plans for the development shall satisfy all governmental regulatory requirements and
those of the WPCA. The developer shall build, test and place into service the completed
community water supply, meet all financial requirements specified herein and train WPCA
personnel before the Town will accept ownership and operations.
A developer seeking to transfer a PWS to be owned by the Town of East Hampton and operated
through its WPCA is required to have a meeting with the WPCA prior to the Town entering into an
agreement to own and operate the PWS. The purpose of the meeting will be to determine what
steps will be necessary for the developer to undertake to establish, to the satisfaction of the
WPCA:
A sufficient quantity of groundwater will be available to support the project; and
Noninterference with existing public and/or private water supply wells.
§ 295-13. Testing of system; water diversion permit; agreement.
When a project has a projected average daily demand (based upon design population of the
proposed PWS in accordance with the requirements of RCSA § 16-262m), which, when multiplied
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 192/200
(1)
(2)
B.
C.
A.
A.
by a safe daily yield factor of 1.50, is less than or equal to 50,000 gallons per day, the developer
shall meet with the WPCA's consultant to determine the site-specific requirements to test the
PWS's aquifer under stress conditions. Such testing shall, in general, include, subject to
modification imposed by the WPCA's consultant, a five-day aquifer test of the well(s) pursuant to
RCSA § 19-13-B51 et seq., evaluation of groundwater flow boundary conditions, and monitoring of
the public and/or private water supply wells before, during and after the aquifer test within
predetermined radius and other antecedent conditions, as required. Should additional monitoring
wells be required upon private land and the landowner objects, such well shall be excluded from
the monitoring requirement. The WPCA shall determine, based upon the results of the testing,
whether there will be:
A sufficient quantity of groundwater available to support the project; and
Noninterference with existing public and/or private water supply wells.
When a project has a projected average daily demand (based upon design population of the
proposed PWS in accordance with the requirements of RCSA § 16-262m), which, when multiplied
by a safe daily yield factor of 1.50 exceeds 50,000 gallons per day, the developer shall apply for a
water diversion permit pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes § 22a-365 et seq. Should a water
diversion permit be issued by the DEP, such permit shall be transferred at no cost to the Town.
Upon the successful completion and affirmative findings for the conditions outlined in either
Subsection A or B above, the WPCA shall recommend that the Town Manager be authorized to
enter into an agreement to own and operate the PWS by the Town of East Hampton through its
WPCA.
§ 295-14. Infrastructure land; well yield; corrosion control
treatment.
All infrastructure associated with water supply and treatment shall be constructed on land deeded in
fee simple to the WPCA. All wells developed shall be utilized at their maximum safe yield as
determined by a yield test described in the PHC 19-13-B51k (b). The following minimum separating
distances are required by PHC Regulation 19-13-B51 and 19-13-B103:
Well Yield
(gpm)
Minimum Distance
(feet)
Under 10 75
10 to 50 150
Over 50 200
Note: All separating distances shown should be measured horizontally.
A PWS to be owned by the Town of East Hampton and operated through its WPCA shall complete
the applicable corrosion control treatment requirements and steps described in RCSA § 19-13-
B102 (j) et seq., and provide corrosion control treatment approved by the WPCA, in Phase II of the
certificate of public convenience and necessity (construction of the water treatment plant). Such
corrosion control treatment shall be acceptable to the WPCA and similar to other PWSs owned by
the Town of East Hampton and operated through its WPCA.
§ 295-15. Cost estimates; construction performance bond.
All costs associated with the development of the PWS, including attorney's fees, shall be borne by
the developer. The WPCA shall provide estimates for each phase of the proposed public water
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 193/200
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
B.
A.
B.
system as follows:
For the purpose of securing payment for engineering review services, the WPCA shall provide
three separate cost estimates, one estimate for each phase of the certificate of public
convenience and necessity: Phases I-A, I-B and II. If the estimate proves to be insufficient to
cover the actual costs to the WPCA for the engineering review services, the developer shall
make such further payments as shall be required upon notification by the WPCA.
Upon approval of Phase I-B of the certificate of public convenience and necessity in
accordance with § 16-262m of the Connecticut General Statutes of Connecticut by the
CTDPH and prior to construction, the WPCA shall provide an additional estimate for
construction inspection services in connection with the water treatment plant construction and
distribution piping, valves, hydrants and appurtenances.
The developer shall make separate deposits with the WPCA which represent the WPCA's
estimate of costs for construction inspection costs for Phase II costs that may be incurred by
the WPCA pursuant to this scope of work. The developer further agrees that this estimate will
be subject to a final accounting, at which time any funds remaining after payment of the
WPCA's engineering and/or inspection costs shall be returned to the developer. Should the
WPCA's engineering and/or inspection costs exceed the deposit, then the developer shall pay
the difference to the WPCA within 30 days of the WPCA's provision of a written statement of
same to the developer.
This estimate does not include an estimate for unforeseen expenses such as legal issues or
additional project elements. The developer will be direct billed within 30 days for these
expenses as they are incurred by the WPCA.
For the purpose of securing payment for construction costs, the developer agrees, before
commencing any work, to post a construction performance bond with the WPCA in the amount
determined by the WPCA, or an authorized agent thereof, to be sufficient to defray construction
costs. The required construction bond may be satisfied by letter of credit, cash bond or surety
bond. The developer further agrees that in case said amount proves to be insufficient at any time
during the progress of the work, the developer shall make such further deposits as shall be
required upon notification by the WPCA.
§ 295-16. Warranty period; operational expenses deposit; service
connection charge.
Upon acceptance, in writing, from the State Department of Public Health that said public water
system is complete, the developer will provide for a warranty period which will conclude one year
after the final certificate of occupancy is issued. Concurrently, the construction bond will be
returned and a maintenance bond in the amount of 10% of the construction bond will be required
to secure the warranty period.
The developer shall agree to provide a pro forma analysis acceptable to the WPCA of system
operations (expenses and revenue) for the full build-out of the system. The developer
acknowledges that once the Town accepts and begins operating the system the Town will not be
responsible for a financial deficit associated with the operation prior to the full build out of the
development. The developer shall deposit with the WPCA an amount which represents one year
of operational expenses, representing the full expense budget which may be expected and
incurred by the WPCA for the system. The developer further agrees that this deposit will be
utilized by the WPCA to offset any financial deficit associated with the operations. The deposit will
be subject to an annual accounting at which time the deposit shall be adjusted to maintain an
amount equal to the full year operational expenses. Said deposit shall continue until full build-out
of the development is achieved or revenues exceed expenses.
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 194/200
C.
A.
B.
C.
D.
The WPCA will assess the service connection cost for each lot to be connected and billed to the
developer at such time as the developer applies to connect the public water system to the lot.
Applications for the installation and connection of new water service shall be made on forms
provided by the WPCA and signed by the developer or a duly authorized representative. Service
connection charges shall fund a potable water sinking fund to be used at the discretion of the
WPCA. Service connection charges are subject to change by the WPCA. The current service
connection charge is $1,250 per equivalent meter unit (EMU).
Chapter 299. Water System Use
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town Council of the Town of East Hampton 1-12-1993 (Ord. No. 4.09).
Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Housing code — See Ch. 219.
Sewer construction — See Ch. 261.
Sewer use — See Ch. 269.
Water system construction — See Ch. 295.
§ 299-1. Purpose.
This chapter establishes the procedures for making connections to the public water system in the Town
of East Hampton. It also regulates the use of the public water system. The purpose of this chapter is
to:
Inform the public as to the technical and administrative procedures to be followed in obtaining
connection to the East Hampton public water system;
Authorize and empower the East Hampton Water Pollution Control Authority to operate and
manage the public water system on behalf of the Town of East Hampton;
Ensure compliance with C.G.S. § 16-262m and with §§ 16-262m-1 through 16-262m-9, inclusive,
of the Connecticut State Regulations;
Ensure compliance with all orders of the Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection and
the Connecticut Department of Health Services relating to the operation of water systems, and the
use of water in the Town of East Hampton.
§ 299-2. Definitions.
The following words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the following meanings unless the
context requires otherwise:
CONTRACTOR
Any person regularly offering to the general public services of his employees or himself in the field
of plumbing, piping, heating, piping and cooling, who possesses a valid license to perform
plumbing and piping work, issued under Chapter 393 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as
amended.
CUSTOMER
Any person, firm, corporation, company, association, governmental unit or lessee who, by terms of
a written lease, is responsible for the water bill, or owner of property furnished water service by the
East Hampton Public Water System
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 195/200
[1]
A.
B.
A.
B.
A.
B.
DEP
The Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection.[1]
DHS
The Connecticut Department of Health Services.
HEALTH OFFICER
The East Hampton Director of Health.
PLUMBING AND PIPING WORK
The installation, repair, replacement, alteration or maintenance of water and associated fixtures,
all water systems for human usage, and shall include lateral storm lines from the buildings to the
mains, swimming pools and pumping equipment.
SERVICE CONNECTION or SERVICE PIPE
The service pipe from the water main to the building in which water is used for commercial,
industrial and human consumption purposes.
TOWN
The Town of East Hampton, a municipal corporation.
WPCA
The East Hampton Water Pollution Control Authority.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 299-3. Use of public water system.
Owners of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human occupancy, employment,
commercial, business, manufacturing, recreation or other purposes shall comply with all orders of
the Health office, DEP and/or DHS relative to usage of water for such purposes.
Whenever the public interest so requires, the WPCA reserves the right to curtail or suspend
entirely the use of water for nonessential purposes. Such limitation of use shall be without liability
on the part of the WPCA.
§ 299-4. Private wells.
The owners of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human occupancy, employment,
commercial, business, manufacturing, recreation or other purposes served by a private well may
continue to use and operate such well, provided no contrary order has been issued by the Health
officer, the DEP or the DHS.
The issuance of water supply well permits shall be in accordance with § 19-13-B51m of the
Connecticut Public Health Code, as amended.
§ 299-5. Service pipe installation.
The Town may license as a contractor to perform plumbing and piping work any person who
possesses a valid license issued under Chapter 393 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as
amended, who shall have applied to it on forms to be provided for that purpose and who shall
have furnished the surety bond and insurance required by § 299-6 hereof.
The following may construct, repair, alter or remove any service pipe or water line connected to
the East Hampton Water System, subject to supervision and approval by the WPCA:
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 196/200
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
Regular forces of a contractor employed by the Town operating under orders of the WPCA
and in the performance of work for the Town.
Regular forces of the Town and/or the State Highway Division, Department of Transportation,
operating under and subject to a permit for the particular job to be issued by the WPCA, and
while engaged in the regular work and operations of the Town, or State Highway Division,
Department of Transportation.
Regular forces of any public utility corporation authorized by state law to construct, maintain
and operate pipes or ducts within public highways within the Town, while engaged in work
incidental to the regular structures of said utility company and operating under and subject to
the conditions of a permit for the particular job issued by the WPCA.
Contractors licensed under Subsection A performing plumbing and piping work for customers
The WPCA may, in any case where the quantity or expense of work by Town forces incidental to
the construction, repair or inspection of any service pipe connection warrants such a requirement,
require that the owner of property concerned or the contractor shall reimburse the Town for the
cost of services of Town employees engaged in work or inspections incidental to said water
service connection. The WPCA or its designated representatives may make a suitable provision
for such reimbursement a condition precedent to the issuance of any permit for construction,
alteration or repair of such service pipe connection, subject to such directions as the WPCA may
issue.
Service pipes are to be installed by persons licensed by the Town to do such work; such licensed
persons shall be retained by the property owner and paid by the property owner, unless specified
otherwise by the WPCA. All such installations between the distribution main and the meter setting
shall be laid in a manner prescribed by the WPCA and subject to inspection, before backfilling, by
a representative of the WPCA.
Such service pipes shall be of Type K copper tubing or other approved pipe, at least one inch and
not more than two inches inside diameter. All pipe shall be laid so as to have at least 4 1/2 feet of
cover and shall not be laid in a trench with other pipes or conduits except as allowed by the State
Public Health Code. Service pipes shall be laid at least 10 feet away from any septic tank leaching
field.
Plumbers shall furnish and install an approved stop and waste cock or shut-off valve on the
service pipe immediately after its entry into the building, except in cases where special permission
is given by the WPCA to install the same elsewhere. Said cock or valve shall be of the same
nominal size as the service pipe.
Plumbers shall install a meter, approved by the WPCA, in a horizontal position in the house piping
immediately after the main shut off and as near to where the service pipe enters the buildings as
practicable.
When no suitable place inside the building is available or the service pipe exceeds 150 feet in
length, the WPCA may require that the meter be set near the street shutoff with suitable valve in a
meter pit. Pit and cover shall be owned, installed and maintained by the customer. Pit construction
and location shall be approved by the WPCA.
All services shall be equipped by the owner of the property with an approved valve or stop cock
immediately after the meter setting on the house side, to act as a back valve and prevent the
house piping from emptying while the meter is being changed or during other work on the water
service pipe.
The installation of either a combined fire and domestic service or a separate fire service
connection will not be permitted.
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 197/200
K.
[1]
A.
B.
C.
[1]
[a]
[b]
[c]
[2]
(a)
(b)
(1)
D.
Before the approval of the installation of service pipe larger than one inch in diameter, a form
listing the water requirements of the property to be supplied shall be filed with the WPCA so that
the proper size of meter may be determined.
§ 299-6. Permits; insurance and bond requirements.
A person intending to connect a service pipe from a building on his property to the public water
system shall first apply for and obtain a permit from the WPCA in the manner set forth in this
section. Upon approval of the application and plan, a permit shall be issued to have the work
performed by the stated contractor. In the event the premises changes ownership before the work
is completed, or if another contractor is chosen to perform or finish the work, the original permit
becomes void, and a new permit must be obtained by the new parties in interest. A permit and
inspection fee as set from time to time by the WPCA shall be paid to the Town at the time that the
application is filed. The WPCA may increase or decrease such fee from time to time based upon
its administrative and inspection costs in issuing such a permit.[1]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
Every application for a permit shall be made in writing on forms to be provided by the WPCA for
that purpose and shall be signed by the owner of the premises to be served and by the contractor.
The application shall state the name and business address of the contractor (in the case of
partnerships and trade names, both the name under which the firm does business and the names
of all individual members of the firm), the location and ownership of the property to be served by
the service pipe connection in question, the post office address of the property owner, a brief
description of the work to be done, and shall contain an agreement that the permittee will do the
work in accordance with the requirements of Town ordinances, regulations and permits as the
same may apply to the particular location or work and will indemnify and save harmless the Town
and others from damages, loss, claims, etc. arising out of work performed pursuant to such permit.
The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information
considered reasonably necessary by the WPCA. The WPCA shall require as a prerequisite to the
issuance of any permit that it be furnished evidence that (1) any and all permits to open public
streets, public or private grounds or property have been or will be issued; (2) the agent of the
applicant is properly authorized to signed the application in question.
Any permit, in whole or in part, may be suspended, canceled or terminated by the WPCA on
written notice to the permittee for violation of the conditions thereof or the violation of the
requirements of this chapter.
The contractor will carry the following insurance coverage with an insurance company licensed in
the State of Connecticut and approved by the WPCA. The insurance company/ies must have at
least an A rating by A.M. Best Company. All policies will provide a thirty-day notice of cancellation
to the office of the WPCA.
The following coverage and limits will be provided:
Workers compensation.
Coverage A: statutory.
Coverage B: employers liability:
Bodily injury by accident: $100,000 per person.
Bodily injury by disease: $100,000 per person.
Bodily injury by disease: $500,000 aggregate.
Comprehensive commercial liability.
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 198/200
[a]
[b]
[c]
[d]
[e]
[f]
[1]
[a]
[b]
[c]
[d]
[e]
[f]
[2]
[3]
[a]
[b]
[c]
[1]
[a]
[b]
[2]
(c)
(2)
(3)
Limits of liability:
Bodily injury, general aggregate limit of $1,000,000 (other than
products/completed operations): $1,000,000.
Products/completed operations: $1,000,000.
Personal and advertising injury: $1,000,000.
Each occurrence: $1,000,000.
Fire damage limit: $50,000.
Medical expenses: $5,000.
Coverage:
Premises/independent contractors.
Contractual/completed operations/products.
Contractual liability will be broad form.
XCU (explosion/collapse/underground utilities).
Comprehensive broad-form liability endorsement or equivalent, including broadform
property damage.
Liability.
The WPCA shall be added as a named insured to the contractor's policies and so
stated in certificates.
Automobile liability.
Limits of liability:
Bodily injury, per person: $1,000,000.
Aggregate: $1,000,000.
Property damage: $1,000,000.
Coverages:
All owned/nonowned/hired/borrowed.
Contractual liability to be included.
Contractor agrees that it will indemnify and hold harmless the Town and its respective officers,
agents and employees from any loss, costs, damages, expenses, judgments and liability of
whatsoever kind or nature howsoever the same may be caused resulting directly or indirectly
from any act or omission of the contractor, any subcontractor, anyone directly or indirectly
employed by any of them or anyone for whose acts any of them may be liable resulting in
bodily injury, including sickness and death, personal injury or damage to property directly or
indirectly, including the loss of use resulting therefrom as permitted by law.
The stipulation of minimum amounts of all such insurance or the acceptance by the WPCA of
certificates indicating these limits of coverage in no way limits the liability of the applicant for
any such amounts.
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 199/200
(4)
(5)
(6)
E.
A.
B.
C.
D.
The applicant, his agents and/or contractor shall not engage in any blasting activities in the
furtherance of their work within the Town unless specific written authorization has been
granted by the Town.
The WPCA, from time to time, may increase or decrease the limits of liability above, and may,
from time to time, add or delete categories of insurance called for in this Subsection D based
upon its determination of the types and extent of risks to which the Town is exposed during
the installation, repair and replacement of service pipes.
Certificates of insurance will be presented to the WPCA for its approval prior to the contractor
or his subcontractors commencing any work whatsoever. Work shall not be continued after
expiration of any of the above forms of insurance until the same have been renewed. If the
WPCA or its designated representative so requires, original policies or certified copies thereof
shall be submitted in lieu of certificates.
Every person making application for a permit shall file with the WPCA a satisfactory bond of a
surety company authorized to transact such business in the State of Connecticut in a form
provided by and satisfactory to the WPCA or its designated representative. The bond shall be in
an amount of not less than $5,000 to be determined by the WPCA or its designated
representative, conditioned that the applicant substantially and properly perform all work to be
done under the permits issued to him in a workmanlike manner and upon his using proper
materials; that the applicant shall reimburse the Town for any injury or damage to any water line or
other property of said Town or by reason of any violation by the applicant or his agents or
employees of any requirement of this chapter; that the applicant shall restore the portion of any
street or public place in which the applicant may have made an excavation incidental to work
under said license to as good a condition as it was prior to said work, and also shall keep said
street or public place in like good condition to the satisfaction of the proper public officer in charge
thereof for a period of not less than one year after said restoration; that the applicant shall
reimburse the Town or the state for the expense of repairs to such street or public place made
necessary by reason of the excavation made by the applicant; and that the applicant shall comply
in all respects with the rules, regulations, laws, ordinances, etc. relative to work in such streets or
public places and with the terms of the permits which may be issued to the applicant.
§ 299-7. Water system regulations.
East Hampton water system water will not be supplied to premises where the pipes used to
convey or distribute said water are connected, directly or indirectly, with any supplementary or
secondary fire or other water service system or supply so as to possible receive a water supply
from any source other than that furnished by the East Hampton water system; provided the WPCA
may allow such connection to be maintained if such other source or supply shall be of safe,
sanitary quality, and said interconnection is approved by the DHS.
The Town furnishes water and not pressure, and does not guarantee a continuous supply. No
responsibility will be assumed for any damages to any apparatus in any house or building due to
the shutting off of water without notice, either for repairs on account of a break in the pipe lines or
for other necessary operations.
While it is the intention to give notice, as far as possible, in advance of any work which must be
done that will necessitate interruption of the supply, such notice is to be considered a courtesy
only and not a requirement on the part of the WPCA. In the case of a break in pipelines, water will
be shut off at any time without notice.
Failure of the tenant or property owner to receive notice of interruptions of service shall entail no
responsibility on the part of the Town, its officers or employees. Property owners must so regulate
their installations connected with the public water systems that damage will not occur if water is
shut off without notice.
11/1/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=12053178,12100178,8896329,11770195,11770196&children=true 200/200
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
L.
M.
N.
No person shall, without proper authorization from the WPCA, tap the mains or distributing pipes,
insert stop cocks therein, set or remove meters on service pipes, interfere with water gates, or
curb cocks or change or operate any pipe or fixture on a water service pipe between the outlet end
of meter and the street main.
No person shall, without proper authorization from the WPCA, tap or make any connection with
any street main or service or other distributing pipe connected with the water system, or shall,
without such authorization, open any gate or valve connected with said system so as to obtain
water from said system or for the purpose of obtaining such water, or shall, in any way or by any
device, obtain the use of such water without such authorization.
No person shall insert, or cause or permit to be inserted into any water pipe, which is a part of the
supply or distribution system of the WPCA, or which is directly or indirectly connected with said
system, any object, material or substance which may cause damage to said system or stoppage
or diminution of the flow of water therein.
In the event that any customer shall use water at rates of flow that cause noticeable pressure
variations in the water system, the WPCA may require that the customer control his flow rates or
install equipment to minimize such variations to an acceptable level.
The WPCA or its designated representative shall have reasonable access to customers' premises
for the purpose of reading, testing, repairing, installing or replacing meters and meter
appurtenances; inspecting plumbing connections, fixtures or pipes, or discontinuing service.
The customer, at his own expense unless specified otherwise by the WPCA, shall furnish, install,
own and maintain the service pipe from the curb stop to the interior of the building and shall
assume ownership of a WPCA-approved curb box, keeping the service pipe and box in good
repair and keeping the curb box readily accessible. If the curb box is not accessible for WPCA
use, the WPCA has the right to make it accessible and/or operable and bill any cost to the
customer.
When there is a leak in any service pipe from the curb box to the customer's premises and the
owner cannot be readily found or shall refuse to make immediate repairs, the WPCA shall have
the right but not the duty to make the necessary repairs and charge the customer for the same.
The WPCA shall from time to time establish standard requirements or specifications to regulate
the sizes, materials, methods and workmanship to be used in the construction of water lines,
service connections, hydrants, valves, and other similar work and appurtenances thereto
connected or intended to be connected to the water system. Such standard requirements shall
provide minimum requirements as to size, depth, slope or rate of grade for such pipes, shall
regulate the kinds of pipe, fittings, methods of laying, jointing, materials used, manner of
connecting to preexisting water lines, and general considerations as to location and other pertinent
features. Any such requirements or specifications as the same may from time to time be amended
are hereby made a part of this chapter.
If the owner, agent, lessee, tenant or other person in charge of any person shall violate any
provision of this chapter affecting said premises and shall fail to remove any violation and comply
with any written order of the WPCA pertaining hereto, then 10 days after such order shall have
been sent by mail, postage prepaid, to the last known address of such person, the WPCA may
discontinue water service to such premises.
Any person who shall violate Subsection E, F or G hereof shall, upon conviction for committing
such an offense, be subject to a fine not exceeding $100 for each such violation.

EAST HAMPTON
Zoning Regulations
Amended November 7, 2018
Effective April 1, 2019
ii
Zoning Regulations
Effective date: September 15, 1990
Amended
Effective
July 15, 1992
May 15, 1993
November 1, 1993
July 1, 1994
June 1, 1994
February 7, 1997
December 1, 1997
May 1, 1998
November 1, 1999
August 17, 2000
July 11, 2001
July 25, 2001
April 3, 2002
April 24, 2002
June 5, 2002
June 21, 2002
December 3, 2003
Dec 6, 2003
January 7, 2004
Jan 12, 2004
May 10, 2006
May 15, 2006
June 5, 2006
July 8, 2006
Aug 2, 2006
Aug 10, 2006
Oct 4, 2006
Nov 13, 2006
May 9, 2007
May 19, 2007
August 1, 2007
August 24, 2007
October 3, 2007
October 15, 2007
December 5, 2007
January 1, 2008
August 4, 2008
August 4, 2008
August 6, 2008
August 16, 2008
September 2, 2009
October 1, 2009
April 6, 2011
July 1, 2011
July 6, 2011
August 1, 2011
August 3, 2011
September 1, 2011
October 5, 2011
November 1,2011
May 2, 2012
May 21, 2012
July 5, 2012
July 30, 2012
March 5, 2014
April 7, 2014
November 4, 2015
December 1, 2015
November 2, 2016
December 1, 2016
October 4, 2017
February 7, 2018
March 22, 2018
November 7, 2018
March 6, 2019
November 1, 2017
March 1, 2018
April 1, 2018
December 1, 2018
April 1, 2019
iii
Table Of Contents
ARTICLE 1 - INTRODUCTION.........................................................1
Section 1.1. Authority ...................................................................................................................... 1
Section 1.2. Purposes ....................................................................................................................... 1
Section 1.3. Zoning Districts ............................................................................................................. 2
A. Districts and Boundaries ..................................................................................................... 2
B. District Interpretation ......................................................................................................... 2
C. Boundary Interpretation ..................................................................................................... 2
Section 1.4. Interpretation Of Regulations ....................................................................................... 3
A. Permitted Uses and Activities ............................................................................................. 3
B. Minimum Requirements ..................................................................................................... 3
C. In The Event of Conflict ....................................................................................................... 3
Section 1.5. Conformity Required .................................................................................................... 3
A. Conformity Required .......................................................................................................... 3
Section 1.6. Administrative Provisions ............................................................................................. 4
A. Severability ......................................................................................................................... 4
B. When Effective.................................................................................................................... 4
ARTICLE 2 - DEFINITIONS .............................................................5
Section 2.1. Use Of Terms ................................................................................................................ 5
A. Definitions to be Applied .................................................................................................... 5
B. Specific Terms ..................................................................................................................... 5
C. Terms Not Defined .............................................................................................................. 5
Section 2.2. Defined Terms .............................................................................................................. 6
ARTICLE 3 - RESOURCE PROTECTION ZONES ............................... 23
Section 3.1. Lake Pocotopaug Protection Zone............................................................................... 23
A. Purpose ............................................................................................................................. 23
B. Scope ................................................................................................................................ 23
C. Additional Requirements. ................................................................................................. 24
Section 3.2. Upper Connecticut Conservation Zone ........................................................................ 25
A. Purpose ............................................................................................................................. 25
B. Referral of Land Use Applications ..................................................................................... 25
C. Assembly and Commission Action .................................................................................... 25
Section 3.3. Aquifer Protection Overlay Zone................................................................................. 26
A. Purpose ............................................................................................................................. 26
B. Establishment and Delineation of Boundary .................................................................... 26
C. Uses Permitted As Of Right ............................................................................................... 26
D. Uses Permitted By Special Permit ..................................................................................... 26
E. Special Provisions ............................................................................................................. 27
Section 3.4. Salmon River Protection Zone ..................................................................................... 28
A. Purpose ............................................................................................................................. 28
iv
B. Delineation of Area ........................................................................................................... 28
C. Special Provisions for the Salmon River Protection Zone ................................................. 28
D. Special Provisions ............................................................................................................. 28
Section 3.5. Floodplain Overlay Zone ............................................................................................. 29
A. Statutory Authorization .................................................................................................... 29
B. Finding Of Fact .................................................................................................................. 29
C. Statement Of Purpose ...................................................................................................... 29
D. Objectives ......................................................................................................................... 30
E. Definitions ......................................................................................................................... 30
F. Administration .................................................................................................................. 34
G. General Provisions ............................................................................................................ 36
H. Provisions For Flood Hazard Reduction ............................................................................ 37
I. Design Standards For Subdivision Proposals .................................................................... 42
J. Variance Procedures ......................................................................................................... 43
K. Enforcement ..................................................................................................................... 44
L. Penalties For Violation ...................................................................................................... 45
ARTICLE 4 - RESIDENTIAL ZONES ................................................ 47
Section 4.1. R-1 Zone – Lakeside and Village Residential ................................................................ 47
A. Purpose ............................................................................................................................. 47
B. Uses Permitted As-Of-Right .............................................................................................. 47
C. Uses Permitted With Site Plan Review ............................................................................. 47
D. Uses Permitted With Special Permit ................................................................................. 47
E. Area and Dimensional Standards ...................................................................................... 48
Section 4.2. R-2 Zone – Single Family Residential ........................................................................... 49
A. Purpose ............................................................................................................................. 49
B. Uses Permitted As-Of-Right .............................................................................................. 49
C. Uses Permitted With Site Plan Review ............................................................................. 49
D. Uses Permitted With Special Permit ................................................................................. 49
E. Area and Dimensional Standards ...................................................................................... 50
Section 4.3. R-3 Zone – Resource Residential ................................................................................. 51
A. Purpose ............................................................................................................................. 51
B. Uses Permitted As-Of-Right .............................................................................................. 51
C. Uses Permitted With Site Plan Review ............................................................................. 51
D. Uses Permitted With Special Permit ................................................................................. 51
E. Area and Dimensional Standards ...................................................................................... 52
Section 4.4. R-4 Zone - Rural Residential ........................................................................................ 53
A. Purpose ............................................................................................................................. 53
B. Uses Permitted As-Of-Right .............................................................................................. 53
C. Uses Permitted With Site Plan Review ............................................................................. 53
D. Uses Permitted With Special Permit ................................................................................. 53
E. Area and Dimensional Standards ...................................................................................... 54
Section 4.5. VHO Zone – Village Housing Overlay (Village District) ................................................. 55
A. Purpose ............................................................................................................................. 55
B. Nature of Zone / Declaration of Village District................................................................ 55
C. Description of Sub-Districts. ............................................................................................. 55
D. Uses Permitted With Special Permit ................................................................................. 56
E. Area and Dimensional Standards ...................................................................................... 56
F. Special Provisions ............................................................................................................. 58
v
Section 4.6. Special Provisions For Residential Zones ..................................................................... 63
A. Two Family Dwellings/Duplexes ....................................................................................... 63
B. Display Or Storage Of Materials ....................................................................................... 63
C. Access Driveways .............................................................................................................. 63
D. Temporary Health Care Structure ..................................................................................... 63
ARTICLE 5 - BUSINESS ZONES ..................................................... 65
Section 5.1. VC Zone – Village Center (Village District) ................................................................... 65
A. Purpose / Village District Declaration ............................................................................... 65
B. Uses Permitted With Site Plan Review ............................................................................. 65
C. Uses Permitted With Special Permit ................................................................................. 65
D. Area and Dimensional Standards ...................................................................................... 66
E. Special Provisions for Residential Use .............................................................................. 66
F. Special Provisions Applicable to All Uses in the Village Center Zone ............................... 66
G. Design Review Provisions ................................................................................................. 67
Section 5.2. C Zone – Commercial .................................................................................................. 70
A. Purpose ............................................................................................................................. 70
B. Uses Permitted With Site Plan Review ............................................................................. 70
C. Uses Permitted With Special Permit ................................................................................. 70
D. Area and Dimensional Standards ...................................................................................... 71
E. Special Provisions ............................................................................................................. 71
Section 5.3. I Zone – Industrial ....................................................................................................... 72
A. Purpose ............................................................................................................................. 72
B. Uses Permitted With Site Plan Review ............................................................................. 72
C. Uses Permitted With Special Permit ................................................................................. 72
D. Area and Dimensional Standards ...................................................................................... 73
E. Special Provisions ............................................................................................................. 73
Section 5.4. PO/R Zone – Professional Office / Residential ............................................................ 74
A. Purpose ............................................................................................................................. 74
B. Uses Permitted As Of Right ............................................................................................... 74
C. Uses Permitted With Site Plan Review ............................................................................. 74
D. Uses Permitted With Special Permit ................................................................................. 74
E. Area and Dimensional Standards ...................................................................................... 74
F. Special Provisions ............................................................................................................. 75
Section 5.5. DD Zone – Design Development .................................................................................. 76
A. Purpose ............................................................................................................................. 76
B. Uses Permitted With Special Permit ................................................................................. 76
C. Area and Dimensional Standards ...................................................................................... 76
D. Special Provisions ............................................................................................................. 77
ARTICLE 6 - PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICTS ....................... 79
Section 6.1. Overall Purpose .......................................................................................................... 79
Section 6.2. RL Zone – Reserved Land ............................................................................................ 79
A. Purpose ............................................................................................................................. 79
B. Uses Permitted With Special Permit ................................................................................. 79
C. Area and Dimensional Standards ...................................................................................... 79
Section 6.3. HOD Zone - Housing Opportunity Development ......................................................... 80
vi
A. Intent and Purpose ........................................................................................................... 80
B. Definitions ......................................................................................................................... 80
C. Primary Uses and Structures Permitted ........................................................................... 80
D. Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures ........................................................................ 81
E. Uses Prohibited in an HOD Zone ....................................................................................... 81
F. Generally-Applicable Standards ........................................................................................ 81
G. Parcels Eligible for to HOD Zone District ........................................................................... 81
H. Height, Area and Yard Requirements ............................................................................... 82
I. Road Construction Standards and Road Dedication Requirements ................................. 84
J. Common Interest Ownership Requirements .................................................................... 84
K. Open Space and Exclusive Use Area ................................................................................. 84
L. Parking Requirements....................................................................................................... 85
M. Signage .............................................................................................................................. 85
N. Trash Removal .................................................................................................................. 85
O. Landscaping ...................................................................................................................... 85
P. Sidewalks and Bus Shelters ............................................................................................... 85
Q. Lighting ............................................................................................................................. 85
R. Utilities .............................................................................................................................. 86
S. Zone Change and Conceptual Plan Requirements ............................................................ 86
T. Final Plan Requirements ................................................................................................... 87
U. Duration of Final Approval ................................................................................................ 87
V. Start of Construction ........................................................................................................ 87
W. Bonding of Public Improvements shown on Final Plan and Subdivision Plan .................. 88
X. Enforcement ..................................................................................................................... 88
Section 6.4. MUDD Zone - Mixed Use Development District .......................................................... 89
A. General ............................................................................................................................. 89
B. Nature Of The Zone .......................................................................................................... 89
C. Intent ................................................................................................................................ 89
D. Mixed Use Development District ...................................................................................... 90
E. Application Procedure For Mixed Use Development Districts ......................................... 91
F. Specific Requirements for All MUDDs .............................................................................. 96
G. Specific Requirements for Residential Development in a MUDD ..................................... 99
H. Specific Requirements for Commercial and Mixed Use Development in a MUDD ........ 100
I. Conformance to Recorded Documents .......................................................................... 100
J. Amendment or Extension of Approved MUDDs ............................................................. 101
K. Commencement and Completion of Construction ......................................................... 101
L. Performance Bonds ........................................................................................................ 101
M. Deeds .............................................................................................................................. 101
N. Outside Storage Applicable to Uses in a Mixed Use Development District .................... 102
ARTICLE 7 - BASIC STANDARDS ................................................ 103
Section 7.1. Parking and Loading .................................................................................................. 103
A. Purpose ........................................................................................................................... 103
B. Number of Parking Spaces .............................................................................................. 103
C. Parking Space Requirements for People with Disabilities .............................................. 105
D. Waivers and Exceptions .................................................................................................. 105
E. Parking Lot Design .......................................................................................................... 106
F. Pervious Parking Area ..................................................................................................... 106
G. Shared Parking ................................................................................................................ 106
H. Bicycle and Pedestrian Accommodations ....................................................................... 107
I. Landscaping Standards for Parking Lot Stormwater Management: ............................... 108
vii
J. Loading Space Requirements .......................................................................................... 108
Section 7.2. Outdoor Signs ........................................................................................................... 109
A. Purpose ........................................................................................................................... 109
B. General Requirements .................................................................................................... 109
C. Signs Permitted in Residential Districts .......................................................................... 110
D. Signs Permitted in Non-Residential Districts .................................................................. 110
E. Banners Across Public Roads and Highways ................................................................... 112
Section 7.3. Lighting ..................................................................................................................... 113
Section 7.4. Landscaping .............................................................................................................. 121
A. Purpose ........................................................................................................................... 121
B. Applicability / Considerations ......................................................................................... 121
C. Standards ........................................................................................................................ 121
Section 7.5. Storm Drainage and Storm Water Management ....................................................... 122
A. Purpose ........................................................................................................................... 122
B. Applicability .................................................................................................................... 122
C. References ...................................................................................................................... 122
D. General ........................................................................................................................... 122
E. Drainage Design and Calculations ................................................................................... 122
F. Drainage of Off-Site Properties ....................................................................................... 124
G. Detention Basins ............................................................................................................. 124
H. Easements and Rights-To-Drain ...................................................................................... 125
Section 7.6. Excavation, Filling And Grading ................................................................................. 126
A. Purpose ........................................................................................................................... 126
B. General ........................................................................................................................... 126
C. Permit Requirement ....................................................................................................... 126
D. Special Permit ................................................................................................................. 126
E. Administrative Permits ................................................................................................... 127
Section 7.7. Erosion and Sediment Control .................................................................................. 128
A. Purpose ........................................................................................................................... 128
B. Applicability .................................................................................................................... 128
C. Review Agency ................................................................................................................ 128
D. Definitions ....................................................................................................................... 128
E. Requirements for Certification/Approval of Erosion and Sedimentation Control Plan .. 129
F. Certification or Denial of Erosion and Sedimentation Plans: .......................................... 129
G. Conditions of Approval ................................................................................................... 130
H. Inspection ....................................................................................................................... 130
I. Enforcement ................................................................................................................... 130
ARTICLE 8 - SPECIAL REGULATIONS .......................................... 132
Section 8.1. Prohibited Uses......................................................................................................... 132
Section 8.2. Non-Conforming Conditions ..................................................................................... 132
A. Interpretation ................................................................................................................. 132
B. Rendering to Safe Condition ........................................................................................... 132
C. Alteration, Repair and Reconstruction ........................................................................... 132
D. Change in Use ................................................................................................................. 133
E. Reversion ........................................................................................................................ 133
F. Non-Conforming Lots of Record ..................................................................................... 133
G. Maximum House Size Allowed on Non-Conforming Lots of Record in the R-1 Zone ..... 133
viii
H. Enlargement of a Permitted use on Non-Conforming Lots ............................................ 133
Section 8.3. General Provisions .................................................................................................... 134
A. Density ............................................................................................................................ 134
B. Interior Lots .................................................................................................................... 134
C. Corner Visibility ............................................................................................................... 134
D. Lots on Narrow Streets ................................................................................................... 134
E. Projections into Yards ..................................................................................................... 134
F. Access to Lots.................................................................................................................. 134
G. Height Limitation ............................................................................................................ 135
H. Water Supply and Sewage Disposal ................................................................................ 135
I. Accessory Buildings ......................................................................................................... 135
J. Accessory Uses ................................................................................................................ 136
Section 8.4. Standards For Specific Uses ...................................................................................... 137
A. Garages And Motor Fuel Filling Stations......................................................................... 137
B. Alcoholic Beverages ........................................................................................................ 137
C. Agriculture and Livestock................................................................................................ 137
D. Commercial Stables ........................................................................................................ 138
E. Commercial Kennels ....................................................................................................... 139
F. Commercial Recreation .................................................................................................. 140
G. Mobile Homes And Trailers ............................................................................................ 141
H. Car Wash ......................................................................................................................... 142
I. Bed & Breakfast .............................................................................................................. 143
J. Country Inn ..................................................................................................................... 144
K. Swimming Pools .............................................................................................................. 145
L. Farm Brewery (Effective 12-01-2015) ............................................................................. 145
M. Accessory Dwelling Units ................................................................................................ 145
Section 8.5. Active Adult, Congregate And Senior Housing .......................................................... 148
A. Purpose ........................................................................................................................... 148
B. Definitions- ..................................................................................................................... 148
C. Approach ........................................................................................................................ 148
D. Permitted Uses ............................................................................................................... 148
E. Bulk Table Requirements ................................................................................................ 149
F. Maximum Density and Dwelling Unit Sizes: ................................................................... 149
G. Utilities ............................................................................................................................ 150
H. Parking Requirements..................................................................................................... 150
I. Road/Driveway Standards and Storm Drainage ............................................................. 150
J. Buffer Requirements ...................................................................................................... 150
K. Open Space and Recreation Areas .................................................................................. 150
L. Architectural Review, Lighting and Landscaping ............................................................ 151
M. Handicapped Access ....................................................................................................... 151
N. Bonding ........................................................................................................................... 151
O. Phasing ............................................................................................................................ 151
P. Special Requirements ..................................................................................................... 151
Q. Development Requirements/Evaluation Criteria ........................................................... 152
Section 8.6. Open Space Subdivisions .......................................................................................... 153
A. Findings ........................................................................................................................... 153
B. Purpose ........................................................................................................................... 153
C. Definitions ....................................................................................................................... 153
D. Authority ......................................................................................................................... 154
E. General Eligibility Requirements .................................................................................... 154
F. Application Procedures and Requirements .................................................................... 154
ix
G. Design Process ................................................................................................................ 156
H. Design Standards and Controls ....................................................................................... 157
I. Open Space and Development Restriction ..................................................................... 159
J. Decision of the Planning and Zoning Commission .......................................................... 161
K. Severability ..................................................................................................................... 162
Section 8.7. Wireless Telecommunication Facilities ..................................................................... 163
A. Purpose ........................................................................................................................... 163
B. Definitions ....................................................................................................................... 163
C. Location Preference & Priority ....................................................................................... 164
D. Permitted Uses ............................................................................................................... 164
E. Special Permit Uses ......................................................................................................... 165
F. Site Plan/Application Requirements ............................................................................... 165
G. Tower and/or Antenna Standards .................................................................................. 166
H. Equipment Building Standards ....................................................................................... 167
I. Maintenance Requirements ........................................................................................... 167
J. Factors Upon Which Approval/Denial is Based .............................................................. 167
ARTICLE 9 - PROCEDURES ........................................................ 168
Section 9.1. Site Plan Requirements ............................................................................................. 168
A. Purpose ........................................................................................................................... 168
B. Design Standards ............................................................................................................ 168
C. Minimum Requirements for Submission for Site Plan Approval .................................... 169
D. Applicants Responsibilities ............................................................................................. 171
E. Bonds Required ............................................................................................................... 172
F. Commission Meeting, Hearings and Decisions ............................................................... 172
G. Filing of the Approved Plan and Pertinent Documents on the Land Records ................ 172
H. Additional Requirements and Independent Reviews ..................................................... 173
I. Amendments .................................................................................................................. 173
Section 9.2. Special Permits ......................................................................................................... 174
A. Purpose ........................................................................................................................... 174
B. Minimum Requirements ................................................................................................. 174
C. Documentation Required ............................................................................................... 174
D. Commission Decisions .................................................................................................... 175
E. Public Hearing Required ................................................................................................. 175
Section 9.3. Provisions For Amendment And Zone Change .......................................................... 176
A. Purpose ........................................................................................................................... 176
B. Statutory Requirements ................................................................................................. 176
C. Submissions Required for Regulation Amendment or Zone Change .............................. 176
D. Amendments Initiated by the Commission .................................................................... 177
Section 9.4. Administration And Enforcement ............................................................................. 178
A. Enforcement ................................................................................................................... 178
B. Applications and Fees ..................................................................................................... 178
C. Submissions Required ..................................................................................................... 178
D. Revisions ......................................................................................................................... 178
E. Minimum Accuracy Standards for Maps......................................................................... 178
F. Required Notification...................................................................................................... 179
G. Procedure Upon Approval of Proposal ........................................................................... 179
H. Zoning Certificates of Approval ...................................................................................... 179
I. Certificate of Occupancy ................................................................................................. 179
J. Certificate of Zoning Compliance .................................................................................... 180
x
K. Procedure When Regulations are Violated..................................................................... 180
L. Partial Unconstitutionality .............................................................................................. 180
Section 9.5. Appeals ..................................................................................................................... 181
A. General ........................................................................................................................... 181
B. Prescribed Regulatory Matters ....................................................................................... 181
C. Variances ........................................................................................................................ 181
1
ARTICLE 1 - INTRODUCTION
Section 1.1. Authority
These Regulations are adopted under the authority of Chapter 124 of the General Statutes of the State of Connecticut, as amended.
Section 1.2. Purposes
These Regulations are adopted for the purposes of:
1. Guiding the future growth and development of the Town in accordance with the Plan of Conservation and Development.
2. Providing adequate light, air and privacy; securing safety from fire and other danger; and preventing overcrowding of the land and undue concentration of population.
3. Protecting the character and the historic, social and economic stability of all parts of the Town and ensuring that development is orderly and beneficial.
4. Protecting and conserving the value of land and buildings appropriate to the various zones established by these Regulations and throughout the Town.
5. Bringing about the gradual conformity of the uses of land and buildings to the Comprehensive Zoning Plan set forth in these Regulations and minimizing conflicts among the uses of the land and buildings.
6. Promoting the most beneficial relationship between the uses of land and buildings and the circulation of traffic throughout the Town, having particular regard for the avoidance of congestion in the streets and the provision of safe and convenient vehicular and pedestrian circulation appropriate to the various uses of land and buildings throughout the Town.
7. Aiding in providing a guide for public policy and action in the efficient provision of public facilities and services and for private enterprise in building development, investment, and other economic activity relating to uses of land and buildings throughout the Town.
8. Controlling development to an amount commensurate with the capacity of the land and the availability and capacity of public facilities and services, thereby facilitating adequate provision for vehicular and pedestrian circulation, water, sewerage, schools, parks and other public requirements.
9. Conserving and protecting the natural resources of the Town, especially groundwater and drinking water, in recognition of their importance to the health, safety and general welfare of East Hampton and its larger environs.
10. Assuring that proper provision is made for sedimentation control and the control of erosion caused by wind or water for any project for which a permit is required or sought from the Town.
11. Encouraging the development of housing opportunities, including opportunities for multi-family dwellings, consistent with soil types, terrain and infrastructure capacity, which will promote housing choice and economic diversity in housing, including housing for both low and moderate income households, and encouraging the development of housing which will meet identified housing needs.
2
Section 1.3. Zoning Districts
A. Districts and Boundaries
1. For the purpose of implementing these Regulations and consistent with the provisions of Connecticut General Statutes Chapter 124, Section 8-2, the Town of East Hampton is hereby divided into zoning districts as enumerated in these Regulations.
2. The boundaries of the zoning districts shall be as shown on maps established by the Commission entitled, "Zoning Map of the Town of East Hampton", dated April 20,2018, revised as indicated, on file with the Town Clerk.
3. This map shall be declared to be a part of these Regulations.
B. District Interpretation
1. The water surface and land thereunder and islands, in any lake, pond, brook, stream, wetland or water course shall be subject to the provisions of the regulations of the district in which they are located.
2. Lots which are located in two zones shall be subject to the requirements of the more restrictive zone. (Revised - effective date Aug. 9, 2003)
C. Boundary Interpretation
If not clearly delineated on the Zoning Map, zone district boundaries shall be construed in the following sequence:
1. Following the center line of a street, highway, or railroad.
2. Where such lines are shown to be set back from streets, highways and railroads, they shall be considered parallel thereto and at distances as shown on the Zoning Map.
3. Where zoning district boundaries are shown approximately following property lines, such property lines shall be considered as zone boundaries.
4. Following the lines of a particular physical feature including brooks, streams, floodplains, or steep slopes.
5. In case of uncertainty regarding zone boundaries on the Zoning Map, the zone boundary shall be determined by the Commission.
3
Section 1.4. Interpretation Of Regulations
A. Permitted Uses and Activities
1. These Regulations shall be construed as being permissive in nature.
2. All permitted uses shall be described within these Regulations.
3. All uses not expressly permitted are prohibited.
4. For a principal use permitted by these Regulations, accessory uses which are customarily incidental and are actually subordinate thereto are permitted.
5. In the event of uncertainty as to whether a use or activity is permitted, the Commission shall be responsible for interpreting these Regulations.
B. Minimum Requirements
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of these Regulations shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, convenience and general welfare, unless the context clearly indicates that such provision is intended to be a maximum limitation.
C. In The Event of Conflict
It is not intended that these Regulations repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way impair or interfere with the provisions of any laws, regulations or ordinances, other than those specifically repealed by these Regulations. Where these Regulations impose restrictions upon land, buildings or structures, greater than is imposed by deed, covenant contract or other requirements, the provisions of these Regulations shall control.
Section 1.5. Conformity Required
A. Conformity Required
1. No building, structure or premises shall be erected, altered, raised, moved, placed, reconstructed, extended, enlarged, reduced, demolished, used, occupied, rented, leased, or sold, or shall any lot, parcel, tract or piece of land be used except in conformance with the regulations herein specified for the district, as shown on the official map referred to in Section 1.3, in which it is located.
2. No lot, parcel, tract or piece of land shall be divided, reduced or altered except in conformance with these Regulations.
4
Section 1.6. Administrative Provisions
A. Severability
Should any provision of these Regulations be declared unconstitutional or beyond the powers granted to the Commission by law, such action shall not affect the validity of any other provision or part hereof.
B. When Effective
These Regulations and any amendments hereto shall be effective from and after the effective date established by the Commission.
5
ARTICLE 2 - DEFINITIONS
Section 2.1. Use Of Terms
A. Definitions to be Applied
In the interpretation and enforcement of these Regulations, the words and phrases set forth in these Regulations shall be construed as defined in this Article, unless otherwise clearly qualified by their context.
B. Specific Terms
In the interpretation and enforcement of these Regulations, certain words contained herein shall be interpreted as follows:
1. The word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary.
2. The word "may" is permissive.
3. When not inconsistent with the context:
a. Words in the present tense include the future and vice-versa.
b. Words in the singular include the plural and vice-versa.
c. Words in the masculine include the feminine and vice-versa.
4. The word “lot” shall include the word “plot”.
5. The word “structure” shall include the word “building”.
6. The words "zone", "zoning district", and "district" have the same meaning.
7. The word "person" also includes a partnership, association, trust, corporation or other legal entity.
8. “Filed” shall mean “submitted” and vice-versa.
9. The word “use” and the word “used” refer to:
a. any purpose for which a lot or land or part thereof is arranged, intended or designed to be used, occupied, maintained, made available or offered for use; and
b. any purpose for which a building or structure or part thereof is arranged, intended or designed to be used, occupied, maintained, made available or offered for use, or erected, reconstructed, altered, enlarged, moved or rebuilt, with the intention or design of using the same.
C. Terms Not Defined
In the interpretation and enforcement of these Regulations, words not defined in this Article shall be interpreted by the Commission after consulting one or more of the following:
1. The State Building Code, as amended.
2. The Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
3. The Illustrated Book of Development Definitions (Rutgers University, Center for Urban Policy Research (Piscataway, NJ), as amended.
4. Black's Law Dictionary.
5. A comprehensive widely recognized and accepted dictionary.
6
Section 2.2. Defined Terms
ABANDONMENT – The relinquishment of property, or a cessation of the use of the property, by owner with the intention neither of transferring rights of the property to another owner nor of resuming the use of the property.
ABUT – to physically touch or border upon or to share a common property line. See “adjoining lot or and” and “contiguous”.
ACCESS – A way or means of approach to provide physical entrance to a property.
ACCESSORY– Subordinate and customarily incidental to a principal building or principal use on the same property.
ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT- A dwelling unit with bedroom, kitchen and bathroom facilities created on a building lot that is separate and detached from the principal structure. See “Dwelling, Attached” and “Dwelling, Detached.”
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE – A subordinate structure detached from but located on the same lot as the principal structure, the use of which is incidental and accessory to that of the principal structure.
ACCESSORY USE – A use customarily incidental to the principal use of a building, lot or land, or part thereof.
ACTIVE ADULT – See Section 8.5.
ADDITION – A structure added to the original structure at some time after the completion of the original.
ADJOINING LOT OR LAND – a lot or parcel of land which shares all or part of a common lot line with another lot or parcel of land. See “abut” and “contiguous”.
ADVERTISING DISPLAY – See “sign”.
AGENT - An individual or group specifically authorized to act on behalf of or in the place of that individual or group giving such authorization. Proof of such specific authorization shall be supplied to the Commission and/or administrative staff in all matters as they relate to these Regulations.
AGRICULTURE – the production, keeping or maintenance, for sale, lease or personal use, of plants and animals useful to man, including but not limited to forages and sod crops; grains and seed crops; dairy animals and dairy products, poultry and poultry products; livestock, including beef cattle, sheep, swine, horses, ponies, mules or goats, or any mutations or hybrids thereof, including the breeding and grazing of any or all such animals; bees and dairy products; fur animals; trees and forest products; fruits of all kinds, including grapes , nuts and berries: vegetables.
AISLE – The traveled way by which cars enter and depart parking spaces.
ALTERATION – See Alteration of Building or Structure.
ALTERATION OF BUILDING OR STRUCTURE – Any change in supporting members of a building, except such change as may be required for its safety; any enlargement to a building; or removal of a building from one location to another. Ordinary repairs shall not be deemed to constitute alterations.
ANTENNA - Any system of wires, poles, rods, reflecting discs, or similar devices used for the transmission or reception of electromagnetic waves.
7
APARTMENT - One or more rooms with private bath and kitchen facilities comprising an independent self-contained dwelling unit in a building containing more than two dwelling units.
APPROVED PLAN – A plan which has been granted final approval by the appropriate approving authority.
AQUIFER - A geological unit in which porous and permeable conditions exist and thus capable of yielding usable amounts of water.
AREA OF PRINCIPAL BUILDING – The horizontal area measured around the outside of the foundation walls and of the floors of roofed porches and roofed terraces inclusive.
ASSISTED LIVING FOR THE ELDERLY – See Section 8.5.
ATTIC – That part of a building which is immediately below and wholly or partly within the roof framing. See “story, half”.
AUTOMOBILE – A self-propelled free moving vehicle, with four or more wheels, primarily for conveyance on a street or roadway.
AUTOMOBILE REPAIR - See “motor vehicle repair shop.”
AUTOMOBILE WRECKING YARD – See “junkyard.”
AWNING – A roof-like cover that is temporary in nature and that projects from the wall of a building for the purpose of shielding a doorway or window from the elements.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION – The highest elevation, expressed in feet above sea level, of the level of flood waters occurring in the regulatory base flood.
BASEMENT - A space having ½ or more of its floor-to-ceiling height of not less than 61/2 feet.
BED AND BREAKFAST – an owner occupied dwelling, having 3 or less guest rooms without separate kitchen facilities, in which overnight accommodations and breakfast are provided to travelers for a fee and for not more than 14 days.
BERM – a mound of earth or the act of pushing earth into a mound.
BILLBOARD – See “sign, billboard.”
BOARD OF APPEALS – The Zoning Board of Appeals of the Town of East Hampton.
BUFFER STRIP - Land area used to visibly separate one use from another or to shield or block noise, lights or other nuisances.
BUILDABLE AREA – The area of a lot remaining after the minimum yard and open space requirements of the Zoning Ordinance have been met.
BUILDING – Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls and intended for the shelter, housing or enclosure of any individual, animal, process, equipment, goods or materials of any kind or nature.
BUILDING, ACCESSORY – A subordinate structure on the same lot as the principal or main building or use occupied or devoted to a use incidental to the principal use.
8
BUILDING HEIGHT – The vertical distance of a building measured from the average elevation of the finished grade within 20 feet of the structure to the highest point of the roof. See “height.”
BUILDING LINE – A line parallel to the street line at a distance therefrom equal to the depth of the front yard required for the zoning district in which the lot is located. See “setback line.”
BUILDING PERMIT – Written permission issued by the proper municipal authority for the construction, repair, alteration or addition of a structure.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL – A building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot on which it is located.
BUSINESS SIGN – See “sign, business.”
CAMPGROUND - An area or tract of land on which accommodations for temporary occupancy are located or may be placed, including tents and recreational equipment, and which is primarily used for recreational purposes and retains an open air or natural outdoor character. (See Section 8.4.F, Commercial Recreation)
CARRY-OUT RESTAURANT – An establishment which by design of physical facilities or by service or packaging procedures permits or encourages the purchase of prepared ready-to-eat foods intended primarily to be consumed off the premises and where the consumption of food in motor vehicles on the premises is not permitted or not encouraged.
CELLAR – A space with less than ½ of its floor-to-ceiling height above the average finished grade of the adjoining ground or with floor-to-ceiling height of less than 6 ½ feet.
CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE – A document issued by the proper authority that the plans for a proposed use meets all applicable codes and regulations.
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY - A document issued by the proper authority allowing the occupancy or use of a building and certifying that the structure or use has been constructed or will be used in compliance with all the applicable municipal codes and ordinances.
CHANGE OF USE – Any use which substantially differs from the previous use of a building or land.
CHILD-CARE CENTER – A private establishment enrolling four or more children between two and five years of age and where tuition, fees or other forms of compensation for the care of the children is charged and which is licensed or approved to operate as a child-care center.
CHIMNEY – a structure containing one or more flues for drawing off emissions from stationary sources of combustion.
CHURCH – A building or structure, or groups of buildings or structures, which by design and construction are primarily intended for the conducting of organized religious services and accessory uses associated therewith.
CLUB – A group of people organized for a common purpose to pursue common goals, interests or activities and usually characterized by certain membership qualifications, payment of fees and dues, regular meetings and a constitution and bylaws.
COMMERCIAL USE - Activity carried out for a pecuniary gain.
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE – Any motor vehicle licensed by the state as a commercial vehicle.
9
COMMISSION – The East Hampton Planning and Zoning Commission.
COMMON ELEMENTS – Land amenities, parts of buildings, central services and utilities and any other elements and facilities owned and used by all condominium unit owners and designated in the master deed as common elements.
COMMON INTEREST FACILITIES – A structure within, or part of, the common elements.
CONGREGATE HOUSING – See Section 8.5.
CONDOMINIUM – A building, or group of buildings, in which units are owned individually, and the structure, common areas and facilities are owned by all the owners on a proportional, undivided basis.
CONDOMINIUM ASSOCIATION - The community association which administers and maintains the common property and common elements of a condominium.
CONSERVATION EASEMENT - An easement granting a right of interest in real property that is appropriate to retaining land or water areas predominately in their natural, scenic, open or wooded condition; retaining such areas as suitable habitat for fish, plants or wildlife.
CONTIGUOUS – Next to abutting or touching and having a boundary or portion thereof which is coterminous. See “abut” and “adjoining lot or land.”
CONVALESCING HOME – See “health care facility.”
CONVENIENCE STORE – Any retail establishment offering for sale prepackaged food products, household items and other goods commonly associated with the same and having a gross floor area of less than 2,000 square feet.
COUNTRY INN - an owner occupied or managed building providing short term rentals of not more than 14 guest rooms, with a maximum of two persons per room, without separate kitchen facilities, in which overnight accommodations and meals may be provided for a fee for not more than 30 days.
CURB CUT - The opening along the curb line at which point vehicles may enter or leave the roadway.
DAY CARE CENTER/DAY NURSERY – See “child-care center.”
DENSITY – The number of families, individuals, dwelling units or housing structures per unit of land.
DEVELOPMENT - Any construction or grading activities to improved or unimproved real estate.
DRAINAGE AREA – That area in which all of the surface runoff resulting from precipitation is concentrated into a particular stream.
DRIVE-IN RESTAURANT – A building or portion thereof where food and/or beverages are sold in a form ready for consumption and where all or a significant portion of the consumption takes place or is designed to take place outside the confines of the building, often in a motor vehicle on the site.
DRIVEWAY - A private roadway providing access for vehicles to a parking space, garage, dwelling or other structure.
DUPLEX – See “dwelling, two-family.”
10
DWELLING – A structure or portion thereof which is used exclusively for human habitation.
DWELLING, ATTACHED - A one-family dwelling attached to two or more one-family dwelling by common vertical walls.
DWELLING, DETACHED – A dwelling which is not attached to any other dwelling by any means.
DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY – A dwelling containing more than two dwelling units.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY – A building containing one dwelling unit.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED – A dwelling which is designed for and occupied by not more than one family and surrounded by open space or yards and which is not attached to any other dwelling by any means. See “dwelling, detached.”
DWELLING, TOWNHOUSE – A one-family dwelling in a row of at least three such units in which each unit has its own front and rear access to the outside, no unit is located over another unit, and each unit is separated from any other unit by one or more common fire-resistant walls.
DWELLING, TWO FAMILY - A structure on a single lot containing two dwelling units, each of which is totally separated from the other by an unpierced wall extending from ground to roof or an unpierced ceiling and floor extending from exterior wall to exterior wall, except for a common stairwell exterior to both dwelling units.
DWELLING UNIT – One or more rooms, designed, occupied or intended for occupancy as separate living quarters, with cooking, sleeping and sanitary facilities provided within the dwelling unit for the exclusive use of a single family maintaining a household. See "housing unit.”
DWELLING UNIT, EFFICIENCY - A dwelling unit consisting of not more than one habitable room together with kitchenette and sanitary facilities.
EASEMENT – A grant of one or more of the property rights by the property owner to and/or for the use by the public, a corporation or another person or entity.
EASEMENT, CONSERVATION – An easement precluding future or additional development of the land.
EASEMENT, DRAINAGE – An easement required for the installation of stormwater sewers or drainage ditches and/or required for the preservation or maintenance of a natural stream or watercourse or other drainage facility.
EAVE – The projecting lower edges of a roof overhanging the wall of a building.
EFFICIENCY UNIT – See “dwelling unit, efficiency.”
ELDERLY OCCUPANCY – See Section 8.5.
ENCROACHMENT – Any obstruction in delineated floodway, right-of-way or adjacent land.
ENLARGEMENT - An increase in the size of an existing structure.
EROSION - The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by water, wind, ice or gravity.
11
EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL - (See Section7.7 for Erosion & Sedimentation Control definitions.)
EXISTING GRADE OR ELEVATION – The vertical location of the ground surface prior to excavating or filling.
EXISTING USE - The use of a lot or structure at the time of the enactment of a zoning ordinance.
EXTERIOR WALL - Any wall which defines the exterior boundaries of a building or structure.
FACADE – The exterior wall of a building exposed to public view or that wall viewed by persons not within the building.
FACTORY – A building in which semifinished or finished materials are converted to a different form or state or where goods are manufactured, assembled, treated or processed.
FAMILY – One or more individuals occupying a dwelling unit and living as a single household unit.
FARM - A tract of land primarily used for agricultural uses. (See Agriculture)
FAST-FOOD RESTAURANT - An establishment whose principal business is the sale of pre-prepared or rapidly prepared food directly to the customer in a ready-to –consume state for consumption either within the restaurant building or off premises.
FENCE - Any artificially constructed barrier of any material or combination of materials erected, above grade, to enclose or screen areas of land. Any fence exceeding seven (7) feet in height shall require a building permit before it is installed, and must meet the building setback requirements for the zone in which it is located. (Effective: August 24, 2007)
FINAL APPROVAL – The last official action of the Planning and Zoning Commission taken on a development plan which has been given preliminary approval, after all conditions and requirements have been met, and the required improvements have been installed or guarantees properly posted for their installation, or approval conditioned upon the posting of such guarantees.
FINANCIAL GUARANTEE – Any security that may be accepted by a municipality as a guarantee that improvements required as part of an application for development are satisfactorily completed (i.e. cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or surety bond).
FLAG LOT – A lot fronting on or abutting a public road and where access to the public road is by an access strip at least 25’ wide (see Sec .8.3.F)
FLEA MARKET – An occasional or periodic market held in an open area or structure where groups of individual sellers offer goods for sale to the public.
FLOATING ZONE – An unmapped zoning district where all the zone requirements are contained in the ordinance and the zone is fixed on the map only when an application for development, meeting the zone requirements, is approved.
FLOOD RELATED DEFINITIONS – See Section 3.5 of these Regulations for definitions related to flooding and floodplain related activities.
FLOOR AREA, GROSS – The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of a building measured from the exterior face of exterior walls, or from the center line of a wall separating two buildings, but not including interior parking spaces, loading space for motor vehicles or any space where the floor-to-ceiling height is less than six feet.
12
FRATERNAL ORGANIZATION - A group of people formally organized for a common interest, usually cultural, religious or entertainment, with regular meetings, rituals and formal written membership requirements.
FRONTAGE – That side of a lot abutting on a street; the front lot line.
FRONT LOT LINE – See “lot line, front.”
FRONT YARD – See “yard, front.”
FUNERAL HOME – A building used for the preparation of the deceased for burial and the display of the deceased and ceremonies connected therewith before burial or cremation.
GARAGE – A deck, building or structure, or part thereof, used or intended to be used for the parking and storage of vehicles.
GLARE – The effect produced by brightness sufficient to cause annoyance, discomfort or loss I visual performance and visibility.
GRADE – The degree of rise or descent of a sloping surface.
GRADE, FINISHED - The final elevation of the ground surface after development. See “finished elevation.”
GRADE, NATURAL – The elevation of the ground surface in its natural stated, before man-made alterations.
GROSS FLOOR AREA - See “floor area, gross.”
GROUND COVERAGE – See “lot coverage.”
GROUND FLOOR – The first floor or a building other than a cellar or basement.
HALF STORY – See “story, half.”
HEALTH CARE FACILITY – A medical facility where medical services are dispensed, practiced, or administered (i.e. nursing homes, convalescing homes, doctors’ offices, rehabilitation facilities).
HEIGHT – The vertical distance of a structure measured from the average elevation of the finished grade within 20 feet of the structure to the highest point of the structure. See “building height.”
HISTORIC BUILDING – Any building or structure which is historically or architecturally significant.
HISTORIC PRESERVATION - The protection, rehabilitation and restoration of the district sites, buildings, structures and artifacts significant in American history, architecture, archaeology or culture.
HOME OCCUPATION - An occupation, profession, activity or use that is clearly a customary, secondary and incidental use of a residential dwelling unit which does not alter the exterior of the property or affect the residential character of the neighborhood (effective July 8, 2006).
HOME PROFESSIONAL OFFICE – A home occupation consisting of the office of a practitioner of a recognized profession, provided that not more than two persons are employed who are not members of the family, and that such office shall be in the main building only and shall not occupy more than the equivalent of 50% of the area of the first floor of the principal building. For the purpose of this definition, a “teacher” shall be restricted to a person giving individual instruction in a musical instrument, in singing or in
13
academic or scientific subjects to a single pupil at a time. A home professional office shall not include the office of any person professionally engaged in the purchase or sale of economic goods. Dancing instruction, band instrument or voice instruction in groups, tea rooms, tourist homes, beauty parlors, barber shops, hairdressing and manicuring establishments, real estate offices, convalescent homes, mortuary establishments, travel agencies and stores, trades or businesses of any kind not herein excepted shall not be deemed to be home professional office.
HOSPITAL - An institution providing primary health services and medical or surgical care to persons, primarily inpatients, suffering from illness, disease, injury, deformity and other abnormal physical or mental conditions and including, as an integral part of the institution, related facilities such as laboratories, outpatient facilities or training facilities.
HOTEL – A facility offering transient lodging accommodations to the general public and providing additional services such as restaurants, meeting rooms and recreation facilities. See “boarding house,” “motel,” and “tourist home.”
HOUSEHOLD – A family living together in a single dwelling unit, with common access to and common use of, all living and eating areas and all areas and facilities for the preparation and storage of food within the dwelling unit.
HOUSING FOR THE ELDERLY - See Section 8.5.
HOUSING UNIT – A room or group of rooms used by one or more individuals living separately from others in the structure, with direct access to the outside or to a public hall and containing separate toilet and kitchen facilities. See “dwelling unit.”
IMPERVIOUS COVERAGE – Total area of impervious surface.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE – Any permanent material which reduces and prevents absorption of stormwater into the underlying ground.
INGRESS – Access or entry.
INSTITUTIONAL USE – A nonprofit or quasi-public use or institution such as a church, library, public or private school, hospital or municipally owned or operated building, structure or land used for public purpose.
ISLAND - A land area totally surrounded by water.
ISLAND, PARKING - In parking lot design, built-up structures, usually curbed, place at the end of parking rows as a guide to traffic and also used for landscaping, signing or lighting.
JUNK – Any scrap, waste, reclaimable material or debris, whether or not stored or used in conjunction with dismantling, processing, salvage, storage, baling, disposal or other use in disposition.
JUNKYARD – Any area, lot, land, parcel, building or structure or part thereof used for storage, collection, processing, purchase, sale or abandonment of wastepaper, rags, scrap metal or other scrap or discarded goods, materials, machinery or two or more unregistered, inoperable motor vehicles or other type of junk.
KENNEL - An establishment in which more than six dogs or domesticated animals more than one year old are housed, groomed, bred, boarded, trained or sold.
14
LAND SURVEYOR – One who is licensed by the state as a land surveyor and is qualified to make accurate field measurements and mark, describe and define land boundaries.
LANDSCAPE – An expanse of natural scenery; or the addition of lawns, trees, plants and other natural and decorative features to land.
LEASE – A contractual agreement for the use of lands, structures, buildings or parts thereof for a fixed time and consideration.
LIGHT INDUSTRY – Any operation which assembles, improves, treats, compounds or packages goods or material in a manner which does not create a noticeable amount of noise, dust, odor, smoke, glare or vibration outside of the building in which the activity takes place, which does not require outside storage of goods or materials, and which does not generate (in the opinion of the Planning and Zoning Commission) objectionable amounts of truck traffic (effective July 8, 2006).
LIGHTING – See Section 7.3.
LOADING SPACE - An off-street or berth used for the loading or unloading of commercial vehicles.
LOT – A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by plat, subdivision or as otherwise permitted by law, to be used, developed or built upon as a unit.
LOT AREA – The total area within the lot lines of a lot, excluding and street rights-of way.
LOT, CORNER – A lot or parcel of land abutting upon two or more streets at their intersection, or upon two parts of the same street forming an interior angle of less than 135 degrees. For the purposes of these Regulations, corner lots shall be required to have two fronts and two sides when considering setbacks and yard dimensions. Corner lots shall be required to have required frontage on both streets.
LOT COVERAGE – See Impervious Coverage.
LOT DEPTH - The distance measured from the front lot line to the rear lot line.
LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE - See “lot, through.”
LOT FRONTAGE – The length of the front lot line measured at the street right-of-way line.
LOT LINE - A line of record bounding a lot which divides one lot from another lot or from a public or private street or any other public space.
LOT LINE, FRONT - The lot line separating a lot from a street right-of-way. The lot line or lines most parallel to the street accessed by the lot shall be considered the front line for the purpose of computing setbacks.
LOT LINE, REAR – The lot line opposite and most distant from the front lot line or, in the case of triangular or otherwise irregularly shaped lots, a line 10 feet in length entirely within the lot, parallel to and at a maximum distance from the front lot line.
LOT LINE, SIDE – Any lot line other than a front or rear lot line.
LOT, MINIMUM AREA OF – The smallest lot area established by the Zoning Regulations on which a use or structure may be located in a particular district.
15
LOT OF RECORD – A lot which exists as shown or which is described on a plat or deed in the records of the East Hampton Town Clerk.
LOT WIDTH – The horizontal distance between the side lines of a lot measured at the minimum required building setback line.
MAINTENANCE BOND - Surety provided to the Town, for the purpose of ensuring that public improvements are viable for a period of one year after approval and acceptance by the Town of such improvements.
MALL, PEDESTRIAN - A shaded walk or public promenade;
MANUFACTURING – Establishments engaged in the mechanical or chemical transformation of materials or substances into new products, including the assembling of components parts, the manufacturing of products and the blending of materials such as lubricating oils, plastics, resins or liquors.
MOBILE HOME – A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is at least eight feet in width and 32 feet in length, which is built on a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities.
MOBILE HOME PARK – A site with required improvements and utilities for the long term parking of mobile homes which may include services and facilities for the residents.
MOTEL – As establishment providing transient accommodations containing six or more rooms with at least 25% of all rooms having direct access to the outside without the necessity of passing through the main lobby of the building.
MOTOR FREIGHT TERMINAL – A building or area in which trucks, including tractor or trailer units, are parked, stored or serviced, including the transfer, loading or unloading of goods. A terminal may include facilities for the temporary storage of loads prior to transshipment.
MOTOR VEHICLE REPAIR SHOP – Any building, place or location that is used or designed to be used for making repairs to motor vehicles by a “repairer,” as defined in chapter 245, Section 14-51, of the General Statutes, as amended.
MULTIFAMILY DWELLING – See “dwelling, multifamily.”
NATURAL GRADE – See “grade, natural.”
NON-CONFORMING LOT – A lot, the area, dimensions or location of which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of the Zoning Regulations, but which fails by reason of such adoption, revision or amendment to conform to the present requirements of the zoning district.
NON-CONFORMING SIGN – Any sign lawfully existing on the effective date of an ordinance, or an amendment thereto, which renders such sign nonconforming because it does not conform to all the standards and regulations of the adopted or amended Regulations.
NON-CONFORMING STRUCTURE OR BUILDING – A structure or building the size, dimensions or location of which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment to a zoning regulation but which fails, be reason of such adoption, revision or amendment, to conform to the present requirements of the zoning district.
NON-CONFORMING USE – A use or activity which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of a zoning regulation but which fails , by reason of such adoption, revision or amendment to conform to the present requirement of the zoning district.
16
NURSERY SCHOOL – See “child-care center.”
NURSING HOME – See “health care facility.”
OFFICE – A room or group of rooms used for conducting the affairs of a business, profession, service, industry or government.
OFF SITE – located outside the lot lines of the lot in question but within the property (of which the lot is a part) that is the subject of a development application, or within a contiguous portion of a street or other right-of-way.
OFF-STREET PARKING SPACE – a temporary storage area for a motor vehicle that is directly accessible to an access aisle and which is not located on a dedicated street right-of-way.
ON SITE – Located on the lot that is the subject of an application for development.
ON-STREET PARKING SPACE – A temporary storage area for a motor vehicle which is located on a dedicated street right-of-way.
PARAPET – The extension of the main walls of a building above the roof level.
PARCEL – A lot or tract of land.
PARKING AREA – Any public or private land area designed and used for parking motor vehicles, including parking lots, garages, private driveways and legally designated areas of public streets. See “garage.”
PARKING AREA, PRIVATE – A parking area for the private use of the owners or occupants of the lot on which the parking area is located.
PARKING AREA, PUBLIC – A parking area available to the public, with or without compensation, or used to accommodate clients, customers or employees.
PARKING ISLAND – See “island, parking.”
PARKING LOT – An off-street, ground level area, usually surfaced and improved, for the temporary storage of motor vehicles. See “garages” and “parking area.”
PARKING SPACE - A space for the parking of a motor vehicle within a public or private parking area. See “off-street parking space” and “on-street parking space.”
PATH – A cleared way for pedestrians and/or bicycles which may or may not be paved.
PATIO – See “terrace.”
PEDESTRIAN MALL – See “mall, pedestrian.”
PERIMETER – The boundaries or borders of a lot, tract or parcel of land.
PERMITTED USE - Any use allowed in a zoning district and subject to the restrictions applicable to that zoning district.
PERSONAL SERVICES- Establishments primarily engaged in providing services involving the care of a person or his or her apparel.
17
PERVIOUS SURFACE - Any material that permits full or partial absorption of storm water into the underlying ground.
PLOT - A single unit parcel of land that can be identified and referenced to a recorded plat or map.
PLOT PLAN - A plan, accurately depicting the dimensions of a lot and the existing uses and buildings thereon. Plot plans shall be prepared to a level of accuracy in compliance with A2 standards unless specifically allowed by designated agencies requiring such plan(s).
PORCH – A roofed open area which may be glazed or screened, usually attached to or part of and with direct access to or from a building.
PREMISES – A lot, parcel, tract or plot of land together with the buildings and structures thereon.
PRINCIPAL– The primary or predominate use, activity, or structure existing or being undertaken.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING – See “building, principal.”
PRINCIPAL USE – The primary or predominate use of any lot.
PROFESSIONAL OFFICE - The office of a member of a recognized profession maintained for the conduct of that profession. See “home professional office.”
PROPERTY LINES – See “lot line.”
PUBLIC UTILITY – A closely regulated private enterprise with an exclusive franchise for providing a public service.
PUBLIC UTILITY FACILITIES – Telephone, electric and cable television lines, poles equipment and structures; water or gas pipes, mains, valves or structures: sewer pipes, valves or structures, pumping stations; telephone exchanges and repeater stations; and all other facilities, equipment and structures necessary for conducting a service by a government or public utility.
REAR LOT – See Flag Lot.
REAR YARD – See “yard, rear.”
RECREATION, ACTIVE – Leisure time activities, usually of a more formal nature and performed with others. Often requiring equipment and taking place at prescribed places, sites or fields.
RECREATION FACILITY – A place designed and equipped for the conduct of sports, leisure-time activities and other customary and usual recreational activities.
RECREATION, PASSIVE - Any leisure-time activity not considered active.
RELIGIOUS USE - A structure or place in which worship, ceremonies, rituals and education pertaining to a particular system of beliefs are held.
REPAIR GARAGE – See “motor vehicle repair shop.”
RESIDENTIAL DENSITY – The number of dwelling units per acre of residential land.
18
RESTAURANT – An establishment where food and drink are prepared, served and consumed primarily within the principal building. See “carry-out restaurant,” “drive-in restaurant,” “fast-food restaurant” and “retail food establishment.”
RETAIL FOOD ESTABLISHMENT – Any fixed or mobile place or facility at or in which food or drink is offered or prepared for retail sale or for service with or without charge on or at the premises or elsewhere.
RETAIL SERVICES – See “services, retail.”
RETAINING WALL – A structure constructed to hold back or support an earthen bank.
REUSE – A use for an existing building or parcel of land other than for which it was originally intended.
REZONE – To change the zoning classification of particular lots or parcels of land.
RIDING ACADEMY – An establishment where horses are boarded and cared for and where instruction in riding, jumping and showing is offered and the general public may, for a fee, hire horses for riding.
ROAD – See “street.”
ROOF – The outside top covering of a building.
ROOF, FLAT – A roof which is not pitched and the surface of which is parallel to the ground.
ROOF, GABLE – A ridged roof forming a gable at both ends of the building.
ROOF, GAMBREL - A gabled roof with two slopes on each side, the lower steeper than the upper.
ROOF, HIP – A roof with sloping ends and sides.
ROOF, MANSARD – A roof with two slopes on each of four sides, the lower steeper than upper.
ROOF, SHED – A roof with one slope.
SCHOOL – A public, private, or vocational institution for education.
SCREENING - A method of visually shielding or obscuring one abutting or nearby structure or use from another by fencing, walls, berms or densely planted vegetation: or
SERVICES – Establishments primarily engaged in providing services for individuals, business and government establishments and other organizations including hotels and other lodging places; establishments providing personal, business, repair and amusement services; health, legal, engineering and other professional services; educational institutions; membership organizations, and other miscellaneous services.
SERVICES, RETAIL– Establishments providing services or entertainment, as opposed to products, to the general public including eating and drinking places, hotels and motels, finance, real estate and insurance, personal services, motion pictures, amusement and recreation services, health, educational and social services, museums and galleries.
SETBACK – The distance between the street right-of –way line and the front line of a building or any project thereof, excluding uncovered steps.
19
SETBACK LINE – That line that is the required minimum distance from the street right-of –way line or any other line that establishes the area within which the principal structure must be erected or placed. See “building line.”
SHOPPING CENTER – A group of commercial establishments planned, constructed and managed as a total entity with customer and employee parking provided on site, provision for goods delivery separated from customer access, aesthetic consideration and protection from the elements.
SIDE YARD – See “yard, side.”
SIDEWALK – A paved, surface or leveled area, paralleling and usually separated from the street, used as a pedestrian walkway.
SIGN – Any object, devise, display or structure, or part thereof, situated outdoors or indoors, which is used to advertise, identify, display, direct or attract attention to an object, person, institution, organization, business, product, service, event or location by any means, including words, letters, figures, design, symbol, fixtures, colors, illumination or projected images.
SIGN AREA – The entire face of a sign, including the advertising surface and any framing, trim or molding, but not including the supporting structure.
SIGN, DIRECTIONAL – Signs limited to directional messages, principally for pedestrian or vehicular traffic, such as “one-way,” “entrance” and “exit.”
SIGN, GROUND – Any sign placed upon or supported by the ground independent of any other structure.
SIGN, REAL ESTATE – A sign pertaining to the sale or lease of the premises, or a portion of the premises, on which the sign is located.
SIGN, TEMPORARY – A sign or advertising display designed or intended to be displayed for a short period of time.
SIGN, WALL – A sign fastened to or painted on the wall of a building or structure in such a manner that the wall becomes the supporting structure for or forms the background surface of the sign.
SIGN, WINDOW – A sign that is applied to the exterior or interior of a window or located in such manner within a building that it can be seen from the exterior or the structure through a window.
SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING - See “dwelling, single–family.”
SITE – Any plot or parcel of land or combination of contiguous lots or parcels of land.
SITE PLAN – The development plan for one or more lots on which is shown the existing and proposed conditions of the lot, including topography, vegetation, drainage, floodplains, mashes and waterways; open spaces, walkways, means of ingress and egress, utility services, landscaping, structures and signs, lighting and screening devices; any other information that reasonably may be required in order that an informed decision can be made by the approving authority.
SLOPE – The degree of deviation of a surface from the horizontal, usually expressed in percent or degrees. See “grade.”
SOLID WASTE – Unwanted or discarded material, including garbage with insufficient liquid content to be free flowing.
20
SPECIAL PERMIT – An approval process whereby the Commission may allow a use or activity in a particular location upon the applicant demonstrating that such use will conform to all applicable criteria and standards as specified in these Regulations.
STEEP SLOPE – Land areas where the slope exceeds 20%.
STORM SEWER – A conduit that collects and transports runoff.
STORY – That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or, if there be no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it and including those basements used for the principal use.
STORY, HALF – A space under a sloping roof which has the line of intersection of the roof and wall face not more than three feet above the floor level and in which space the possible floor area with head room of five feet or less occupies at least 40% of the total floor area of the story directly beneath.
STREET – Any vehicular way which is an existing state, county or municipal roadway; or is shown upon a plat approved pursuant to law; or is approved by other official action: or is shown on a plat duly filed and recorded in the office of the county Recording Officer prior to the appointment of a Planning Board and the grant to such board of the power to review plats: and includes the land between the street lines, whether improved or unimproved.
STREET, ARTERIAL - A street which provides for traffic flow and capacity between communities and regions.
STREET, COLLECTOR – Street which collects traffic from local streets and connects with arterial streets.
STREET FURNITURE – Man-made, above-ground items that are usually found in street rights-of-way, including benches, plants, canopies, shelters and phone booths.
STREET LINE - See “right-of-way lines.”
STREET, LOCAL – A street designed to provide vehicular access to abutting property and to discourage through traffic.
STRUCTURE – A combination of materials to form a construction for use, occupancy or ornamentation, whether installed on, above or below the surface of land or water. See “building”
SUBDIVISION – The division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land for sale, development or lease.
SURVEY - The process of precisely ascertaining the area, dimensions and location of piece of land.
SWIMMING POOL - A water-filled enclosure, permanently constructed or portable, having a depth of more than eighteen inches below the level of the surrounding land or an above-surface pool, having a depth of more than thirty inches, designed, used and maintained for swimming and bathing.
TEMPORARY HEALTH CARE STRUCTURE – A transportable residential structure that provides an environment in which a caregiver may provide care for a mentally or physically impaired person as defined in Public Act 17-155.
THEATER - A building or part of a building devoted to showing motion picture or for dramatic, musical or live performances.
21
TOPOGRAPHY - The configuration of a surface area showing relative elevations.
TOURIST HOME – See “bed-and-breakfast.”
TRACT – An area, parcel, site, piece of land or property which is the subject of a development application.
TRANSITIONAL USE- A land use of an intermediate intensity between a more intensive and less intensive use.
TRIP – A single or one-way vehicle movement either to or from a subject property or study area.
UNDEVELOPED LAND – Land in its natural state before development.
UPPER CONNECTICUT RIVER CONSERVATION ZONE - Area of East Hampton, shown on the Zoning Map, under the authority of the Connecticut River Assembly with regard to certain development rights as described by Connecticut General Statutes Sec. S 25-102aa. - S25-102jj.
USE – The purpose or activity for which land or buildings are designed, arranged or intended or for which land or buildings are occupied or maintained.
USE, ACCESSORY – See “accessory use.”
USE, EXISTING – See “existing use.”
USE, INSTITUTIONAL – See “institutional use.”
USE, PERMITTED – See “permitted use.”
USE, PRINCIPAL – See “principal use.”
USE, RELIGIOUS – See “religious use.”
USE, TRANSITIONAL – See “transitional use.”
VARIANCE – Permission to depart from the literal requirements of the Zoning Regulations.
WAREHOUSE – A building used primarily for the storage of goods and materials.
WATERCOURSE – As defined in Section 22a-38 of the Connecticut General Statutes (Chapter 440).
WATERSHED – The area drained by a given stream, river or lake.
WETLANDS – As defined in Section 22a-38 of the Connecticut General Statutes (Chapter 440).
YARD – An open space that lies between the principal or accessory building or buildings and the nearest lot line. Such yard is unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward except as may be specifically provided in the zoning regulation. See “buildable area,” “lot line,” “yard depth” and “yard line.”
YARD DEPTH – The shortest distance between a lot line and a yard line.
YARD, FRONT – A space extending the full width of the lot between any building and the front lot line and measured perpendicular to the building at the closest point to the front lot line. Such front yard is unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward except as may be permitted elsewhere in the ordinance.
22
YARD LINE – A line drawn parallel to a lot line at a distance therefrom equal to the depth of the required yard.
YARD, REAR – A space extending across the full width of the lot between the principal building and the rear lot line and measured perpendicular to the building to the closest point of the rear lot line. Such rear yard is unoccupied and unobstructed front eh ground upward except as may be permitted elsewhere in the ordinance.
YARD, REQUIRED – The open space between a lot line and the buildable area within which no structure shall be located except as provided in the Zoning Regulations.
YARD, SIDE – A space extending from the front yard to the rear yard between the principal building and the side lot line measured perpendicular from the side lot line to the closest point of the principal building. Such side yard is unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward except as may be permitted elsewhere in the ordinance.
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS – See “board of appeals.”
ZONING Certificate of Approval – A document signed by the Zoning Enforcement Officer which is required as a condition precedent to the commencement of a use or the erection, construction, reconstruction, restoration, alteration, conversion or installation of a structure or building, which acknowledges that such use, structure or building complies with the provisions of the Zoning Regulations or an authorized variance therefrom.
23
ARTICLE 3 - RESOURCE PROTECTION ZONES
Section 3.1. Lake Pocotopaug Protection Zone
A. Purpose
This regulation is intended to provide special protection to all land included in the watershed of Lake Pocotopaug and to help reduce the negative environmental effects of development within the watershed area.
B. Scope
1. All uses within the Lake Pocotopaug Protection Zone requiring Subdivision, Site Plan or Special Permit approval shall be subject to this regulation.
2. A public hearing will be required for all applications under this Section.
3. All proposals shall show that specific and adequate measures have been taken to.
a. Reduce erosion and sedimentation during and after construction.
b. Promote the removal of sediments and nutrients in stormwater.
c. Limit the area of disturbance.
d. Avoid slopes in excess of 20%.
e. Protect native vegetation.
f. Ensure that post development peak rates and volume of stormwater runoff do not exceed predevelopment levels.
g. Promote infiltration of stormwater.
h. Protect native wildlife.
i. Provide adequate open space.
j. Reduce the effort required to maintain systems proposed, (road drainage, septic systems, landscaping, etc.) to increase the likelihood of proper maintenance.
k. Ensure that the proposed development is compatible with the surrounding area.
l. Preserve scenic ridgelines and other natural features.
4. The following are some techniques recommended in the design of proposals in this zone.
a. Use of slotted or perforated pipe.
b. Use of vegetated swales in lieu of piped drainage.
c. Use of stormwater recharge basins.
d. Treatment of first flush. Systems should be capable of treating the first 1" runoff.
e. Use of Universal Soil Loss equation.
f. Environmental Impact Statements.
g. Use of porous pavements.
h. Use of check dams energy dissipaters.
i. Use of bioengineered mulches, mats and rolls.
j. Avoidance of steep slopes.
k. Referral of proposal to SCS, DEEP, etc.
l. Investigation of native wildlife.
m. Recreational impacts statement.
n. Rationale for open space proposed.
o. Use of phasing to minimize disturbed area.
p. Use of contract limit lines (plans & field).
24
C. Additional Requirements.
1. All proposals within the Lake Pocotopaug Protection Zone shall be subject to all provisions of Section 9.1 (Site Plan), Section 9.2 (Special Permit), or Subdivision, as applicable, and all relevant regulations, codes and laws. (Effective: October 15, 2007)
2. The Commission may request any such information it deems necessary to make their determination regarding any application, in addition to and exclusive of materials submitted to the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Agency and the Conservation Commission, or any other review entity. (Effective: September 1, 1996).
3. In cases where the Commission decides that the development may have significant impact on Lake Pocotopaug, the applicant shall contact the Town Planner to make arrangements with the Town’s Lake Consultant to review the proposed development and comment as to its effect on the lake.
a. The cost of Consultant shall be paid by the Applicant.
b. The consultant shall forward the report to the Town Planner who shall then forward it to the Planning and Zoning Commission. (Effective: May 19, 2007).
25
Section 3.2. Upper Connecticut Conservation Zone
A. Purpose
This regulation is intended to provide special protection to all land located within in Upper Connecticut River Conservation Zone and to help reduce the negative environmental effects of development within that area.
B. Referral of Land Use Applications
1. Whenever the East Hampton Planning and Zoning Commission receives an application for any of the following land uses for land that is located within the Upper Connecticut River Conservation Zone, the Commission shall forward a copy of the application to the Connecticut River Assembly (CGS Chapter 477) for information, review, comments, and recommendations:
a. Business Uses: Any use of land for commercial, business, retail, or office use; or any combination thereof that requires a land area of more than seven and one-half (7.5) contiguous acres, a change of zone of more than seven and one-half contiguous acres, or a building floor area of more than 75,000 square feet.
b. Industrial Uses: Any industrial or manufacturing use that requires a land area of more than ten (10) contiguous acres, a change of zone of more than ten (10) contiguous acres, or the employment of more than 250 employees.
c. Residential Uses: Any residential use that requires more than 25 contiguous acres, a change of zone of more than 25 contiguous acres, or includes more than 50 dwelling units
d. Municipal or Institutional Uses: Any municipal or institutional use that requires a land area of more than fifteen (15) contiguous acres.
e. Public Service Uses: Any project that is submitted by a public service company for municipal approval and includes proposed land use of ten (10) acres or more.
f. Parking Area: Any use having 100 or more parking spaces.
g. Hazardous Waste Facilities: Any hazardous waste facility, as defined in Section 22a-115 of the General Statutes of Connecticut, as amended.
h. Solid Waste Facilities: Any solid waste facility, as defined in Section 19-524a of the General Statutes of Connecticut, as amended.
i. Petroleum Facilities: Any oil refinery or bulk fuel oil storage facility.
j. Any bridge, dam or hydropower facility.
k. Power Lines: Any electric transmission line of a design capacity of 69 kilovolts or more.
l. Quarry Operations: Any soil and earth material removal operation involving 15,000 cubic yards of material or five (5) contiguous acres of land area.
2. The application shall be forwarded not later than 35 days before:
a. a public hearing, if a public hearing is required or scheduled, or
b. a decision is made on the application, if no public hearing is required or scheduled.
C. Assembly and Commission Action
1. The Assembly, upon receiving a copy of the application, may prepare and submit written comments concerning the regional impact of the proposed land use. The lack of comment by the Assembly shall not be considered in a negative or affirmative manner.
2. The Commission shall read any comments submitted by the Assembly into the record of any public hearing or public meeting held on the application.
3. Comments provided by the Assembly shall be advisory except that a two-thirds vote of all the members of the Commission shall be required to approve an application which has received a negative comment from the Assembly. (Effective date June 21, 2001)
26
Section 3.3. Aquifer Protection Overlay Zone
A. Purpose
The purpose of this regulation is to protect the aquifers likely to be used as the source of the Town's public water supply from the potentially adverse effects of development which might reduce both the quality and the quantity of this vital resource. This regulation exists to protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens, both present and future, of the Town of East Hampton.
B. Establishment and Delineation of Boundary
The Aquifer Protection Area shall be all land so designated on the East Hampton Zoning Map, described in Section 1.3, and this area shall include primary and secondary recharge areas as measured from data established by the United States Geological Survey. This area may be revised by the Commission after a public hearing in accordance with Sec. 8-3 of the Connecticut General Statutes. Within the boundaries, as described above, no land shall be used, treated, sprayed or otherwise altered except in conformance with this Section and all other regulations applicable to such use.
C. Uses Permitted As Of Right
1. The following uses are permitted in the Aquifer Protection Area as of right.
a. Single family dwellings in accordance with the applicable provisions of the zone in which they exist.
b. Accessory uses and structures, incidental and subordinate to the primary single family use and in accordance with Section 8.3.I.
c. Parking in accordance with Section 7.1.
D. Uses Permitted By Special Permit
1. The following uses are permitted in the Aquifer Protection Area as Special Permit Uses when specifically approved by the Commission in accordance with Section 9.2 and when consistent with the permitted uses found in these Regulations for the zone in which the parcel is located.
a. Business offices
b. Professional offices
c. Retail stores
d. Financial institutions
e. Public utility structures
f. Personal service shops
g. Fire and Police Stations and other municipal uses and buildings
h. Accessory uses incidental and subordinate to a permitted use in accordance with Section 8.3.I
i. Parking in accordance with Section 7.1
j. Signs in accordance with Section 7.2, for a permitted use, when carried out on the same premises.
2. In considering an application for a Special Permit under this regulation, the Commission shall evaluate the immediate and long range impact of the proposed use on the ground water and the possible effects of the proposed use upon the maintenance of safe and healthful conditions. In making such an evaluation, the Commission shall carefully consider such factors as:
a. the amount and types of wastes to be generated and the efficacy of the disposal provisions,
b. the capability of the land and water to sustain such use without degradation,
c. the topography of the area as it relates to flooding and drainage, and
d. the compatibility of the proposed use with the goals of the Commission with regard to land use.
27
3. The Planning and Zoning Commission, in approving an application for a Special Permit in the Aquifer Protection Area, may impose such reasonable restrictions concerning setbacks of buildings and structures, the cumulative quantity of potential pollutants to be permitted in the Aquifer Protection Area, and like matters as it deems advisable to protect its resources.
E. Special Provisions
1. On-site sanitary waste discharge shall not exceed the equivalent discharge from one single family dwelling per two (2) acres.
2. Underground storage of fuels shall be prohibited.
3. All special permit uses under Section 3.3.D shall be served by public sewer.
28
Section 3.4. Salmon River Protection Zone
A. Purpose
The purpose of this regulation is to secure the immediate vicinity of the Salmon River as it courses within or touches upon the boundaries of the Town, from the detrimental effects of unsuitable development or intense land uses.
B. Delineation of Area
The Salmon River Protection Zone is as shown on the Zoning Map of the Town of East Hampton, as described in Section 1.3, and encompasses those areas bounded on the west by Young Street, Tartia and Wopowog Roads, on the north, by Markham Road, on the east by Route 16, Waterhole Road and the eastern Town border at Colchester, and on the south by the Town's border at Haddam, East Haddam and Colchester.
C. Special Provisions for the Salmon River Protection Zone
1. The minimum lot size shall be one hundred thousand (100,000) sq. ft. (effective date Jan. 12, 2004)
2. A five hundred (500') foot setback, measured from the high water line of the Salmon River, shall be maintained. Any development or use, including single family dwellings, in this five hundred (500') foot setback shall:
a. be by Special Permit only,
b. be allowed by Section 7.4, and
c. be specifically approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission in accordance with Section 9.2.
D. Special Provisions
1. Development within five hundred (500') feet of the high water line of the Salmon River cannot contain land having slopes greater than twenty (20%) percent.
2. Driveways within five hundred (500') feet of the high water line of the Salmon River shall not exceed ten (10%) percent slopes.
3. Activity proposed within one hundred fifty (150') feet of wetlands and watercourses within this area regulated by this Section shall be by Special Permit only and in accordance with the Inland Wetlands and watercourses Regulations (effective date 12/6/03).
29
Section 3.5. Floodplain Overlay Zone
A. Statutory Authorization
The Legislature of the State of Connecticut has in Title 7, Chapter 98, Section 7-148(c)(7)(A) and in Title 8, Chapter 124, Section 8-2 of the General Statutes delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the East Hampton Planning & Zoning Commission of the Town of East Hampton, Connecticut, does ordain as follows:
B. Finding Of Fact
The flood hazard areas of the Town of East Hampton are subject to periodic flood inundation which results in the loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare.
These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in the floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy in flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods or hazards to other lands which are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damage. Uncontrolled development and use of the floodplains can adversely affect the community.
The Town of East Hampton has voluntarily participated in the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) since October 16, 1979. The NFIP is founded on a mutual agreement between the federal government and each participating community. Local, state and federal governments must share roles and responsibilities to meet the goals and objectives of the NFIP. The community’s role is of paramount importance. Property owners are able to receive federally-subsidized flood insurance only if the community enacts and enforces the minimum floodplain regulations required for participation in the NFIP.
C. Statement Of Purpose
It is the purpose of this regulation to regulate floodplain development, promote public health, safety, and general welfare, and minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
1. To protect human life and health, and prevent damage to property;
2. To minimize expenditure of public funds for costly flood control projects;
3. To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
4. To minimize prolonged business interruptions and other economic disruptions;
5. To minimize damage to public facilities, infrastructure and utilities, such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, and streets and bridges, located in the floodplain;
6. To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood hazard areas in such a manner as to minimize flood damage and flood blight areas;
7. To insure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood hazard area;
8. To prevent increase in flood heights that could increase flood damage and result in conflicts between property owners;
9. To ensure that those who occupy the flood hazard areas assume responsibility for their actions; and
10. To discourage development in a floodplain if there is any practicable alternative to locate the activity, use or structure outside of the floodplain.
30
D. Objectives
In order to accomplish its purposes, this regulation includes objectives, methods and provisions that:
1. Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to flood or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
2. Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities that serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction;
3. Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers that are involved in the accommodation of flood waters;
4. Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase erosion or flood damage; and
5. Prevent or regulate the construction of barriers or obstructions which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands.
E. Definitions
The words defined below shall apply to this Section of the Regulations. Unless specifically defined below, words and phrases used in this Section of the Regulations shall have the same meaning as they have in common usage and to give this regulation its most reasonable application.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING (for a community with AO or AH Zones only) - A designated AO, AH, AR/AO, AR/AH, or VO zone on a community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a one percent or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
BASE FLOOD – The flood having a one (1) percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, also referred to as the one hundred (100) year flood, as published by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) as part of a Flood Insurance Study (FIS) and depicted on a Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM).
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) – The elevation of the crest of the base flood or 100-year flood. The height in relation to mean sea level expected to be reached by the waters of the base flood at pertinent points in the floodplains of coastal and riverine areas.
BASEMENT – Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.
BUILDING – see definition for “Structure”.
LOST – As related to substantial improvements, the cost of any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, alteration, repair or other improvement of a structure shall be established by a detailed written contractor’s estimate. The estimate shall include, but not be limited to: the cost of materials (interior finishing elements, structural elements, utility and service equipment); sales tax on materials, building equipment and fixtures, including heating and air conditioning and utility meters; labor; built-in appliances; demolition and site preparation; repairs made to damaged parts of the building worked on at the same time; contractor’s overhead; contractor’s profit; and grand total. Items to be excluded include: cost of plans and specifications, survey costs, permit fees, outside improvements such as septic systems, water supply wells, landscaping, sidewalks, fences, yard lights, irrigation systems, and detached structures such as garages, sheds, and gazebos.
DEVELOPMENT – Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to the construction of buildings or structures; the construction of additions, alterations or substantial
31
improvements to buildings or structures; the placement of buildings or structures; mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment; the storage, deposition, or extraction of materials; and the installation, repair or removal of public or private sewage disposal systems or water supply facilities.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION – A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured home are to be affixed (including, as a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION – The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufacturing homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY (FEMA) - The federal agency that administers the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP).
FINISHED LIVING SPACE – Fully enclosed areas below the base flood elevation (BFE) that are not considered a basement cannot have finished living space and needs to be designed to be exposed to flood forces. These spaces can only to be used for parking, building access or limited storage. Finished living space can include, but is not limited to, a space that is heated and/or cooled, contains finished floors (tile, linoleum, hardwood, etc.), has sheetrock walls that may or may not be painted or wallpapered, and other amenities such as furniture, appliances, bathrooms, fireplaces and other items that are easily damaged by floodwaters and expensive to clean, repair or replace.
FLOOD OR FLOODING – A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from either the overflow of inland or tidal waters, or the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) – The official map of a community on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has delineated both the special flood hazard areas (100-year floodplain) and the insurance risk premium zones applicable to a community. FIRM published after January 1990 may also show the limits of the regulatory floodway.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) – The official study of a community in which the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has conducted a technical engineering evaluation and determination of local flood hazards, flood profiles and water surface elevations. The Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM), which accompany the FIS, provide both flood insurance rate zones and base flood elevations, and may provide the regulatory floodway limits.
FLOODWAY – The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one (1.0) foot. For the purposes of these regulations, the term “Regulatory Floodway” is synonymous in meaning with the term “Floodway”.
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE OR FACILITY – A use or facility that cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities. The term does not include seafood processing facilities, long-term storage, manufacturing, sales or service facilities.
32
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE (HAG) – The highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE – Any structure that is: (a) Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; (b) Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historic significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; (c) Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or (d) Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: (1) By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or (2) Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
LOWEST FLOOR – The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building’s lowest floor, provided that such an area meets the design requirements specified in Section 3.5.F.4.b.1 of this regulation.
MANUFACTURED HOME – A structure, transportable in one (1) or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term also includes park trailers, travel trailers, recreational vehicles and other similar vehicles or transportable structures placed on a site for one hundred and eighty (180) consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION – A parcel or contiguous parcels of land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
MARKET VALUE – The market value of the structure shall be determined by (an independent appraisal by a professional appraiser; the property’s tax assessment, minus land value; the replacement cost minus depreciation of the structure; the structure’s Actual Cash Value) prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring.
MEAN SEA LEVEL (MSL) – The North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) are referenced.
NEW CONSTRUCTION – Structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after October 16, 1979, the effective date of the floodplain management regulations, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION – A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date, October 16, 1979, of the floodplain management regulation adopted by the community.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE – A vehicle which is: (a) built on a single chassis; (b) four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; (c) designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and (d) designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as a temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA) – The land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one (1) percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. SFHAs are determined utilizing the base flood elevations
33
(BFE) provided on the flood profiles in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for a community. BFEs provided on Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) are only approximate (rounded up or down) and should be verified with the BFEs published in the FIS for a specific location. SFHAs include, but are not necessarily limited to, the land shown as Zones A, A1-30, AE, AO, AH, and the Coastal High Hazard Areas shown as Zones V, V1-30, and VE on a FIRM. The SFHA is also called the Area of Special Flood Hazard.
START OF CONSTRUCTION – For other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (P.L. 97-348), includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, substantial improvement or other improvement was within one hundred and eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erections of temporary forms; not does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE – A walled and roofed building which is principally above ground, including a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank, or other man-made facilities or infrastructures.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE – Damage of any origin sustained by a structure, whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its pre-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT – Any combination of repairs, reconstruction, rehabilitation, alterations, additions or other improvements to a structure, taking place during a ten (10) year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure as determined at the beginning of such ten (10) year period. This term includes structures that have incurred “substantial damage”, regardless of the actual repair work performed. For purposes of this definition, “substantial improvement” is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however, include either: (1) Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or (2) Any alteration of a “historic” structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a “historic structure”.
VARIANCE - A grant of relief by a community from the terms of the floodplain management regulation that allows construction in a manner otherwise prohibited and where specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship.
VIOLATION – Failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community’s floodplain management regulation. A structure or other development without required permits, lowest floor elevation documentation, flood-proofing certificates or required floodway encroachment calculations is resumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
WATER SURFACE ELEVATION – The height, in relation to the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas.
34
F. Administration
1. Designation Of The Local Administrator - The Planning and Zoning Official is hereby appointed to administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this regulation.
2. Certification - Where required under this regulation, a Connecticut registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions of this regulation. Such certification must be provided to the Planning and Zoning Official.
3. Establishment Of The Flood Management Section Of The East Hampton Building and/or Zoning Certificate of Approval - The flood management section of the East Hampton Building and/or Zoning approval must be completed in conformance with the provisions of this regulation prior to the commencement of any development activities. Permits issued under this regulation shall expire if actual construction of a permitted structure does not commence within one hundred and eighty (180) days of the permit approval date.
4. Permit Application Procedures - A Building Permit and/or Zoning Certificate of Approval is hereby established for all construction and other development to be undertaken in Special Flood Hazard Areas in this community. Prior to any development activities, application for a Building Permit and/or Zoning Certificate of Approval shall be made to the Planning and Zoning Official on forms provided and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing, at a minimum, the property lines and location of the parcel; the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in question; limit and extent of the 100-year floodplain and/or floodway boundary and base flood elevation(s); existing and proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities and the location of the foregoing. Specifically, the following information is required to be submitted to the Planning and Zoning Official:
a. Application Stage: The applicant shall provide at least the following information, where applicable. Additional information may be required on the permit application form.
1. Base flood elevation (BFE) for the site in question as determined in the FEMA Flood Insurance Study (FIS) or Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). The FIS flood profiles provide more accurate BFE data than the FIRM. The extent of the 100-year floodplain and floodway must be depicted with a boundary line on any site plans and shown in relation to existing and proposed structures or development;
2. Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the proposed lowest floor, including basement, of all new construction, substantial improvements or repairs to structures that have sustained substantial damage;
3. Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any non-residential new construction, substantial improvements or repair to structures that have sustained substantial damage will be dry flood-proofed;
4. Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development. Computations by a licensed professional engineer must be submitted that demonstrate that the altered or relocated segment will provide equal or greater conveyance than the original stream segment. The applicant must submit any maps, computations or other materials required by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in order to officially amend or revise the Flood Insurance Rate Map. The applicant must pay any fees or other costs assessed by FEMA for this purpose. The applicant must also provide assurances that the conveyance capacity of the altered or relocated stream segment will be maintained;
5. A statement and supporting documentation (all costs of project, market value of structure, etc.) verifying that the proposed alterations to an existing structure meets or does not meet the criteria of the substantial improvement and/or substantial damage definition. If a development meets the definition of substantial improvement and/or substantial damage, the structure must be brought into compliance with all floodplain regulations as if it was new construction;
35
6. Where applicable the following certifications by a Connecticut registered engineer or architect are required, and must be provided to the Planning and Zoning Official. The design and methods of construction must be certified to be in accordance with accepted standards of practice and with the provisions of Section 3.5.H.
a. Non-residential flood-proofing must meet the provisions of Section 3.5.H.3.2.b;
b. Fully enclosed areas below the base flood elevation (BFE) must meet the minimum design criteria in Section 3.5.H.3.3;
c. No (0.00) increase in floodway water surface elevations are allowed. Any development in a floodway must meet the provisions of Section 3.5.H.3.c;
b. Construction Stage: Upon completion of the applicable portion of construction, the applicant shall provide verification to the Planning and Zoning Official of the following as is applicable:
1. Lowest floor elevation shall be verified for:
a. A structure in Zones A, AE, A1-30, AO or AH is the top of the lowest floor (including basement);
b. A non-residential structure which has been dry flood-proofed is the elevation to which the flood-proofing is effective (Note: For insurance purposes, a dry flood-proofed, non-residential structure is rated based on the elevation of its lowest floor unless it is floodproofed to one foot above the BFE.);
c. Deficiencies detected by the review of the above listed shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being permitted to proceed. Failure to submit the survey or failure to make said corrections required hereby shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project.
5. Duties And Responsibilities Of The Local Administrator - Duties of the Planning and Zoning Official shall include, but not be limited to:
a. Review all permit applications for completeness, particularly with the requirements of Section 3.5.H.
b. Review all permit applications to determine whether the proposed development and building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding.
c. Review all development permits to assure that the permit requirements of this regulation have been satisfied.
d. Review all permit applications to assure that all necessary federal or state permits have been received. Require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file with the permit application. Such permits include, but are not limited to, Stream Channel Encroachment Line (SCEL) Permit, Coastal Area Management (CAM) Permit, Water Diversion Permit, Dam Safety Permit, and Army Corps of Engineers 401 and 404 Permits.
e. Notify the regional planning agency and affected municipality at least thirty-five (35) days prior to a public hearing if any change of regulation or use of a flood zone will affect an area within five hundred (500) feet of another municipality.
f. Notify the adjacent communities and the Department of Energy and Environmental Protection (DEEP), Land and Water Resources Division, prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
g. Assure that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood carrying capacity is not diminished.
h. Obtain record and maintain the elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new construction, substantial improvements or repair to a structure that has sustained substantial damage.
i. Obtain, record and maintain the elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which the new construction, substantial improvement or repair to a structure that has sustain substantial damage has been flood-proofed.
j. When flood-proofing is utilized for a particular structure, the Planning and Zoning Official shall obtain certification from a registered professional engineer or architect, in accordance with Section 3.5.H.3.2.b.
36
k. Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the area of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the Planning and Zoning Official shall make necessary interpretation. The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this regulation.
l. Require the applicant to provide base flood elevation data for all proposed development, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions.
m. When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with Section 3.5.G and Section 3.5.H.2, the Planning and Zoning Official shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source in order to administer the provisions of Section 3.5.
n. All records pertaining to the provisions of this regulation shall be obtained and maintained in the office of the Planning and Zoning Official.
Upon completion of the permitted development and prior to issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy (CO), necessary as-built surveys (prepared by a Connecticut Licensed Professional as per Connecticut State Statutes) and engineering and architectural certifications shall be provided to the Planning and Zoning Official demonstrating compliance with the approved plans and standards set forth in Section 3.5.
G. General Provisions
1. Areas To Which This Regulation Applies - This regulation shall apply to all Special Flood Hazard Areas (SFHA) within the Town of East Hampton.
2. Basis For Establishing The Special Flood Hazard Areas (SFHA) - The Special Flood Hazard Areas (SFHA) identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in its Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for the Town of East Hampton, dated August 28, 2008, and accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM) and/or Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps (FBFM), dated August 28, 2008, and other supporting data, and any subsequent revisions thereto, are adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this regulation. Since mapping is legally adopted by reference into this regulation it must take precedence when more restrictive until such time as a map amendment or map revision is obtained from FEMA.
3. Delineation Of Special Flood Hazard Areas (SFHA) - The SFHA includes any area shown on the FIRM as Zones A, A1-30, AE, AO, and AH, including areas designated as a floodway on a FIRM or FBFM. SFHAs are determined utilizing the base flood elevations (BFE) provided on the flood profiles in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for a community. BFEs provided on Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) are only approximate (rounded up or down) and should be verified with the BFEs published in the FIS for a specific location. Also included are areas of potential, demonstrable or historical flooding, including any area contiguous with but outside the SFHA identified by FEMA, and where the land surface elevation is lower than the base flood elevation (BFE) as shown in the FIS, and the area is not protected from flooding by a natural or man-made feature. The FIRM, FBFM and FIS are on file in the Building, Planning & Zoning Department, Town of East Hampton Ct. 06424
4. Structures Already In Compliance - A structure or development already in compliance with this regulation shall not be made non-compliant by any alteration, modification, repair, reconstruction or improvement and must also comply with other applicable local, state, and federal regulations. No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted, modified or structurally altered without full compliance with the terms of this regulation and other applicable regulations.
5. Abrogation And Greater Restrictions - This regulation is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this regulation and another ordinance, regulation easement, covenant or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
6. Interpretation - In the interpretation and application of this regulation, all provisions shall be: 1) considered as minimum requirements; 2) liberally construed in favor of the governing body, and; 3) deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under State statutes.
37
7. Warning And Disclaimer Of Liability - The degree of flood protection required by this regulation is considered the minimum reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering consideration and research. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This regulation does not imply or guarantee that land outside the Special Flood Hazard Area or uses permitted in such areas will be free from flooding and flood damages. This regulation shall not create liability on the part of the Town of East Hampton or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this regulation or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. The Town of East Hampton, its officers and employees shall assume no liability for another person’s reliance on any maps, data or information provided by the Town of East Hampton.
8. Severability - If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this regulation should be declared invalid for any reason whatsoever, such decision shall not affect the remaining portions of this regulation, which shall remain in full force and effect; and to this end the provisions of this regulation are hereby declared to be severable.
H. Provisions For Flood Hazard Reduction
1. General Standards - In all Special Flood Hazard Areas (SFHAs) the following provisions are required:
a. New construction, substantial improvements, and structures that have sustained substantial damage shall be constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
b. New construction, substantial improvements, and structures that have sustained substantial damage shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment that are flood-damage resistant and conform to the provisions of FEMA Technical Bulletin 2, Flood Damage-Resistant Material Requirements. This includes, but is not limited to, flooring, interior and exterior walls, wall coverings and other materials installed below the base flood elevation plus one (1.0) foot.
c. New construction, substantial improvements, and structures that have sustained substantial damage shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.
d. New construction, substantial improvements, and repairs to structures that have sustained substantial damage shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.
e. New construction, substantial improvements and repair to structures that have sustained substantial damage cannot be constructed or located entirely or partially over water unless they are a functionally dependent use or facility.
f. The bottom of all electrical, heating, plumbing, ventilation and air conditioning equipment, appliances, fixtures and components, HVAC duct work and duct systems, and any other utility service equipment, facilities, machinery, or connections servicing a structure shall be elevated one (1.0) foot above the base flood elevation (BFE). This includes, but is not limited to, furnaces, oil or propane tanks, air conditioners, heat pumps, hot water heaters, ventilation duct work, washer and dryer hook-ups, electrical junction boxes, and circuit breaker boxes. Systems, fixtures, equipment and components shall not be mounted on or penetrate through breakaway walls intended to fail under flood loads. Connections or other equipment that must be located below the BFE plus 1.0 foot elevation are permitted only when no other elevation alternative is available and provided they are designed and installed to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components and to resist hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and stresses, including the effects of buoyancy, during the occurrence of the base flood event. Electrical wiring systems that must be located below the BFE plus 1.0 foot shall conform to the standards for wet locations.
g. New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system.
h. New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system and discharges from the system into flood waters.
38
i. On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
k. Underground tanks shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse and lateral movement under conditions of the base flood. Above-ground storage tanks which are located outside or inside of a structure must be elevated one (1.0) foot above the base flood elevation (BFE) or shall be securely anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement under conditions of the base flood. Where elevated on platforms, the platforms shall be cantilevered from or knee braced to the building or shall be supported on elevated foundations that conform to the standards for the particular flood zone as described in Section 5.3. Anchored tanks must have the top of the fill pipe located at least one (1.0) foot above the BFE and have a screw fill cap that does not allow for the infiltration of flood water.
l. In any portion of a watercourse that is altered or relocated, the flood carrying capacity must be maintained. Notify adjacent communities and the Connecticut Department of Energy and Environmental Protection (DEEP), Land and Water Resources Division prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse.
m. If any portion of a structure lies within the Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA), the entire structure is considered to be located within the SFHA and must meet the construction requirements of the flood zone. The structure includes any structurally attached additions, garages, decks, porches, sunrooms, patios or any other structure attached to the main structure.
n. If a structure lies within two or more flood zones, the construction standards of the most restrictive zone apply to the entire structure (i.e., VE zone is more restrictive than AE zone; structure must be built to the highest BFE). The structure includes any structurally attached additions, garages, decks, porches, patios, sunrooms, or any other structure attached to the main structure.
o. Compensatory Storage. The water holding capacity of the floodplain, except those areas which are tidally influenced, shall not be reduced. Any reduction caused by filling, new construction or substantial improvements involving an increase in footprint to the structure, shall be compensated for by deepening and/or widening of the floodplain. Storage shall be provided on-site, unless easements have been gained from adjacent property owners; it shall be provided within the same hydraulic reach and a volume not previously used for flood storage; it shall be hydraulically comparable and incrementally equal to the theoretical volume of flood water at each elevation, up to and including the 100-year flood elevation, which would be displaced by the proposed project. Such compensatory volume shall have an unrestricted hydraulic connection to the same waterway or water body. Compensatory storage can be provided off-site if approved by the municipality.
p. Equal Conveyance. Within the floodplain, except those areas which are tidally influenced, as designated on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for the community, encroachments resulting from filling, new construction or substantial improvements involving an increase in footprint of the structure, are prohibited unless the applicant provides certification by a registered professional engineer demonstrating, with supporting hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice, that such encroachments shall not result in any (0.00 feet) increase in flood levels (base flood elevation). Work within the floodplain and the land adjacent to the floodplain, including work to provide compensatory storage shall not be constructed in such a way so as to cause an increase in flood stage or flood velocity.
2. Standards For Watercourses Without Established Base Flood Elevations (Un-Numbered A Zone), Adopted Floodways And/or Flood Mapping
a. The Planning and Zoning Official shall require base flood elevation (BFE) data be provide with any application for new construction, substantial improvement, repair to structures which have sustained substantial damage or other development in Zone A without a FEMA-published BFE (un-numbered A Zone). A registered professional engineer must determine the BFE in accordance with accepted hydrologic and hydraulic engineering practices and document the technical methods used. Studies, analyses and computations shall be submitted in sufficient
39
detail to allow thorough review and approval. The Planning and Zoning Official shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any BFE and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, including data developed for subdivision proposals, as criteria for requiring that new construction, substantial improvements, repair to structures which have sustained substantial damage or other development in un-numbered A Zones on the community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) meet the standards in Section 3.5.H.2.If no BFE can be determined, the lowest floor, including basement, must be elevated to two (2) feet above the highest adjacent grade next to the structure.
b. When BFEs have been determined within Zones A1-30 and AE on the community’s FIRM but a regulatory floodway has not been designated, the Planning and Zoning Official must require that no new construction, substantial improvements, repair to structures which have sustained substantial damage or other development, including fill, shall be permitted which will increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one (1.0) foot at any point within the community when all existing and anticipated development is considered cumulatively with the proposed development.
c. The Planning and Zoning Official may request floodway data of an applicant for watercourses without FEMA-published floodways. When such data is provided by an applicant or whenever such data is available from any other source (in response to the municipality’s request or not), the community shall adopt a regulatory floodway based on the principle that the floodway must be able to convey the waters of the base flood without increasing the water surface elevation more than one (1.0) foot at any point within the community.
d. The Planning and Zoning Official shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any BFE and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, as criteria for requiring that new construction, substantial improvements, repair to structures which have sustained substantial damage or other development in any area of potential, demonstrable or historical flooding within the community meet the standards in Section 3.5.
e. Under the provisions of 44 CFR Chapter 1, Section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations, a community may approve certain development in Zones A1-30, AE, AH, on the community’s FIRM which increases the water surface elevation of the base flood by more than one (1.0) foot, provided that the community first completes all of the provisions required by Section 65.12.
3. Specific Standards
a. Construction Standards in Special Flood Hazard Areas (SFHA), Zones A, A1-30, AE.
1. Residential Construction - All new construction, substantial improvements, and repair to structures that have sustained substantial damage which are residential structures shall have the bottom of the lowest floor, including basement, elevated one (1.0) foot above the base flood elevation (BFE). Electrical, plumbing, machinery or other utility equipment that service the structure must be elevated one (1.0) foot above the BFE.
2. Non-Residential Construction - All new construction, substantial improvements, and repair to structures that have sustained substantial damage which are commercial, industrial or non-residential structures shall:
a. Have the bottom of the lowest floor, including basement, elevated one (1.0) foot above the base flood elevation (BFE); or
b. In lieu of being elevated, non-residential structures may be dry flood-proofed to one (1) foot above the BFE provided that together with all attendant utilities and sanitary facilities the areas of the structure below the required elevation are watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and provided that such structures are composed of structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy. A Connecticut registered professional engineer or architect shall review and/or develop structural design specifications and plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with acceptable standards of practice for meeting the provisions of this Section. Such
40
certification shall be provided to the Planning and Zoning Official on the FEMA Floodproofing Certificate, Form 81-65.
c. The bottom of all electrical, plumbing, machinery or other utility equipment that service the structure must be elevated one (1.0) foot above the BFE.
3. Fully Enclosed Areas Below The Base Flood Elevation Of Elevated Buildings. All new construction, substantial improvements, or repair to structures that have sustained substantial damage, whether residential or non-residential, that include fully enclosed areas formed by a foundation and other exterior walls shall have the lowest floor elevated to one (1.0) foot above the base flood elevation (BFE). The elevated building shall be designed to preclude finished living space below the lowest floor and be designed to allow for the entry and exit of flood waters to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls (wet flood-proofing). Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect as meeting the requirements of ASCE 24 Section 2.6.2.2, or meet the following minimum criteria listed in sections (a)-(h) below:
a. Provide a minimum of two (2) openings (hydraulic flood vents) having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every one square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding. The enclosed area is measured on the exterior of the enclosure walls. These hydraulic openings must be located on at least two different exterior walls of each enclosed area. If the structure has more than one enclosed area, openings must be installed in the exterior walls of each enclosed area so that flood waters can enter directly from the outside;
b. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one (1.0) foot above the higher of either the final interior grade or floor elevation, or the finished exterior grade adjacent to the outside of the foundation wall. At least one side of the structure’s fully enclosed area must be at or above grade. Fill placed around the foundation walls must be graded so that the elevation inside the enclosed area is equal to or higher than the adjacent outside elevation on at least one side of the building. The finished floor of the enclosed area shall be no lower than the bottom of the foundation openings. The foundation slab of a residential structure, including the slab or a crawlspace, must be set equal to the outside finished grade on at least one side of the building;
c. The openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic entry and exit of flood waters in both directions without any external influence or control such as human intervention, including the use of electrical and other non-automatic mechanical means. These coverings must not block or impede the automatic flow of floodwaters into and out of the enclosed area. Other coverings may be designed and certified by an a registered professional engineer or approved by the Planning and Zoning Official;
d. Openings shall not be less than three (3) inches in any direction in the plane of the wall;
e. The area cannot be used as finished living space. Use of the enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary and shall only be used for the parking of vehicles, building access or limited storage. Access to the enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to allow for the parking of vehicles (garage door) or limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises (standard exterior door) or entry to the living area (stairway or elevator). The enclosed area shall not be used for human habitation;
f. All interior walls, floor, and ceiling materials located below one (1.0) foot above the BFE shall be unfinished and resistant to flood damage-resistant in accordance with FEMA Technical Bulletin 2, Flood Damage-Resistant Requirements.
41
g. Electrical, plumbing, HVAC ductwork, machinery or other utility equipment and connections that service the structure (including, but not limited to, furnaces, oil or propane tanks, air conditioners, heat pumps, hot water heaters, ventilation, washers and dryers hook-ups, electrical junction boxes, circuit breaker boxes and food freezers) are prohibited in the fully enclosed area below the BFE plus one (1.0) foot. Utilities or service equipment located in this enclosed area, even if elevated one (1.0) foot above the BFE in the space, will subject the structure to increased flood insurance rates.
h. A residential building with a structurally attached garage having the floor slab below the BFE is considered an enclosed area below the BFE and must meet the standards of Sections 3.5.H.3.3 (a)-(g). A garage attached to a residential structure, constructed with the garage floor slab below the BFE, must be designed to allow for the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters in both directions. Flood openings or vents are required in the exterior walls of the garage or in the garage doors. The human intervention necessary to open garage doors when flooding occurs is not an acceptable means of meeting the openings requirements. Garage doors that must be manually opened do not meet the flood vent opening requirements in Section 3.5.H.3.3 (a)-(c) In addition to the automatic entry of floodwaters, the areas of the garage below BFE plus one (1.0) foot must be constructed with flood damage-resistant materials per the requirements of FEMA Technical Bulletin 2. Garages attached to non-residential structures must also meet the aforementioned requirements or be dry floodproofed as per the requirements of Section 3.5.H.3.2.
b. Manufactured (Mobile) Homes and Recreational Vehicles (RVs).
1. In all Special Flood Hazard Areas (SFHA), any manufactured (mobile) homes to be newly placed, undergoing a substantial improvement or repaired as a result of substantial damage, shall be elevated so that the bottom of the frame is located one (1.0) foot above the base flood elevation (BFE). The manufactured home must also meet all the construction standards per Section 3.5.H.3. The foundation and anchorage of manufactured homes to be located in floodways shall be designed and constructed in accordance with ASCE24. This includes SFHAs outside a manufactured home park or subdivision, in a new manufactured home park or subdivision, in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, or on a site in an existing park which a manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as a result of a flood.
2. All manufactured (mobile) homes within a SFHA shall be placed on a permanent foundation which itself is securely anchored and to which the structure is securely anchored so that it will resist flotation, lateral movement and hydrostatic pressures. Anchoring may include, but not be limited to, the use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors.
3. All manufactured (mobile) homes within a SFHA shall be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood damage. Adequate access and drainage should be provided. Elevation construction standards include piling foundations placed no more than ten (10) feet apart, and reinforcement is provided for piers more than six (6) feet above ground level.
4. Recreational vehicles placed on sites within a SFHA shall either (i) be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days, and (ii) be fully licensed and ready for highway use, OR (iii) meet all the general standard of Section 3.5 and the elevation and anchoring requirement of Section 3.5.H.3.b.1, 3.5.H.3.b.2, and 3.5.H.3.b.3 . A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions.
c. Floodways:
1. Located within Special Flood Hazard Areas (SFHA) are areas designated as floodways on the community’s Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM) or Flood Boundary and Floodway
42
Maps (FBFM). Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of flood waters which carry debris, potential projectiles and has erosion potential, no encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, repairs to substantially damaged structures and other developments shall be permitted unless certification, with supporting technical data, by a Connecticut licensed professional engineer is provided demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any (0.00 feet) increase in flood levels during occurrence of the base flood discharge published by FEMA. Buildings and structures meeting the standard above and located in whole or in part in the floodway shall be designed and constructed in accordance with ASCE 24.
2. Fences in the floodway must be aligned with the flow and be of an open design.
3. A permit may be given which allows encroachments resulting in increases in base flood elevations provided the community first obtains a conditional floodway revision by meeting the requirements of C.F.R. 44, Chapter 1, Subsection 65.12.
d. Standards for Development in Areas of Shallow Flooding (Zones AO and AH) - Located within the Special Flood Hazard Areas (SFHA) are areas designated as shallow flooding areas (AO and AH Zones). These areas have flood hazards associated with base flood depths of one (1) to three (3) feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist and where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate. In AO and AH zones, the following provisions apply:
1. For residential structures, all new construction, substantial improvements and repair to structures that have sustained substantial damage shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as one (1.0) foot above the depth number specified on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM. If no depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three (3.0) feet above the highest adjacent grade.
2. For non-residential structures, all new construction, substantial improvements and repair to structures that have sustained substantial damage shall:
a. Have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as one (1.0) foot above the depth number specified on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). If no depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three (3.0) feet above the highest adjacent grade; or
b. Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be completely flood- proofed to above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as one (1.0) foot above the depth number specified on the FIRM, or if no depth number is specified at least three (3.0) feet above the highest adjacent grade, so that any space below that level is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. Designs for complying with this requirement must be certified by either a Connecticut licensed professional engineer or architect.
3. On-site drainage for all proposed structures in AO and AH Zones located on slopes shall provide adequate drainage paths to guide flood waters around and away from such structures.
4. Fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor in AO and AH Zones must comply with the provisions of Section 3.5.H.3.3 for hydraulic flood vents.
I. Design Standards For Subdivision Proposals
If a proposed subdivision, including the placement of a manufactured home park or subdivision, is located in a Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA) the following requirements shall apply:
43
1. All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;
2. All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage;
3. All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards; and
4. The Planning & Zoning Official shall require the applicant to provide BFE data for all subdivision proposals, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions, as per Section 3.5.F.5.l. In all special flood hazard areas where base flood elevation (BFE) data is not available, the applicant shall provide a hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analysis performed by a Connecticut licensed professional engineer that generates BFEs for all subdivision proposals and other proposed development, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions. The Planning and Zoning Official shall require the applicant to provide BFE data for all subdivision proposals, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions, as per Section 3.5.I.
J. Variance Procedures
1. Establishment Of Variance Process
a. The Zoning Board of Appeals, as established by the Town of East Hampton, shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of this regulation.
b. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision or determination made by the Planning and Zoning Official in the enforcement or administration of this regulation.
c. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals or any person owning land which abuts or is within a radius of one hundred (100) feet of the land in question may appeal within fifteen (15) days after such decision to the State Superior Court of Middlesex County, as provided in Section 8-8 of the General Statutes of Connecticut.
d. The Planning and Zoning Official shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) upon request.
2. Specific Situation Variances
a. Buildings on a Historic Register - Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places, the State Inventory of Historic Places, or any locally-adopted historic district without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this Section and provided the proposed reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration will not result in the structure losing its historical designation.
b. Functionally Dependent Use or Facility - Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements and other development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use or facility provided the structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage, creates no additional threat to public safety, and meets all the requirements of Section 9.5.C.
c. Floodway Prohibition - Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
3. Considerations For Granting Of Variances - In passing upon such applications, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all standards specified in other sections of this regulation and the items listed below as 9.5.C. Upon consideration of these factors and the purposes of this regulation, the Zoning Board of Appeals may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this regulation.
a. The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;
b. The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
c. The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
d. The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community;
e. The necessity of the facility to waterfront location, in the case of a functionally dependent facility;
44
f. The availability of alternative locations not subject to flooding or erosion damage for the proposed use;
g. The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;
h. The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area;
i. The safety access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;
j. The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the flood waters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and
k. The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, and streets and bridges.
4. Conditions For Variances
a. Variances shall only be used upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary to afford relief considering the flood hazard; and in the instance of a historical building, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building and result in the loss of historic designation of the building. Variances pertain to a piece of property and are not personal in nature. A properly issued variance is granted for a parcel of property with physical characteristics so unusual that complying with the regulation would create an exceptional hardship to the applicant or the surrounding property owners. Those characteristics must be unique to that property and not be shared by adjacent parcels. For example, economic or financial hardship is not sufficient cause for a variance, nor are inconvenience, aesthetic considerations, physical handicaps, personal preferences or disapproval of one’s neighbors.
b. Variances shall only be used upon (i) a showing of good and sufficient cause, (ii) a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship, and; (iii) a determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, damage the rights or property values of other persons in the area, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws, ordinances or regulations. Only hardships that are based on unusual or unique physical characteristics of the property in question, characteristics that are not shared by adjacent parcels, shall qualify to meet subsection (ii) above. Claims of hardship based on the structure, on economic gain or loss, or on personal or self-created circumstances are not sufficient cause for the granting of a variance.
c. No variance may be issued within a regulatory floodway that will result in any increase in the 100-year flood levels. A variance may be issued for new construction, substantial improvements and other development necessary for the conduct of a “functionally dependent use” provided that there is good and sufficient cause for providing relief; and the variance does not cause a rise in the 100-year flood level within a regulatory floodway. The structure and other development must be protected by methods that minimize flood damages.
d. Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with the lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation (BFE) and the elevation, and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the lowest floor elevation.
K. Enforcement
1. Each Building Permit and/or Zoning Certificate of Approval shall authorize, as a condition of approval, the Planning and Zoning Official or designated agents to make regular inspections of the subject property. The Planning and Zoning Official or designated agents are also authorized to inspect any property in a Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA) where it appears that violations of these regulations may be taking place.
45
2. If the Planning and Zoning Official finds that any person is undertaking any construction, substantial improvement, filling, or any other activity or maintaining a condition which is in violation of these regulations, the Planning and Zoning Official shall:
a. Issue a written order by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the subject property owner, ordering that the activity cease and ordering the property owner to either obtain a Building Permit and/or Zoning Certificate of Approval prior to continuing with the activity or, if appropriate, ordering that all violations and/or obstructions be removed from the Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA) immediately.
b. Notify the Building Official and request that any building and or zoning Certificate of Approval(s) in force be revoked or suspended and that a stop work order be issued.
c. The Planning and Zoning Official may suspend or revoke a Floodplain Development approval if it is found that the applicant has not complied with the terms, conditions or limitations set forth in the approval or has exceeded the scope of work as set forth in the application including application plans. Prior to revoking any approval, the Planning and Zoning Official shall issue notice to the applicant, personally or by certified mail, return receipt requested, setting forth the facts or conduct which warrants the intended action.
d. Failure to comply with any written order issued under this Section shall be considered a violation of these regulations and is subject to the penalties described in Section 9.4.
e. In the event violations or obstructions are not promptly removed from the Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA), the Planning and Zoning Official may cause such removal and remediation work to be performed utilizing bond money held in escrow pursuant to Section 9.4 of this regulation, or may direct the director of public works or appropriate agent to cause such work to be done and to place a lien against the property.
f. Any person subjected to enforcement action pursuant to this regulation, may appeal any requirement, decision, or determination of the Planning and Zoning Official to the Zoning Board of Appeals, in accordance with Section 9.5 of this regulation. Such person shall provide such information as necessary including appropriate certifications from a registered professional engineer or architect in order to substantiate the claim that the requirement, decision, or determination of the Planning and Zoning Official was in error or unwarranted.
L. Penalties For Violation
Any violation of the provisions of this regulation or failure to comply with any of its requirements, including violation of conditions and safeguards established in connection with grant of variances or special permits, shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this regulation or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined a penalty of $250.00 per day [or imprisoned for not more than ten (10) days for each day of violation, or both,] and in addition shall pay all costs and reasonable legal fees involved in the case. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Town of East Hampton from taking such lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
46
This page intentionally left blank
47
ARTICLE 4 - RESIDENTIAL ZONES
Section 4.1. R-1 Zone – Lakeside and Village Residential
A. Purpose
The primary purpose of this zone is to provide for residential use in the most established areas of town, principally in and around the Town central areas and in the immediate vicinity of Lake Pocotopaug. This area encompasses the major portion of the Town with lot sizes less than one (1) acre.
B. Uses Permitted As-Of-Right
The following uses are permitted in the R-1 Zone as of right:
1. Detached single family dwellings.
2. Dwellings for two families in accordance with the provisions of Section 4.6.
3. Accessory uses and buildings incidental and subordinate to a permitted residential use (Accessory buildings shall comply with Section 8.3.I).
4. Keeping of domestic livestock in accordance with Section 8.4.C.
5. Parking in accordance with Section 7.1.
6. Signs in accordance with Section 7.2.
7. Agricultural uses as described in Section 8.4.C.
8. Temporary Health Care Structure in accordance with Section 4.6.D and Public Act 17-155.
C. Uses Permitted With Site Plan Review
The following uses are permitted in the R-1 Zone following site plan review as described in Section 9.1:
1. Buildings used for the storing, processing and manufacture of site grown agricultural products and livestock as an accessory use of a farm
2. Buildings used for the storage of farm equipment and motor vehicles, when such equipment and vehicles are used in connection with the operation of such farm
D. Uses Permitted With Special Permit
The following are Special Permit uses, permitted in the R-1 Zone only when specifically approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission in accordance with the provisions of Section 9.2:
1. Uses providing essential community services including, but not limited to the following:
a. Fire or Police stations or other Municipal buildings
b. Public Utility buildings, structures or utility substations.
c. Schools.
d. Parks, playgrounds or public recreation areas.
e. Libraries, churches, museums or auditoriums.
f. Cemeteries and their extensions.
g. Hospitals.
2. Roadside stands for the seasonal sale of farm produce and products grown or produced on the parcel on which they stand. Such stands shall be located no closer than fifty (50') feet from any street or lot line.
3. Active Adult, congregate and Senior Housing, as defined and described in Section 8.5 (revised – effective date Dec. 6, 2003)
4. Commercial recreation as defined and described in Section 8.4.F.
5. Conversions of existing single family dwellings for use as two family dwellings in accordance with the provisions of Section 9.2 and the following requirements:
a. Building must have been built prior to 1941.
48
b. The existing building must contain at least two thousand (2000) square feet of habitable space.
c. The proposal shall be such that no exterior evidence of multi-family use shall be visible.
d. All applications for approval shall include:
1. Photographs of the existing building from all sides
2. Plans and exterior details of proposed conversion
3. Adequate parking in accordance with Section 7.1
4. Adequate provisions for water supply and sewage disposal
6. Accessory Dwelling Units in accordance with Section 8.4.M.
E. Area and Dimensional Standards
With Sewer Without Sewer
Minimum Lot Area (square feet)
20,000
60,000
Minimum Lot Width (feet)
125
150
Minimum Lot Depth (feet)
125
200
Minimum Lot Frontage (feet)
100
100
Maximum Lot Coverage (percent)
20%
10%
Minimum Front Setback (feet)
25
50
Minimum Side Setback (feet)
15
25
Minimum Rear Setback (feet)
25
50
Maximum Building Height (feet)
30
30
49
Section 4.2. R-2 Zone – Single Family Residential
A. Purpose
The purpose of this zone is to provide primarily for single family residential uses in those areas of the Town which have been predominately developed with single family dwellings and to provide a transition of density between those areas which shall remain rural in nature, due to environmental and topographical concerns (R-3 and R-4) and those areas more densely settled (R-1 Zone).
B. Uses Permitted As-Of-Right
The following uses are permitted in the R-2 Zone as of right:
1. Detached Single family dwellings
2. Accessory uses and buildings incidental and subordinate to a permitted residential buildings shall comply with Section 8.3.I
3. Keeping of domestic livestock in accordance with Section 8.4.C
4. Parking in accordance with Section 7.1
5. Signs in accordance with Section 7.2
6. Agricultural uses as defined in Section 8.4.C
7. Temporary Health Care Structure in accordance with Section 4.6.D and Public Act 17-155.
C. Uses Permitted With Site Plan Review
The following uses are permitted in the R-2 Zone following site plan review as described in Section 9.1:
1. Buildings used for the storing, processing and manufacture of site grown agricultural products and livestock as an accessory use of a farm.
2. Buildings used for the storage of farm equipment and motor vehicles, when such equipment and vehicles are used in connection with the operation of such a farm.
D. Uses Permitted With Special Permit
The following are Special Permit uses, permitted in the R-2 Zone only when specifically approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission in accordance with the provisions of Section 9.2:
1. Uses providing essential community services including, but not limited to the following:
a. Fire or Police stations or other Municipal buildings
b. Public Utility buildings, structures or utility substations
c. Public and Parochial schools
d. Parks, playgrounds or public recreations areas
e. Libraries, churches, museums or auditoriums
f. Cemeteries and their extensions
g. Hospitals.
2. Roadside stands for the seasonal sale of farm produce and products grown or produced on the parcel on which they stand. Such stands shall be located no closer than fifty (50') feet from any street or lot line.
3. Commercial recreation as defined and described in Section 8.4.F
50
E. Area and Dimensional Standards
With Sewer Without Sewer
Minimum Lot Area (square feet)
40,000
60,000
Minimum Lot Width (feet)
150
150
Minimum Lot Depth (feet)
175
200
Minimum Lot Frontage (feet)
100
100
Maximum Lot Coverage (percent)
10%
10%
Minimum Front Setback (feet)
50
50
Minimum Side Setback (feet)
25
25
Minimum Rear Setback (feet)
50
50
Maximum Building Height (feet)
30
30
51
Section 4.3. R-3 Zone – Resource Residential
A. Purpose
The purpose of this zone is to provide primarily for one and two family residences in those areas of Town associated with resources requiring preservation and/or protection. This zone is focused on major resources encompassing but not limited to:
1. The Pine Brook Aquifer area (See Also Sec. 8)
2. The north and west Lake Pocotopaug watershed areas not presently served by public sewer
B. Uses Permitted As-Of-Right
The following uses are permitted in the R-3 Zone as of right:
1. Detached single family dwelling units
2. Dwellings for two families in accordance with the provisions of Section 4.6.
3. Accessory uses and buildings incidental and subordinate to a permitted residential use (Accessory buildings shall comply with Section 8.3.I).
4. Keeping of domestic livestock in accordance with Section 8.4.C
5. Parking in accordance with Section 7.1
6. Signs in accordance with Section 7.2
7. Agricultural uses as defined in Section 8.4.C
8. Temporary Health Care Structure in accordance with Section 4.6.D and Public Act 17-155.
C. Uses Permitted With Site Plan Review
The following uses are permitted in the R-3 Zone following site plan review as described in Section 9.1:
1. Buildings used for the storing, processing, and manufacture of site grown agricultural products and livestock as an accessory use of a farm.
2. Buildings used for the storage of farm equipment and motor vehicles when such equipment and vehicles are used in connection with the operation of such farm.
D. Uses Permitted With Special Permit
The following are Special Permit uses, permitted in the R-3 Zone only when specifically approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission in accordance with the provisions of Section 9.2:
1. Uses providing essential community services including, but not limited to the following:
a. Fire or Police stations or other Municipal buildings.
b. Public utility buildings, structures or utility substations
c. Public and Parochial schools
d. Parks, playgrounds or public recreation areas
e. Libraries, churches, museums or auditoriums
f. Cemeteries and their extensions
g. Hospitals
2. Roadside stands for the seasonal sale of farm produce and products grown or produced on the parcel on which they stand. Such stands shall be located no closer than fifty (50') feet from any street or lot line.
3. Commercial recreation as defined and described in Section 8.4.F.
4. Commercial kennels in accordance with Section 8.4.C.
5. Conversions of existing single family dwellings for use as two family dwelling in accordance with the provisions of Section 9.2 and the following requirements:
a. Building must have been built prior to 1941.
b. The existing building must contain at least two thousand (2000 square feet of habitable space
52
c. The proposal shall be such that no exterior evidence of multi-family use shall be visible
d. All applications for approval shall include:
1. Photographs of the existing building from all sides
2. Plans and exterior details of proposed conversion
3. Adequate parking in accordance with Section 7.1
4. Adequate provisions for water supply and sewage disposal
6. Accessory Dwelling Units in accordance with Section 8.4.M.
E. Area and Dimensional Standards
With Sewer Without Sewer
Minimum Lot Area (square feet)
45,000
65,000
Minimum Lot Width (feet)
150
150
Minimum Lot Depth (feet)
175
200
Minimum Lot Frontage (feet)
100
100
Maximum Lot Coverage (percent)
10%
10%
Minimum Front Setback (feet)
50
50
Minimum Side Setback (feet)
25
25
Minimum Rear Setback (feet)
50
50
Maximum Building Height (feet)
30
30
53
Section 4.4. R-4 Zone - Rural Residential
A. Purpose
The purpose of this zone is to provide primarily for single and two family residential uses in those areas of the Town which are expected to rely upon site septic disposal and individual wells for water supply. These areas are considered key to the maintenance of the rural character that defines much of the Town's historical and social identity.
B. Uses Permitted As-Of-Right
The following uses are permitted in the R-4 Zone as of right:
1. Detached single family dwellings
2. Dwellings for two families in accordance with the provisions of Section 4.6
3. Accessory uses and buildings incidental and subordinate to a permitted residential use (Accessory buildings shall comply with Section 8.3.I)
4. Keeping of domestic livestock in accordance with Section 8.4.C
5. Parking in accordance with Section 7.1
6. Signs in accordance with Section 7.2
7. Agricultural uses as defined in Section 8.4.C
8. Temporary Health Care Structure in accordance with Section 4.6.D and Public Act 17-155.
C. Uses Permitted With Site Plan Review
The following uses are permitted in the R-4 Zone following site plan review as described in Section 9.1:
1. Buildings used for the storing, processing and manufacture of site grown agricultural products and livestock as an accessory use of a farm
2. Buildings used for the storage of farm equipment and motor vehicles, when such equipment and vehicles are used in connection with the operation of such farm
D. Uses Permitted With Special Permit
The following are Special Permit uses, permitted in the R-4 Zone only when specifically approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission in accordance with the provisions of Section 9.2:
1. Uses providing essential community services including, but not limited to the following:
a. Fire or Police stations or other Municipal buildings
b. Public Utility buildings, structures or utility substations
c. Public and Parochial schools
d. Parks, playgrounds or public recreation areas
e. Libraries, churches, museums or auditoriums
f. Cemeteries and their extensions
g. Hospitals
2. Roadside stands for the seasonal sale of farm produce and products grown or produced on the parcel on which they stand. Such stands shall be located no closer than fifty (50') feet from any street or lot line.
3. Commercial recreation as defined and described in Section 8.4.F
4. Commercial kennels in accordance with Section 8.4.C
5. Conversions of existing single family dwellings for use as two-family dwelling in accordance with the provisions of Section 9.2 and the following requirements:
a. Building must have been built prior to 1941
b. The existing building must contain at least two thousand (2000) square feet of habitable space
c. The proposal shall be such that no exterior evidence of multi-family use shall be visible
54
d. All applications for approval shall include:
1. Photographs of the existing building from all sides
2. Plans and exterior details of proposed conversion
3. Adequate parking in accordance with Section 7.1
4. Adequate provisions for water supply and sewage disposal
6. Accessory Dwelling Units in accordance with Section 8.4.M.
E. Area and Dimensional Standards
With Sewer Without Sewer
Minimum Lot Area (square feet)
85,000
85,000
Minimum Lot Width (feet)
150
150
Minimum Lot Depth (feet)
200
200
Minimum Lot Frontage (feet)
100
100
Maximum Lot Coverage (percent)
10%
10%
Minimum Front Setback (feet)
50
50
Minimum Side Setback (feet)
25
25
Minimum Rear Setback (feet)
50
50
Maximum Building Height (feet)
30
30
55
Section 4.5. VHO Zone – Village Housing Overlay (Village District)
A. Purpose
The Village Housing Overlay Zone is intended to:
1. Create additional housing opportunities within East Hampton.
2. Promote the revitalization of East Hampton’s historic village center area.
3. Promote appropriate building and site design in order to enhance the village center and surrounding neighborhoods.
B. Nature of Zone / Declaration of Village District.
1. The Village Housing Overlay Zone enables a property owner to apply for approval of a development using the provisions of this Section instead of those for the underlying zone.
2. The provisions of the Village Housing Overlay Zone are not mandatory for existing uses or new development in the underlying zone. A property owner would voluntarily choose to comply with these provisions when or if new development is proposed.
3. In the event of any conflict between the provisions of this Section and any other Section of the Regulations, the provisions of this Section shall control.
4. Due to the importance of design in maintaining and enhancing the character of the village center area, the Village Housing Overlay Zone is hereby declared to be a “village district” as authorized by CGS Section 8-2j.
C. Description of Sub-Districts.
Due to the diversity of existing buildings and uses in the Village Center and the desired development patterns in different parts of the village center, the Village Housing Overlay Zone consists of three (3) different sub-districts as reflected on the zoning map:
1. Multi-Family (VHOZ-M) – these areas contain existing mill buildings with potential for redevelopment and other areas with potential for development with multi-family buildings.
2. Townhouse (VHOZ-T) – these areas have the potential for redevelopment with residential townhouse development (a residential building consisting of three or more attached units in which each unit shares a wall extending from foundation to roof with the adjacent unit(s) and has exterior walls on at least two sides), often in areas near to Pocotopaug Brook.
3. Duplex (VHOZ-D) – these areas have the potential for development with duplex housing units designed to be compatible with the single-family units in adjacent residential neighborhoods.
56
D. Uses Permitted With Special Permit
The following uses are permitted in the various sub-districts subject to granting of a Special Permit by the Planning and Zoning Commission:
1. Multi-Family Sub-District
a. Multi-family residential development at up to 20 units / acre of developable land as defined in Section 6.3.B.
b. Townhouse residential development at up to 10 units / acre of developable land as defined in Section 6.3.B.
c. Public parking area.
d. Private parking area.
e. Municipal facility.
2. Townhouse Sub-District
a. Townhouse residential development at up to 10 units / acre of developable land as defined in Section 6.3.B.
b. Private parking area.
c. Municipal facility.
3. Duplex Sub-District
a. Duplex residential development (two-unit buildings) at up to 6 units / acre of developable land as defined in Section 6.3.B.
b. Single-family residential units at up to 3 units / acre of developable land as defined in Section 6.3.B.
E. Area and Dimensional Standards
Multi-Family Townhouse Duplex
Minimum lot area
Same as
underlying zone
Same as
underlying zone
14,520 SF
Minimum lot frontage
Same as
underlying zone
Same as
underlying zone
100 feet
Build-to-line *
10 feet along Summit Street, Main Street, Watrous Street, or Skinner Street
10 feet along
Watrous Street
None
Minimum front setback *
25 feet where no build-to-line (See Above) required
10 feet for building
5 feet for open porch
25 feet for building
20 feet for open porch
Minimum side setback *
10 feet
10 feet
10 feet
Minimum rear setback *
20 feet
20 feet
20 feet
Maximum building height (stories)
3.5 stories
2.5 stories
2.5 stories
Maximum building height (feet)
45 feet to
mid-height of roof
35 feet to
mid-height of roof
35 feet to
mid-height of roof
Maximum lot coverage
50 percent
35 percent
20 percent
Minimum percentage of affordable housing units
20%
20%
20%
* When desirable in order to address on-site constraints, enhance the village center and surrounding neighborhoods, and/or be consistent with the setbacks of nearby buildings, the setback standards may be modified or waived by the Commission as a Special Permit
57
58
F. Special Provisions
1. Façade Width Requirement - Unless modified by the Commission by Special Permit, buildings fronting along Summit Street, Main Street, Water Street, or Skinner Street shall have building faces (facades) which occupy at least 70 percent of the lot width.
2. Housing Affordability Requirements
a. At least twenty percent (20%) of all dwelling units constructed in a development approved under this Section of the Regulations shall be deed-restricted to be affordable to and occupied by households earning 80 percent or less of the area median income for East Hampton, as determined and reported by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD).
b. When a calculation performed under this subsection results in a number that includes a fraction, the fraction shall be rounded up to the next higher whole number.
c. Each such affordable unit shall be subject to a housing restriction acceptable to the Town Attorney and the Commission, which shall be recorded on the East Hampton Land Records and shall, at a minimum, include the following:
1. An identification of the affordable housing units within the development.
2. A requirement that such affordable unit shall only be occupied by a household earning 80 percent or less of the area median income for East Hampton, as determined and reported by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD).
3. A statement of whether the affordable units will, at the time of initial occupancy, be rented or owner-occupied.
4. A statement of the method for determining the rental rate or sale price or resale price of an affordable housing unit at any point in time.
5. A statement that the term of the deed restriction for each affordable unit shall be a minimum of forty (40) years from the date of first occupancy of that affordable unit.
d. The applicant shall also prepare and submit a final “Housing Affordability Plan” in accordance with CGS § 8-30g, Section 8-30g-1 et seq. of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies and the “Housing Affordability Plan Requirements” as adopted by the policy of the Commission and as the same may be amended from time to time, including:
1. The name and address of the proposed administrator of the deed restricted affordable units.
2. Provision that the proposed administrator shall file an annual report to the Commission, in a form specified by the Commission, certifying compliance with the provisions of this Section.
3. Additional Provisions.
a. All developments approved under this Section shall be served by public water and public sewer.
b. An developments approved under this Section shall provide for parking as follows :
1. Multi-family development - 1.75 spaces/dwelling unit
2. Townhouse development - 2 spaces/dwelling unit
3. Duplex development - 2 spaces/dwelling unit
c. In the Multi-Family sub-district, off-street parking and loading shall not be located between buildings and a public street unless approved by the Commission and any parking area visible from a public street or public sidewalk, shall be screened with landscaping, walls, fencing, or combination thereof.
d. Any developments proposed under this Section shall, unless modified by the Commission, construct or improve the sidewalks abutting the project site in order to enhance the pedestrian nature and character of the village center area.
e. Any developments proposed under this Section shall, unless modified by the Commission, provide for and construct trails for public use within the project site (especially in areas adjacent to the Airline Trail, Pocotopaug Brook or other water features) in order to enhance the pedestrian nature and character of the village center area.
59
4. Building Design and Construction Guidelines - Since design of buildings and sites is an important part of enhancing the village center and surrounding areas, the quality of the overall design will be an important consideration as part of the granting of any Special Permit. In evaluating the quality of the overall design, the Commission will consider the following guidelines and the pictorial design guidelines on the following pages:
a. Overall Character
1. Proposed development projects should enhance the overall flavor of a historic New England mill village and, where appropriate, complement the scale and architecture of adjacent buildings.
2. The design guidelines on the following pages shall be used as a reference for desirable characteristics of buildings and sites.
b. Building Placement
1. In general, new buildings shall be placed near to the public street and shall be oriented with the main façade parallel to the public street in order to strengthen the overall streetscape.
2. The Commission may modify or waive this requirement when the applicant demonstrates that a greater setback or alternative orientation will enhance the overall flavor of a historic New England mill village and/or allow for the creation of a public amenity (such as a wider sidewalk, a public seating area, etc.).
c. Building Mass
1. Monolithic building forms shall be avoided through the use of variations in wall placement, color, texture and/or material and variations in the height of buildings or use of architectural features such as balconies, cornices, step-backs, or other articulating features.
d. Exterior Materials and Colors
1. Exterior building materials and their placement on a building shall be consistent with the overall flavor of a historic New England mill village.
e. Doorways and Windows
1. Recessed doorways are preferred. Where a recessed doorway is not used, an awning or similar architectural overhang shall be used.
2. Adequate lighting for the doorway shall be incorporated into the design of the doorway.
3. Windows should be taller than they are wide and windows on upper floors should not be larger than windows on lower floors.
4. Windows should be inset from the exterior wall surface and shall have visually prominent sills, lintels, or other forms of architectural detailing to add visual relief to the wall.
f. Roofs and Mechanical Equipment
1. Roof forms should complement the principal building in terms of style, detailing, and materials.
2. Roof overhangs (eaves and cornices) should be a minimum of two feet (2’).
3. Any mechanical equipment shall be screened from public view using landscaping, walls, fencing, parapets or other architectural elements, or combination thereof.
60
Design Guidelines - Single Family Dwellings
Design Elements Which Are Encouraged / Required
Discouraged Elements
1.5 to 2.5 story buildings
Building comprised of distinct parts with smaller footprints
Articulated forms and facades
Rich architectural details (porches, eaves, shutters, columns, dormers, chimneys, trim, etc.)
Classically proportioned facades
Entrances face the street
Pitched roofs
Windows with vertical proportions
Strong relationship to street / sidewalk
Parking on-street or behind buildings
1.0 story buildings
Monolithic forms
Flat facades
Limited architectural detailing
Plain facades
Flatter roofs
Windows with horizontal proportions
Weak relationship to street / sidewalk
Dominant garages / parking
61
Design Guidelines – Duplex / Townhouse Dwellings
Design Elements Which Are Encouraged / Required
Discouraged Elements
2.0 to 2.5 story buildings
Articulated forms and facades and materials
Good architectural details (porches, eaves, shutters, columns, dormers, chimneys, trim, etc.)
Well proportioned facades
Good building materials
Pitched roofs
Windows with vertical proportions
Strong relationship to street / sidewalk
Parking on-street or behind buildings
Single-family appearance for duplex buildings
Entrances face the street
1.0 story buildings
Monolithic forms
Overly repetitive forms
Monotonous materials
Flat facades
Limited architectural detailing
Plain facades
Flatter roofs
Windows with horizontal proportions
Weak relationship to street / sidewalk
Dominant garages / parking
Entrances face parking areas
62
Design Guidelines – Multi-Family Dwellings and Mixed Use Buildings
Design Elements Which Are Encouraged / Required
Discouraged Elements
2.0 to 3.5 story buildings
Articulated forms and facades
Good architectural details (lintels, dormers, trim, etc.)
Classically proportioned facades
Entrances face the street
Adaptive re-use of historic buildings
Pitched roofs / flat roofs, deep cornices
Windows with vertical proportions
Strong relationship to street / sidewalk
Mixed use – strong glass presentation on first floor
5.0+ story buildings
Monolithic forms
Flat facades
Limited architectural detailing
Plain facades
Windows with horizontal proportions
Weak relationship to street / sidewalk
Dominant parking
63
Section 4.6. Special Provisions For Residential Zones
A. Two Family Dwellings/Duplexes
For the purpose of maintaining a balance of density in the R-1, R-3 and R-4 Zones, lots created after October 28, 1987 on which two family dwellings/duplexes are constructed shall contain twice the minimum area and frontage specified for the applicable zone.
B. Display Or Storage Of Materials
In all Residential zones, the permanent display, exhibition or storage of merchandise, material, vehicles or articles for sale in the required front yard and side yard (revision effective 7/8/06) shall be prohibited and the storage of such materials behind the building line shall be covered or screened from the street.
C. Access Driveways
1. A single access driveway shall service no more than two (2) residences.
2. A waiver may be granted by the Commission by a vote of three-fourths of all the members of the Commission. In no case shall a waiver be granted for access to more than three (3) residences, in which case the shared portion of the driveway shall be a minimum of 22 feet in width and shall be paved.
3. The Commission shall not grant a waiver unless it finds, based upon evidence presented to it in each specific case that:
a. The granting of the waiver will not have an adverse effect on adjacent property or on the public health or safety;
b. The conditions upon which the request for a waiver is based are unique to the property for which the waiver is sought and are not generally applicable to other land in the area;
c. Because of the particular physical surroundings, shape or topographical conditions of the specific property involved, a particular hardship to the applicant would result, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience, if the strict letter of these Regulations is carried out; and
d. The waiver will not in any manner vary the provisions of the Zoning Regulations or the intent of the Plan of Conservation and Development.
4. A request for any waiver shall be submitted in writing by the applicant at the time of application acceptance by the Commission. The request shall state fully the grounds for the request and all of the facts relied upon by the applicant.
5. The Commission shall state upon its records the reason for which a waiver is granted in each case. In approving a waiver the Commission may require such conditions that will, in its judgment, substantially conform to the objectives of the standards or requirements of these Regulations. (Effective: August 24, 2007)
D. Temporary Health Care Structures
In addition to the requirements set forth in the Connecticut General Statutes and Public Act 17-155 (The Act) and in accordance with the Act, the following shall apply:
1. A bond shall be submitted in an amount determined by the Planning and Zoning Department not to exceed $50,000 in the form of either cash or a Letter of Credit to be held by the Town of East Hampton until the structure is removed.
2. The property owner shall submit, on the yearly anniversary date of the permit, written verification of compliance with this section and the Act.
3. The property owner shall allow the Town to inspect the unit upon request at reasonable hours.
4. Failure to adhere to any requirements in this regulation or in the Act will result in revocation of the permit requiring the structure to be removed.
64
This page intentionally left blank
65
ARTICLE 5 - BUSINESS ZONES
Section 5.1. VC Zone – Village Center (Village District)
A. Purpose / Village District Declaration
The purpose of the Village Center Zone is to encourage and support a vibrant and successful village center area by providing for a mixture of compatible public and private uses subject to specific standards and controls appropriate to the intensity, scale, and overall character of the area while stressing pedestrian circulation and amenities.
The village center area possesses distinct historical, economic, and environmental characteristics which are embodied in intermixed residential, manufacturing, commercial and public uses and which differentiate it from other areas in East Hampton. Due to the importance of promoting good design and protecting and enhancing the distinctive character, landscape, and historic values in this area, the Village Center Zone is hereby declared to be a “village district” as authorized by CGS Section 8-2j and as recommended in the East Hampton Plan of Conservation and Development.
B. Uses Permitted With Site Plan Review
The following uses are permitted in the VC Zone upon approval by the Planning and Zoning Commission of a site plan in accordance with Section 9.1 and the Special Provisions set forth in this Section:
1. Retail store (drive-in windows are prohibited)
2. Medical office
3. Professional office
4. Business office
5. Personal service shop (drive-in windows are prohibited)
6. Financial institution (drive-in windows are prohibited)
7. Restaurant (drive-in windows are prohibited)
8. Club or fraternal organization
9. Day care
10. Place of worship
11. Business school, including, but not limited to, secretarial, data processing, real estate, accounting/tax, administration, management
12. Corporate office
13. Shop for custom or craft work which is deemed not to be industrial in nature
14. Wholesale sales office, sample room
15. Sign in accordance with Section 7.2
C. Uses Permitted With Special Permit
The following uses are permitted in the VC Zone as Special Permit Uses approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission in accordance with Section 9.2, following a public hearing.
1. Establishments for retail and sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption as limited by Section 8.4.B
2. Hotels, inns
3. Theaters, cinemas
4. Places of assembly for recreation, entertainment or amusement
5. Uses providing essential community service including, but not limited to, government buildings, park playground or recreational area, museums or auditoriums, community houses and parking lots
66
D. Area and Dimensional Standards
Minimum Lot Area (square feet)
20,000
Minimum Lot Width (feet)
100
Minimum Lot Depth (feet)
150
Minimum Lot Frontage (feet)
100
Maximum Lot Coverage (percent)
75%
Minimum Front Setback (feet) *
10
Maximum Front Setback (feet) *
20
Minimum Side Setback (feet) *
10
Minimum Rear Setback (feet) *
20
Maximum Building Height (feet) **
30
* The yard setback requirements may be waived by the Commission by a ¾ vote of the members present where the Commission deems a waiver would enhance the overall streetscape; reason for the waiver shall be made a part of the record.
** The maximum building height limitation may be waived by the Commission by a ¾ vote of the members present where the Commission deems a waiver would enhance the overall streetscape provided the reason for the waiver shall be made a part of the record.
See Section 3.3.E of these Regulations for possible exceptions to these standards.
E. Special Provisions for Residential Use
1. Apartments may, by Special Permit, be permitted on the second and third floors of buildings.
2. In addition to building and other applicable code requirements, the residential uses shall have unobstructed access to the outside, separate from any business activity.
3. The business building shall be served by public water supply and sanitary sewer as available.
4. Soundproofing shall be designed and installed to isolate the normal sounds of business activity from the apartments.
5. On-site parking standards as set forth in Section 7.1 shall be adhered to and such spaces shall be designated as resident parking or tenant parking.
F. Special Provisions Applicable to All Uses in the Village Center Zone
1. At least seventy-five (75%) percent of the gross floor area of the first floor of a building located in the VC Zone shall be devoted to retail stores, personal service shops, financial institutions, restaurants, or day care uses.
2. No building, driving lane, parking or loading shall be located within twenty-five (25') feet of a residential zone boundary. This area shall have existing or installed evergreen plantings or fencing to provide maximum screening of not less than five (5') feet in height at the time of installation. The Commission reserves the right to waive this by a three-quarters (3/4) vote of members present, and reasons for such waiving shall be made part of the record. The buffer width may not be decreased to less than half of the requirement.
3. The front yard, the side yard, and ten (10') feet of the rear yard shall be retained for landscape or pedestrian amenities. The Commission reserves the right to modify this requirement by a three-quarters (3/4) vote of members present, and reasons for such modification shall be made part of the record.
4. A building may be built on a lot line on no more than one side and one rear parcel providing:
67
a. Such lot line separates two (2) parcels in the same zone.
b. Whenever parcels are owned by two different owners, the applicant shall submit a “zero-lot-line” agreement prepared by an attorney and executed by the owners and site plan(s) demonstrating coordinated floor plans and architectural designs. In the event of a phased “zero-lot-line” building project by a single owner of parcels, the Commission shall be provided with a site plan depicting the phased portions of the building, architectural design, and a time table for project completion.
5. Access to a lot shall be limited to one drive unless otherwise directed by the Traffic Authority and/or Fire Marshal. Common drives between lots are to be encouraged, per agreement, between owners.
6. All heating, ventilation, air conditioning, or other exterior mounted appurtenances, portable and fixed, shall be hidden from view.
7. All electric, telephone and other cable-like utility installation shall be located underground, except required or necessary light standards, etc.
8. No outside storage shall be permitted.
9. On-site dumpsters shall be placed in a location so as to be out of the public's view and be adequately screened.
10. Parking shall be located to the rear or on non-public street sides of the building so as to allow maximum building frontage exposure and pedestrian access. Provision shall be made for pedestrian access to the building's rear and to the public street.
11. Sidewalks, where not already present, shall be installed along the frontage of public streets according to the Town of East Hampton Road Standards.
12. When an existing structure is deemed to be of historic significance by the Commission, application for site plan approval shall contain a report detailing the manner of restoration. Any restoration shall be in keeping with the character of the Village Center.
13. New building style, signage, on-site amenities, etc. are encouraged to be in keeping with the overall character of the Village Center.
14. A development plan contributing to the implementation of public amenities such as courtyards, parks, benches, decorative sidewalks, landscaping along street, period lighting, etc. shall be granted a density bonus of twenty (20%) percent, as reflected in an increase in height of the building, and result in a decrease of lot coverage by a minimum of ten (10%) percent.
G. Design Review Provisions
1. Design Review Required - The Commission shall review an application in relation to the design guidelines of this Section and, in accordance with CGS Section 8-2j, shall obtain the assistance of a design consultant in evaluating such plans.
2. Design Guidelines - Since the architectural design, scale and mass of the buildings and other structures are important in determining the visual character of an area, the guidelines listed below are recommended so as to harmonize and be compatible with the neighborhood, to protect property values and to preserve and improve the appearance and the beauty of the community.
a. Relationship of Buildings to Site and Adjoining Areas
1. Buildings shall be designed and located on the site so as to retain the existing topography and natural features of the land to the greatest extent possible.
2. Buildings shall be organized in a coordinated and functional manner that is compatible with site features and the desirable characteristics of adjoining areas.
3. A unified design theme for building massing, exterior treatments and signage shall be established where harmony in textures, lines, and masses is provided and monotony is avoided.
4. Parking areas shall be treated appropriately in relation to the building, the neighborhood, and the community.
5. The height and scale of each building shall be compatible with its site and existing (or anticipated) adjoining buildings.
68
6. Newly installed utility services, and service revisions necessitated by exterior alterations, shall be underground.
7. A desirable streetscape and attractive landscape transitions to adjoining properties shall be provided.
b. Landscape and Site Treatment
1. The design of the development and the placement of buildings, driveways, walkways, parking facilities and other improvements shall be such that existing trees, watercourses, rock outcrops and similar natural features are preserved to the greatest extent possible.
2. Landscape treatment shall be provided to enhance architectural features, shield unsightly areas, provide shade, and relate to the natural environment and topography.
3. Plant material that is indigenous to the area shall be selected for its ultimate growth and for interest in its shape, texture, and color.
4. Pedestrian walkways shall provide safe and convenient connections within the site and between adjacent sites and shall be constructed of all-weather materials appropriate for the location (such as brick, concrete, or paving blocks but not earth, gravel, or loose stone).
5. Existing trees at four (4) inches or greater caliper shall be incorporated into the site plan.
c. Building Design
1. Architectural designs appropriate to a New England community are generally preferred (pitched roof buildings, colonial facades, etc.).
2. Architectural features shall be evaluated based on the scale of the building(s), the quality of the design, and the relationship to surroundings.
3. Facades and rooflines shall be articulated and/or varied to reduce the appearance of bulk and provide architectural interest.
4. Building materials shall have good architectural character and durable quality and shall be selected for harmony of the building with adjoining buildings.
5. Building textures, colors, and components shall be selected for harmony of the building with adjoining buildings.
6. Utility and service equipment areas shall be screened from public view with materials harmonious with the building.
7. Rooftop mechanical equipment (other than solar energy panels) should be concealed.
d. Signs and Lighting
1. Every sign shall be designed as an integral architectural element of the building and site to which it principally relates and shall be coordinated with the building architecture.
2. Exterior lighting, where used, shall enhance the building design and the adjoining landscape.
3. Lighting shall be restrained in design and excessive brightness avoided.
4. Roof lighting is prohibited.
e. Additional Design Guidelines
1. Special attention shall be paid to protecting the distinctive character, landscape, and historic structures within any Village District.
2. The removal or disruption of historic, traditional, or significant structures or architectural elements shall be avoided or minimized.
3. The conversion, conservation, and preservation of existing buildings and sites in a manner that maintains the historic or distinctive character of a Village District is encouraged.
4. The exterior of structures or sites shall be consistent with:
a. the "Connecticut Historical Commission - The Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation and Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings", revised through 1990, as amended; or
b. the distinctive characteristics of the district identified in the Plan of Conservation and Development.
69
5. Proposed buildings or modifications to existing buildings shall be harmoniously related to their surroundings, the terrain in the district, and to the use, scale and architecture of existing buildings in the district that have a functional or visual relationship to a proposed building or modification.
6. All spaces, structures, and related site improvements visible from public roadways shall be designed to be compatible with the elements of the area of the Village District in and around the proposed building or modification.
7. The color, size, height, location, proportion of openings, roof treatments, building materials, and landscaping of commercial or residential property, and any proposed signs and lighting, shall be evaluated for compatibility with the local architectural motif.
8. Maintenance of views, historic buildings, monuments, and landscaping shall be encouraged.
3. Procedures -
a. The Commission shall select and contract with one or more Village District consultants.
b. Such Village District consultant shall be:
1. a registered architect or an architectural firm,
2. a licensed landscape architect, or
3. a planner who is a member of the American Institute of Certified Planners.
4. Alternatively, an architectural design review board may be designated as the Village District consultant provided the members shall include at least one (1) architect, landscape architect or planner who is a member of the American Institute of Certified Planners.
c. All applications shall be subject to review and recommendation by the Village District consultant designated by the Commission as the Village District consultant for such application.
d. The Village District consultant shall review an application and report to the Commission within thirty-five (35) days of receipt of the application.
e. Such report and recommendation shall be entered into the public hearing record and considered by the Commission in making its decision.
f. Failure of the Village District consultant to report within the specified time shall not alter or delay any other time limit imposed by these Regulations.
g. The Commission may seek the recommendations of any Town or regional agency or outside specialist including, but not limited to, the regional planning agency, a historical society, the Connecticut Trust for Historic Preservation and The University of Connecticut College of Agriculture and Natural Resources.
h. Any reports or recommendations from such agencies or organizations shall be entered into the public hearing record.
70
Section 5.2. C Zone – Commercial
A. Purpose
The primary purpose of the Commercial Zone is to provide for the orderly development of those areas for commercial, professional and business uses. Its intention is to create an atmosphere conducive to the growth and maintenance of uses essential to serving the needs of the community.
B. Uses Permitted With Site Plan Review
The following uses are permitted in the Commercial Zone upon approval of a site plan in accordance with Section 9.1:
1. A retail store not to exceed 25,000 sq ft of gross floor area for a single entity (revision effective May 15, 2006).
2. Business offices
3. Professional offices
4. Financial institutions
5. Public utility structures
6. Signs in accordance with Section 7.2 for a use permitted under this Section and carried out on the same premise
7. Accessory structures and uses incidental and subordinate to a permitted use in accordance with Section 8.3.I
8. Personal service shops
C. Uses Permitted With Special Permit
The following uses are permitted in the Commercial Zone as Special Permit uses, when specifically approved by the Commission in accordance with provisions of Section 9.2:
1. Hotels, motels, inns
2. Restaurants
3. Establishments for the retail sale of alcoholic beverages under Section 8.4.B
4. Theaters, legitimate, or motion picture
5. Assembly halls
6. Places of worship
7. Hospitals
8. Active adult, congregate, and senior housing as described in Section 8.5 (revised effective date Aug. 9, 2003
9. Veterinary hospitals
10. Commercial kennels in accordance with Section 8.4.C
11. Fire and police stations or other municipal uses and buildings
12. Signs in accordance with Section 7.2 for a use permitted under this Section and carried out on the same premise
13. Accessory structures and uses incidental and subordinate to a permitted use under this Section in accordance with Section 8.3.I
14. Newspaper and job printing, publishing establishments
15. Food preparation, bakeries, caterers
16. Storage/self-storage uses
17. Accessory use for auto body repair, not to exceed the storage of more than 10 motor vehicles with valid work orders or registration in place. Complete neutral opaque screening must be utilized either by vegetation or fencing.
18. Research labs
71
19. A retail store containing more than 25,000 sq ft and not exceeding 40,000 sq ft of gross floor area for any single entity (revision effective May 15, 2006).
20. Day care (effective: August 24,2007)
D. Area and Dimensional Standards
Minimum Lot Area (square feet)
40,000
Minimum Lot Width (feet)
150
Minimum Lot Depth (feet)
175
Minimum Lot Frontage (feet)
100
Maximum Lot Coverage (percent)
60%
Minimum Front Setback (feet) *
50
Minimum Side Setback (feet) *
25
Minimum Rear Setback (feet) *
25
Maximum Building Height (feet) **
35
See Section 3.3.E of these Regulations for possible exceptions to these standards.
E. Special Provisions
1. In the Commercial Zone, where any lot or parcel or part thereof, adjoins any residential zone, there shall be a landscaped strip, a minimum of fifteen (15') feet wide, consisting of evergreen plantings a minimum five (5') feet tall at time of installation, (revision effective May 15, 2006) forming an effective visual buffer between the commercial and residential uses. Such strip may be in either zone, but the ownership of such strip must be and remain in the same person, persons, firm or corporation as the premise devoted to such commercial use. Failure to maintain this area as an effective buffer shall constitute a violation of these Regulations.
2. Buildings erected for principle, permitted uses in the C Zone, shall contain a minimum square footage of fifteen hundred (1500) sq. ft. on the ground floor.
3. Premises with more than one principle use shall meet the provisions of the most restrictive regulations applicable to the entire premise.
4. There shall be a minimum 6 foot wide vegetative buffer on each parcel, between commercial properties, not to include interconnections between properties for access and common easements. (Amended 4/3/02)
72
Section 5.3. I Zone – Industrial
A. Purpose
The purpose of the Industrial (I) Zone is to encourage the best and most reasonable use of the land so designated, to broaden the tax base and to increase the opportunities for local employment. It shall promote the logical and orderly separation of land uses, encouraging reasonable growth within the Industrial Zone, unimpaired as much as possible by non-industrial uses.
B. Uses Permitted With Site Plan Review
The following uses are permitted in the Industrial (I) Zone upon approval of a site plan prepared in accordance with Section 9.1:
1. The manufacturing, assembly, processing, packaging of products deemed by the Commission as non-toxic, non-noxious and non-hazardous
2. Warehousing and shipping facilities
3. Machine and tool shops
4. Wholesale sales rooms
5. Facilities for the rental of equipment and motor vehicles
6. Lumber yards, saw and planing mills
7. Printing establishments
8. Research facilities
9. Signs in accordance with Section 7.2, for a use permitted under this Section and carried out at the same premise
10. Accessory uses incidental and subordinate to a use permitted under this Section and in accordance with Section 8.3.1
C. Uses Permitted With Special Permit
The following uses are permitted in the Industrial Zone as Special Permit uses when specifically approved by the Commission in accordance with the provisions of Section 9.2:
1. Manufacturing and storage of alcohol, plastic and chemicals
2. Manufacture, processing and storage of asphalt products
3. Manufacture of masonry products, bricks, concrete, tile, etc.
4. Bulk storage and processing of cement, sand, stone, concrete mixing and batch plants
5. Bulk storage of petroleum products
6. Contractor storage/service/office
7. Public utility power plants
8. Commercial kennels in accordance with Section 8.4.C
9. Motor vehicle sales and storage, garages for the repair of motor vehicles, gasoline or motor fuel filling stations, in accordance with Section 8.4.A, only after approval of the location by the Zoning Board of Appeals as required by Sec.14-54 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as may be amended
10. Signs in accordance with Section 7.2, for a use permitted under this Section, carried out at the same premise
11. Accessory uses incidental and subordinate to a use permitted by this Section and in accordance with Section 8.3.I
12. Day care (effective: August 24, 2007)
73
D. Area and Dimensional Standards
Minimum Lot Area (square feet)
40,000
Minimum Lot Width (feet)
150
Minimum Lot Depth (feet)
175
Minimum Lot Frontage (feet)
100
Maximum Lot Coverage (percent)
50%
Minimum Front Setback (feet) *
65
Minimum Side Setback (feet) *
25
Minimum Rear Setback (feet) *
50
Maximum Building Height (feet) **
45
See Section 3.3.E of these Regulations for possible exceptions to these standards.
E. Special Provisions
1. In the Industrial Zone, where any lot or parcel or part thereof, adjoins any residential zone, there shall be a landscaped strip, a minimum of fifteen (15') feet wide, consisting of evergreen plantings a minimum of five (5') feet tall at time of installation (effective July 8, 2006) forming an effective visual buffer between the industrial and residential uses. Such strip may be in either zone, but the ownership of such strip must be and remain in the same person, persons, firm or corporation as the premise devoted to such commercial use. Failure to maintain this area as an effective buffer shall constitute a violation of these Regulations.
2. Any use which is dangerous by reason of fire, radiation or explosion; injurious or detrimental to the surrounding area by reason of the possible emission of excessive dust, odor, fumes, gas, smoke, wastes, refuse matter, noise, vibration or because of any other objectionable situation which is likely to be a hazard, presently or in the future, to adjacent property or the community at large, shall be deemed prohibited by the Commission after solicitation and review of reports submitted by appropriate departments and agencies, including, but not limited to Fire, Police, Building, Planning and Health Departments.
74
Section 5.4. PO/R Zone – Professional Office / Residential
A. Purpose
The purpose of this zone is to allow for professional uses in the areas fronting on both sides of West High (Rt. 66) between North Main Street and North Maple Street as well as Main Street up to a distance of 400’ from the intersection of West High Street supplementing uses in the adjacent C Zone while retaining the residential character of the area.
B. Uses Permitted As Of Right
The following uses are permitted in the PO/R Zone as of right:
1. All uses allowed in the R1 Zone and as limited by the provisions of Section 4.1
C. Uses Permitted With Site Plan Review
The following uses are permitted in the PO/R Zone upon approval of a site plan submitted in accordance with Section 9.1.
1. Professional offices
2. Financial institutions
3. Executive and administrative offices
4. Business offices
5. Signs in accordance with Section 7.2.C, for a use permitted under this Section, carried out on the premise
6. Accessory uses and structures incidental and subordinate to a permitted use under this Section, in accordance with Section 8.3.1
D. Uses Permitted With Special Permit
The following uses are permitted in the PO/R Zone as Special Permit Uses, when specifically approved by the Commission in accordance with Section 9.2.
1. Shop for custom work, including repair, fabricating and making of such articles incidental to such work
2. Printing and publishing
3. Public utility structures
4. Fire and police stations and other municipal uses and structures
5. Day care (effective: August 24, 2007)
E. Area and Dimensional Standards
Minimum Lot Area (square feet)
20,000
Minimum Lot Width (feet)
125
Minimum Lot Depth (feet)
125
Minimum Lot Frontage (feet)
100
Maximum Lot Coverage (percent)
20%
Minimum Front Setback (feet) *
25
Minimum Side Setback (feet) *
15
Minimum Rear Setback (feet) *
25
Maximum Building Height (feet) **
30
75
See Section 3.3.E of these Regulations for possible exceptions to these standards.
F. Special Provisions
1. All uses in Sections 5.4.C and 5.4.D shall be limited to the ground floors of any buildings in the PO/R Zone.
2. Residential use located in the same premise as a use permitted under Sections 5.4.C and 5.4.D shall be limited to one dwelling unit.
3. There shall be no exterior evidence of the conduct of non-residential uses, except for the placement of signage complying with the provisions of these Regulations, as stated in Section 7.2.C
4. Expansion of a permitted use of the ground floor to an existing second floor of a structure may be allowed under Section 9.2, Special Permit, with following conditions:
a. The expanded use on the second floor must be the same as the ground floor.
b. The Commission determined the expanded use would be beneficial to the community
76
Section 5.5. DD Zone – Design Development
A. Purpose
The purpose of the Design Development Zone (DD) is to permit the development of selected office, professional, laboratory, commercial/retail and light industry on tracts with good access to Rte. 66 and Rte. 2. High standards are required in this zone to ensure the harmonious integration of these types of development with the rural residential uses common to these areas. Low intensity of land uses with substantial buffering for adjacent residential areas are key characteristics in this zone. An important concept in this zone is that rough and less desirable land shall be incorporated into proposals for development to serve as a buffer, thereby lessening the effect of the development on the natural topographical and environmental features of the area.
B. Uses Permitted With Special Permit
The following uses are permitted as Special Permit Uses in the Design Development Zone (DD), upon specific approval by the Commission in accordance with Section 9.2:
1. Business, executive, professional or administrative offices
2. Research facilities
3. Financial institutions
4. Publishing establishments
5. School, colleges and universities
6. Retail and Commercial uses as described in Section 5.2 and strictly limited by Section 5.5.D.1
7. Light industry
8. Police and Fire stations and other municipal uses and structures
9. Accessory uses and structures incidental and subordinate to permitted uses in accordance with Section 8.3.I
10. Signs in accordance with Section 7.2, for a use permitted under this Section and carried out on the same premise
11. Emergency medical center/immediate medical care facility
12. Day care (effective: August 24, 2007)
13. Libraries, churches, museums or auditoriums (Effective: September 1, 2011)
C. Area and Dimensional Standards
Minimum Lot Area
5 acres
Minimum Lot Width (feet)
150
Minimum Lot Depth (feet)
175
Minimum Lot Frontage (feet)
100
Maximum Lot Coverage (percent)
50%
Minimum Front Setback (feet) *
See Section 5.5.D
Minimum Side Setback (feet) *
See Section 5.5.D
Minimum Rear Setback (feet) *
50
Maximum Building Height (feet) **
30
See Section 3.3.E of these Regulations for possible exceptions to these standards.
77
D. Special Provisions
1. Retail and Commercial Use in the DD Zone - The following requirements, in addition to all other provisions of this and any other applicable sections of these Regulations shall apply to any and all commercial/retail uses proposed in the Design Development Zone.
a. Retail uses shall be limited to not greater than thirty (30%) percent, expressed as square feet of occupiable floor area of the total developed proposal.
b. The proposal shall be so phased that construction and development of commercial/retail use(s) shall commence after or concurrent with the total development proposal.
c. The applicant shall demonstrate that commercial/retail uses are of such nature to enhance and augment the development proposal and that all uses shall be compatible and inter-related.
d. Occupancy of commercial/retail uses shall not be permitted prior to substantial completion of all buildings proposed for each phase. In developments consisting of multiple phases, no more than thirty (30%) percent of the development of each phase shall contain commercial/retail use. Buildings proposed for exclusive commercial/retail use shall not be permitted unless, or until the seventy percent: thirty percent (70%:30%) use ratio is evident.
2. Special Provisions for All Uses
a. Public sewers and all available utilities are required to serve any development in this zone. All utilities including electricity, telephone and cable television shall be underground.
b. Lot coverage shall not exceed fifty (50%) percent of the lot area.
c. Landscaped open space is subject to review and approval by the Commission and shall cover a minimum of fifty (50%) percent of the lot area.
d. There shall be a minimum effective buffer of at least fifty (50') feet between any proposed building or parking area or lot in this zone and any existing residential property line. This buffer shall be one hundred (100') feet to any existing residence.
e. For any proposed use in this zone, the applicant shall supply, in sufficient quantities, architectural drawings of all buildings, structures and signs. Such drawings shall consist of, but not be limited to: exterior elevations, general floor plans, at least one perspective drawing showing structures, where applicable, types of exterior materials proposed for use and proposed signs as to their location and general design.
f. The design of all buildings and structures to be erected in this zone shall be subject to the approval of the Commission. The design of all buildings and other structures including the building materials and exterior elevations shall be of such a character as to be harmonious with the area in which it is located, to accomplish an effective, non-abrupt transition of styles between it and areas of established development. The design shall preserve and enhance the appearance of the community and shall not have any detrimental effect on the property values of the area.
g. The proposal shall include a forty (40') foot effective buffer around the entire perimeter of the parcel except for that portion that abuts a major thoroughfare, or those areas requiring larger buffers as described in Section 5.5.D.2.D. Only access drives, utilities, and natural or landscaped vegetation shall be allowed in these areas.
h. The minimum first floor area of any principal building in this zone shall be ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
i. Access drives, roadways, etc. shall be designated as "No Parking" areas.
j. The Commission reserves the right to waive any of the special provisions of this Section 5.5.D.2 by a three-quarter (3/4) majority vote of all the members seated if, in the opinion of the Commission, the proposal would be in keeping with the purpose of the regulation and would not have a detrimental effect on the area.
78
This page intentionally left blank
79
ARTICLE 6 - PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICTS
Section 6.1. Overall Purpose
This Section of the Regulations is intended for the adoption, by the Commission, from time to time, of regulations authorizing the implementation of Planned Development Districts, which shall be floating zones, designed to provide flexibility, but with regulatory control, to achieve targeted developmental objectives within the Town of East Hampton which will enhance and diversify the residential, commercial, recreational and cultural opportunities within the municipality, and which development cannot be feasibly achieved pursuant to the regulatory framework created by other sections of these regulations. Each Planned Development District adopted by the Commission hereunder shall be a floating zone.
Development within any Planned Development District may only be accomplished by:
1. obtaining from the Commission a zone change attaching the Planned Development District regulation to a parcel or parcels of land proposed for inclusion within the zone, which zone change shall only be granted in conjunction with the approval of a preliminary site development plan and land use concept plan (Master Plan) as provided in these Regulations, and
2. obtaining final site plan approval for the development as proposed.
Section 6.2. RL Zone – Reserved Land
A. Purpose
The purpose of this zone is to provide for uses of public land, within the boundaries of the Town of East Hampton that is owned by the Federal, State or Local Government.
B. Uses Permitted With Special Permit
All uses within the RL Zone shall be demonstrated to be in the best interest of the public and shall be permitted as a Special Permit only. All such uses shall be proposed in accordance with Sections 9.1 & 9.2.
C. Area and Dimensional Standards
As established by the Commission as part of the approval process.
80
Section 6.3. HOD Zone - Housing Opportunity Development
(effective 08/04/08)
A. Intent and Purpose
This regulation (hereinafter referred to as the “HOD Regulation”) is adopted for the following purposes:
1. To allow, on a long-term basis, for the development of diverse housing types, including affordable housing to help address identified housing needs;
2. To encourage the construction of housing that is both affordable as defined by state statutes and is consistent with design and construction standards present in the community;
3. To promote housing choice and economic diversity, including housing for low and moderate income households;
4. To efficiently utilize existing infrastructure and promote neighborhood planning by providing, where infrastructure support is available, a mix of housing types, densities, sizes and prices, while also providing substantial public and private open space and recreational areas;
5. To guide a proposed development so that it helps accomplish the above purposes while being consistent with soil types, terrain and infrastructure capacity and is consistent with the statutory purpose of protecting the public health, safety, convenience and property values; and
6. To encourage energy-efficient patterns of development, the use of solar and other renewable forms of energy, and energy conservation.
B. Definitions
HOUSING OPPORTUNITY DEVELOPMENT (“HOD”) - A proposed housing development in which, for at least forty (40) years after the initial occupancy of units within the proposed development, (1) not less than fifteen percent(15%) of the dwelling units will be conveyed by deeds containing covenants or restrictions which shall require that such dwelling units be sold or rented at, or below, prices which will preserve the units as affordable housing, as defined in CGS § 8-30g, for persons or families whose income is less than or equal to eighty percent (80%) of the area median income or the statewide median income, whichever is less; and (2) not less than fifteen percent (15%) of the dwelling units shall be conveyed in the same manner to persons or families whose income is less than or equal to sixty percent (60%) of the area median income or the statewide median income, whichever is less.
HOUSING OPPORTUNITY UNIT - As used in this HOD Regulation, “Housing Opportunity Unit” means a housing unit within a Housing Opportunity Development for which persons and families pay thirty percent (30%) or less of their annual income, where such income is less than or equal to eighty percent (80%) or sixty percent (60%) as applicable, of the lesser of area median income for the Hartford PMSA or statewide median income, as determined by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development.
DEVELOPABLE LAND- The land area of the parcel after deducting any area defined as an inland wetland or watercourse, located within a special flood hazard area as defined by the Federal Emergency Management Agency or exhibiting pre-development slopes of 25 percent (25%) (a 12.5 foot rise over a 50 foot distance) or steeper. If an HOD is proposed within the Lake Pocotopaug Protection Area, the term developable land shall be defined as aforesaid except that any area exhibiting pre-development slopes of 20 percent (20%) or steeper shall be deducted.
C. Primary Uses and Structures Permitted
1. Single-family detached dwellings, on either common interest ownership property or subdivided lots.
2. Attached single-family dwellings consisting of two or more residential units except that there shall be no more than four units per building, unless the dwellings are located within a Common Interest Ownership Association in which case there shall be no more than six units per building.
81
3. Public utility and infrastructure uses.
4. Water supply tanks.
D. Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures
1. On-site facilities for active and passive recreation, including community buildings and clubhouses, swimming pools, athletic fields, walking trails, bicycle routes, tennis courts, basketball courts, playgrounds and picnic areas.
2. Uses or structures accessory to the primary uses to the extent permitted by and subject to the procedures, limitations and conditions of Section 8.3.I of the Zoning Regulations.
3. Uses of a residence for personal business purposes to the extent permitted by and subject to the procedures, limitations and conditions of the Zoning Regulations.
E. Uses Prohibited in an HOD Zone
Burial of fuel storage tanks, except liquid propane, shall be prohibited.
F. Generally-Applicable Standards
1. All areas within the Lake Pocotopaug Protection Area shall remain subject to its requirements as set forth in Section 3.1 of the Zoning Regulations.
2. Unless modified by the Commission, each HOD shall make provision for facilities to help meet the social and recreational needs of residents of the HOD.
a. A community building / clubhouse or other arrangement for common interest activities may be required if the HOD development contains 100 or more units and if so required, such community building / clubhouse shall be provided as part of the construction phase resulting in 100 or more units within the HOD development.
b. Recreational amenities such as, but not required to be, tennis courts, basketball courts, bocce courts and /or other recreational facilities as proposed by the applicant.
3. All attached dwellings shall be served by sewers.
4. To maintain long-term affordability, the applicant shall demonstrate, as part of the Conceptual Plan and Final Plan, what strategies have been employed to provide for energy-efficient patterns of development, the use of solar and other renewable forms of energy, and energy conservation in a cost effective manner.
G. Parcels Eligible for to HOD Zone District
No parcels of land shall be rezoned to HOD Zone District unless it satisfies the following criteria:
1. Not less than 10 nor more than 200 total acres;
2. Currently zoned for residential use; and
3. Not less than 50 feet of frontage on a Town road.
82
H. Height, Area and Yard Requirements
1. Overall Housing Opportunity Development
Maximum Density
5.0 units per acre of developable land
Maximum Coverage by Impervious Surfaces
25 percent
Total Minimum Open Space
15 percent
2. Single-Family Detached Dwellings on Subdivided Lots
Minimum Lot Width
70 feet
Minimum Lot Frontage
50 feet
Minimum Front Yard
30 feet
Minimum Side Yard
10 feet
Minimum Rear Yard
25 feet
Maximum Building Coverage
20 percent
Maximum Building Height
35 feet
Maximum Stories
2 ½
3. Single-Family Detached Dwellings on Common Land
Minimum Setback from Perimeter of HOD Zone
30 feet
Minimum Setback from Existing or Proposed Public Road Right-of-way
30 feet
Minimum Setback from Existing or Proposed Private Road
30 feet
Minimum Principal Building Separation
20 feet
Minimum Accessory Building Separation
15 feet
Maximum Building Coverage
20 percent
Maximum Principal Building Height
35 feet
Maximum Accessory Building Height
15 feet
Maximum Stories
2 ½
83
4. Attached Dwellings on Common Interests Lands
Minimum Setback from Perimeter of HOD Zone when Abutting Existing Residential
75 feet
Minimum Setback from Existing Public
Road Right-of-way
100 feet
Minimum Setback from Proposed Public
Road Right-of-way
30 feet
Minimum Setback from Existing or
Proposed Private Road
30 feet
Minimum Principal Building Separation
30 feet
Minimum Accessory Building Separation
15 feet
Maximum Principal Building Height
35 feet
Maximum Accessory Building Height
15 feet
Maximum Stories
2 ½
5. Common Interest Facilities
Minimum Setback from Perimeter of HOD Zone or Existing Public Road Right-of-way
100 feet
Community Building/Clubhouse:
Maximum Height
35 feet
Maximum Stories
2 ½
84
I. Road Construction Standards and Road Dedication Requirements
Within an HOD Zone District, all roads, whether public or private, shall be constructed in conformance with the Town standards except that the Commission may, by a simple majority vote, modify sidewalk requirements, cul-de-sac length limits, and/or road widths. However, for projects that shall be developed as Common Interest Ownership Associations, private roads shall not be required to be constructed in accordance with Town standards. For these, the Commission may establish project-specific sidewalk requirements, cul-de-sac length limits, and road widths only to the extent the same promote and protect the public health and safety.
J. Common Interest Ownership Requirements
1. A common interest ownership association formed and governed in accordance with the Connecticut General Statutes shall be established whenever a development proposed within an HOD Zone District includes private roads, includes units on common land or attached dwellings, includes common recreation facilities, when the required open space is to be owned by a homeowner association, or when there are any other circumstances which would require common maintenance or management responsibilities (for maintenance of dwelling units not situated on subdivided lots, maintenance of infrastructure, neighborhood coordination, or other purpose).
2. When so required, all dwelling unit owners in an HOD Zone District, including the owners of single-family detached homes on subdivided lots, shall be members of the common interest ownership association.
3. An application for approval of Conceptual or Final Plans shall include, in draft form, a declaration and bylaws prepared in conformance with the Connecticut Common Interest Ownership Act, CGS § 47-200 et seq. In order to avoid fundamental differences between different components of the HOD, including affordable and non-affordable units, such common interest ownership documents shall provide for one owners association unless, for valid reason proposed by the developer, the Commission allows establishment of a master unit owners association comprising the entire HOD, as well as subsidiary association of development areas or clusters within the HOD.
4. The declaration and bylaws prepared in conformance with the Connecticut Common Interest Ownership Act shall provide that any fees set by the association shall not result in a person or family occupying a Housing Opportunity Unit having monthly expenditures for housing which will exceed the “maximum monthly payment” for an affordable unit as provided in State Statute, Regulation of Connecticut State Agencies, or the required Affordability Plan.
K. Open Space and Exclusive Use Area
1. Within an HOD, not less than fifteen percent (15%) of the gross area shall be set aside as open space to be deeded to the Town, a recognized land trust, or another recognized conservation organization as approved by the Commission. With approval of the Commission, such open space may be retained by the common interest ownership association subject to a conservation easement. Such areas may include, but are not limited to, areas for active or passive recreational uses; perimeter buffers or trees belts as described in this HOD Regulation; and upland regulated areas surrounding wetlands or watercourses. The Commission shall encourage the open space to be contiguous to or to interconnect existing or potential future open space. Any open space subjected to a conservation easement shall preserve it for such uses in perpetuity.
2. The common interest ownership documents for an HOD may provide for an exclusive use area for each dwelling unit located in a common interest ownership area of the HOD
85
L. Parking Requirements
1. Within an HOD, off-street parking shall be provided at a rate of not less than two (2.0) space per dwelling unit.
2. An application for a Housing Opportunity Development shall identify on the Conceptual and Final Plans the location and number of parking spaces that will serve all units located in the common interest ownership areas.
M. Signage
Signage within a Housing Opportunity Development shall comply with Section 7.2 of these Zoning Regulations.
N. Trash Removal
The Conceptual and Final Plan for a Housing Opportunity Development shall provide information about the number, location and screening of dumpsters or trash receptacles at community facilities and for servicing dwelling units. For individual units, the Final Plan and, if applicable, a Subdivision Plan shall make adequate provision for trash storage and removal.
O. Landscaping
Landscaping of buffers and perimeters and the aesthetic quality achieved thereby shall be considered a critical part of the Conceptual and Final Plans and if applicable, a Subdivision Plan, for a Housing Opportunity Development. Such Plans, therefore, shall provide at a minimum for the following:
1. For all dwellings except single-family detached dwellings on subdivided lots, one shade tree per unit, along with an illustration or detail of minimum foundation plantings per unit.
2. Between all proposed single-family detached dwellings on subdivided lots and fronting on an existing Town road, a minimum 25 foot wide “tree belt” in which trees are to be planted with one row of deciduous trees no more than 50 feet apart on center.
3. Between any proposed attached dwellings and any existing offsite single-family detached dwellings on subdivided lots, a landscaped or natural area, called a “perimeter buffer,” of not less than 25 feet wide containing plantings to achieve visual screening from adjacent properties.
4. When and where appropriate, the Commission may allow existing vegetation to be used in lieu of new landscaping materials.
P. Sidewalks and Bus Shelters
Sidewalks, trail and bus shelters shall be provided in suitable locations: however, sidewalks shall not be required on both sides of the street.
Q. Lighting
Conceptual and Final Plans and if applicable, a Subdivision Plan, for a Housing Opportunity Development shall provide, with illustrative detail, for exterior street lighting fixtures at intersections of Town roads, and as may be required for the safety of vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
86
R. Utilities
1. All electrical and telephone lines shall be located in conformance with applicable Town highway specifications.
2. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any dwelling unit until such unit has been connected to all required utilities.
S. Zone Change and Conceptual Plan Requirements
1. An application to establish a HOD zone requires a zone change application which will be processed in accordance with Section 9.3 of the Regulations.
2. In addition no zone change to HOD shall be granted without simultaneous submission and simultaneous approval of Conceptual Plans demonstrating that the area of the proposed zone change and the design of the proposed development is consistent with the purpose of the Zone and, as provided in CGS § 8-2, is appropriate for the site given soil types, terrain and infrastructure capacity.
3. The Conceptual Plan(s) shall contain an overall plan showing the following:
a. Key Map at 1” = 2000’ scale
b. For the parcel to be rezoned and other properties within 500 feet, a map at 1” = 100’ scale depicting:
1. The parcel to be rezoned to HOD with the boundaries of the property certified to a State of Connecticut A-2 Map Survey Standard,
2. Parcel to be rezoned the existing zoning of parcel to be rezoned, and
3. The existing zoning of adjacent land, and
4. The Assessor’s parcel numbers of the parcel to be rezoned and other properties within 500 feet,
c. 500 foot perimeter map, with Assessor’s parcels listed.
4. The conceptual Plan(s) shall show the following information, at a scale no greater than 1”=100’.
a. Title block, north point, scale, location map, and names of the engineer, architect, landscape architect, and/or surveyor preparing the plan.
b. Approval blocks
c. Location and extent of watercourses and waterbodies.
d. Location and extent of wetlands as defined by soil type.
e. Location and extent of floodplains.
f. Location and extent of areas with pre-development slopes of 25 percent or more (for land not located within the Lake Pocotopaug Protection Area) or 20 percent or more (for land located within the Lake Pocotopaug Protection Area).
g. Location of existing buildings and structures.
h. Location and layout of proposed property lines and building setback lines.
i. Location of proposed property lines and building setback lines.
j. Existing and proposed roads, pedestrian walkways, driveways, loading and parking areas and spaces.
k. Conceptual building elevations and floor plans.
l. Conceptual grading plan based on ten (10) foot contours from a USGS map.
m. Conceptual plan of existing and proposed storm drainage.
n. Conceptual plan of existing and proposed water supply facilities.
o. Conceptual plan of existing and proposed sewage disposal facilities.
p. Conceptual profiles for roads to be constructed to Town standards and dedicated to the Town in areas where road grades will exceed eight percent.
q. Proposed Open Space Plan identifying the areas of the development what will be preserved as open space; the areas and facilities to be used for active or passive recreation; connections to existing Town open space; and any improvements, structures, buildings or accessory uses to be located in open space.
87
r. A Conceptual Schedule of Construction, explaining the sequence of construction of the development areas in coordination with construction of infrastructure and recreational uses.
5. Traffic study prepared by a licensed engineer including, if off-site traffic improvements are proposed or required, a schematic plan with existing and proposed conditions.
6. Sufficient information for the Commission to determine that there is or will be adequate water available to service the proposed development (quantity, quality, pressure) as evidenced by:
a. A letter from an existing water company indicating that it can and will service the development,
b. A report from a hydro-geologist or other appropriate professional, based on field testing and other relevant information, or
c. Both.
7. Sufficient information for the Commission to determine that there is or will be adequate provision for the sewage disposal needs of the proposed development as evidenced by:
a. A letter from the water pollution control authority indicating that it can and will service the development,
b. A report from a Connecticut-licensed civil engineer, based on field testing and other relevant information, that the soils are adequate for septic systems to be installed as part of the proposed development, or
c. Both.
8. A preliminary “Housing Affordability Plan” in accordance with CGS § 8-30g, Section 8-30g-1 et seq. of the Regulations of Connecticut State agencies and the “Housing Affordability Plan Requirements” as adopted by the policy of the Commission and as the same may be amended form time to time.
T. Final Plan Requirements
1. Following approval of the Conceptual Plan or in lieu of filing a Conceptual Plan, the applicant shall submit a Final Plan for review and approval.
2. The Final Plan application shall be processed in accordance with Section 9.1 of the Zoning Regulations.
3. If applicable, a Subdivision Plan shall be processed in accordance with the requirements of the Subdivision Regulations.
4. Nothing in this HOD Regulation shall be interpreted as prohibiting as applicant from seeking concurrent conceptual and Final Plan approvals.
5. Such Final Plan application shall include a final “Housing Affordability Plan” in accordance with CGS § 8-30g, Section 8-30g-1 et seq. of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies and the “Housing Affordability Plan Requirements” as adopted by this policy of the Commission and as the same may be amended from time to time.
U. Duration of Final Approval
Following approval of a Final Plan and/or Subdivision Plan, all work associated with such approval(s) shall be completed in accordance with CGS § 8-3(i), CGS § 8-3(j), CGS § 8-26c and /or CGS § 8-26g, as applicable.
V. Start of Construction
An HOD may be built in phases provided each phase is consistent with the overall requirements of the HOD. In accordance with CGS § 8-3(i) and/or § 8-26c, each phase, including public improvements, shall be completed within five years of the start of construction of such phase, provided that the overall HOD shall proceed in accordance with Section 7.1 of the HOD Regulation.
88
W. Bonding of Public Improvements shown on Final Plan and Subdivision Plan
When a phase includes a public improvement, including a phase within a common interest community, the posting on any performance or other bond or financial security to ensure the completions of any such public improvements, shall occur prior to the start of construction of that phase of the HOD or in the case of a subdivision approval, including a conditional approval as authorized by CGS 8-25. The posting of any such bond or other financial security shall be done in accordance with the provisions contained in Section 9.1.E of the East Hampton Subdivision Regulations.
X. Enforcement
A violation of the provisions of the approved Affordability Plan shall not result in a forfeiture or reversion of title, but the Planning and Zoning Commission shall otherwise retain all enforcement powers granted by the Connecticut General Statutes, including the authority under CGS § 8-12 to issue notices of violation, to impose fines, and to seek injunctive relief.
89
Section 6.4. MUDD Zone - Mixed Use Development District
(Effective 08/04/)
A. General
The Planning and Zoning Commission recognizes that areas exist in the Town of East Hampton which are in close proximity to infrastructure required to support larger scale planned development incorporating a cohesive mixture of commercial, residential, recreational and lifestyle uses which will augment the economic development of the Town of East Hampton and provide employment, housing and lifestyle opportunities within the Town which currently do not exist. The Commission further recognizes that the assimilation of mixed uses which can occur in such a setting is not permitted under any individual zoning classification which is currently incorporated into the Town of East Hampton zoning ordinance. The Commission desires to create a legislative framework which will allow the type of development contemplated by this Section 6.4 of the Town of East Hampton zoning ordinance with stringent controls which will allow the Commission to ensure that the uses proposed within the district can be developed in harmony with each other, giving due consideration to the availability of infrastructure to support such development in the district; and that the uses proposed in the district will be in harmony with adjoining neighborhoods and compliment, rather than detract from, the orderly development of the Town.
B. Nature Of The Zone
1. The Mixed Use Development District (MUDD) will be a floating zone governed by a Master Plan, in accordance with Article 6 of these Regulations. The Master Plan will be subject to review and approval by the Commission as a zone change, subject to a public hearing and all other applicable terms and conditions of these Regulations.
2. It is recognized that the Master Plan may require fluidity in order to accommodate market changes during the complete development of any project. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any substantial and material change will be subject to the same procedural requirements for a zone change as required by the original zone change application adopting the Mixed Use Development District. For purposes hereof, a Substantial and Material Change is:
a. any reduction to any component of the MUDD in excess of ten (10%) percent thereof or (ii) any increase in the net square footage of all buildings in the MUDD by more than ten (10%) percent or (iii) any substantial change in the general layout and arrangement of uses and neighborhoods in the MUDD which would alter the general character of the neighborhood settings of each phase of the MUDD as approved by the Commission.
b. Notwithstanding anything herein contained to the contrary, no such reduction to any component of the MUDD shall be authorized which would increase the percentage of residential to non-residential uses in the MUDD without the approval of a new Master Plan.
3. Except as provided in Article 6 hereof, the Mixed Use Development District will supersede all pre-existing zoning, and any development of the zoned property owned and/or controlled by the Applicant, will be subject to the specific requirements for the Mixed Use Development District set forth herein and as delineated in the approved Master Plan.
C. Intent
1. Unified and Comprehensive Design. The Mixed Use Development District is designed to encourage mixed-use developments incorporating a neighborhood concept for separate and distinct neighborhoods within the Mixed Use Development District which are laid out, planned and designed to create a single integrated community on large blocks of land, whether or not the Applicant is the owner of all of the parcels within the district boundaries. Such unified design shall include comprehensive standards for the architectural style of buildings within each neighborhood of the MUDD; provision of open spaces and recreational areas, including pedestrian linkages and linked community facilities; the design of utilitarian
90
elements such as street furniture, lighting fixtures, and signage; preliminary designs for sewer, water and stormwater management and renovation for the district.
2. Maximum Utilization of Infrastructure. To direct more intensive development to areas of the Town where the highway connections, pedestrian linkages, public transportation utilities, water and sewer facilities and topography will support such development, in accordance with the recommendations of the Town’s Plan of Conservation and Development.
3. Expand Property Tax Base and Employment Opportunities. Use the incentives of higher density residential development and increased flexibility in overall development density and intensity to create an expanded non-residential tax base for the Town; to create attractive commercial, recreational and lifestyle environments which address the needs of Town and regional residents for shopping, services and recreational opportunities; to create employment opportunities for existing and future residents; and to create open space and recreational facilities that do not rely on public funds for their establishment and/or operation.
4. Increased Residential Diversity and Opportunity. Provide housing for persons who, due to age, income, health or lifestyle choice, require or demand more compact residential patterns than are possible with either (i) conventional single-lot subdivisions or (ii) development which can occur under existing multi-family development regulations; encourage varied housing types and to require the clustering of housing on land most capable of supporting it, and to create open space corridors between such clusters. Nothing herein contained shall be construed to prevent the incorporation of single family subdivision building lots within a MUDD; provided, however, that any such single family residential building lot shall comply with any bulk requirements established by the Master Plan, and not based upon the bulk regulations contained in the underlying zoning district.
5. Health, Safety, and Welfare; Plan of Conservation and Development. To encourage mixed use development, including recreational and lifestyle opportunity development at such degrees of intensity as can be conveniently accommodated by available infrastructure, or such infrastructure that may be developed or improved at the Applicant’s expense, in a manner which is consistent with the Plan of Conservation and Development of the Town of East Hampton and which promotes the health, safety, economic development and general welfare of the Town.
D. Mixed Use Development District
1. Applicants. Any owner of property within a proposed MUDD may apply to the Commission for a change of zoning district classification from the underlying zoning district to MUDD. Such owner, herein referred to as the Applicant, need not own all land within the proposed MUDD, and failure to own all land within such proposed district shall not prevent the Commission from hearing or granting any such application; provided, however, that the owner of each parcel delineated on the Master Plan for which MUDD approval is requested consents, in writing, to the filing of the application for the MUDD. For the purpose of this Section, the term “underlying zoning district” shall be defined as the zone(s) or district(s) existing on the subject parcel prior to the filing of an application for a MUDD.
2. Limitations on Underlying Zoning Districts. An Applicant can only apply for MUDD zoning district classification in existing Commercial and Design Development zones.
3. Uses Allowed and Required. A MUDD may include any use of land set forth in the following Sections of these Regulations, developed at the density and in accordance with the design parameters permitted by this Section 6.4 of these Regulations, in distinction to the density and design requirements set forth in the hereinafter referenced underlying districts:
a. Residential District Uses: Any use permitted by right or by special permit in the R1 District, the R2 District, the R3 District, and specifically including zero lot line subdivisions and two-family and multi-family residential uses, but excluding farms, seasonal roadside stands, kennels, wineries, excavation and filling operations other than for construction-related site grading, and cemeteries. The permitted uses expressly include housing types which would be compatible with a neighborhood or village type development. The overall residential density of the MUDD shall not exceed six (6) dwelling units for each acre of land in the MUDD, including open space and
91
recreational areas. In the event that the residential component of a MUDD includes not less than 10 percent of the proposed dwelling units as dwelling units which are designated as affordable housing units as defined in Connecticut General Statutes Section 8-30g, the overall maximum residential density of the MUDD shall be increased to eight (8) dwelling units for each acre of land in the MUDD, including open space and recreational areas. Residential components of the MUDD shall contain, be linked to, or be supported by new neighborhood, regional, commercial and/or recreational and lifestyle commercial development.
b. Commercial Uses: Any use permitted as of right or by special permit in the Commercial Zone, the Design Development Zone or the Village Center Zone, including bars, taverns and night clubs; and any use, which would otherwise be considered residential, which (i) has been submitted to a timesharing plan or a fractional interest plan pursuant to which the owner of any interest therein is limited to the use thereof for less than six (6) consecutive months in any one calendar year or (ii) which has been submitted to an age restricted housing plan with at least one household member being not less than fifty-five (55) years of age and no household member being less than eighteen (18) years of age; excluding, however, convenience gasoline sales establishments, gasoline filling stations, and automotive repair, as principal uses.
c. Accessory Uses:
1. As defined in Section 2.2 of these Regulations.
2. Work areas and facilities within residential units; provided, however, that the work space within each residential unit is clearly subordinate to the primary residential use.
d. Performance Standards for MUDDs. Any MUDD established pursuant to the provisions of this Section 6.4 of the East Hampton Zoning Regulations shall satisfy the following minimum standards:
1. The MUDD shall contain a minimum of sixty (60) contiguous acres of land.
2. The MUDD shall have direct access to a state highway which is classified as a Major Arterial Street pursuant to the provisions of Section 2.2 of these Regulations, which arterial street shall be utilized in the design of the MUDD as the primary point of ingress and egress to and from all uses within the MUDD for vehicular travel.
3. All uses in the MUDD shall be served by public water and municipal sewer facilities.
E. Application Procedure For Mixed Use Development Districts
1. Informal Preliminary Review: The Commission recommends that, prior to the submission of an official application for MUDD approval, the Applicant initiate a pre-application conference with the Commission and its staff and subsequently prepare and present a preliminary plan for informal consideration by the Commission. The preparation of the preliminary plan is recommended to facilitate the general consideration of factors and problems affecting the development of the land before the Applicant proceeds with the official application and the preparation of submittable maps, plans and documents required for formal consideration by the Commission. The presentation of a preliminary plan will more readily and economically facilitate alterations and changes recommended by the Commission. The pre-application conference and the informal consideration of the preliminary plan shall not be deemed to constitute any portion of the official and formal procedure of applying for a change of zone or a Master Plan approval. Neither the Applicant nor the Commission shall be in any way bound by statements made in such informal discussions, their purpose being only to minimize delay, expense and inconvenience to the public, the Applicant, and the Commission upon the future receipt, if any, of a formal application for a MUDD. Following any informal discussion, the Commission may suggest that the proposal, or certain aspects thereof, be referred to other municipal, State, or Federal agencies for review and comment, or may suggest that additional information is or will be required prior to action on a formal application for change of zone.
92
2. Formal Application:
a. Application Form and Fee. All applications for a MUDD shall be submitted to the Commission on a form prescribed by it and accompanied by an application fee for a zone change in accordance with the Ordinances of the Town of East Hampton. In addition, each application shall be accompanied by a list of names and addresses of the owners of all properties within and abutting the subject zone change, as such names and addresses appear in the most recent Grand List of the Town Assessor.
b. General Statement. Applications for change of zone to MUDD shall include a general statement describing the following:
1. The specific types of proposed uses on the site and the approximate square footage of each use;
2. The methods by which site utilities will be provided;
3. The proposed timetable for development, including a description of phases, if any;
4. A list of all additional licenses, permits, and approvals which will be required for the development together with a delineation of the agency responsible for the issuance of such permits, licenses and approvals;
5. The open space and/or recreational resources of the site, and the amount of open space to be retained, and the method of preservation, if any;
6. The pattern/method of ownership and maintenance of any interior roadways, public facilities, the sewerage disposal system(s), the water supply system(s), and other common elements;
7. For residential portions of the site, a schedule of bedrooms per dwelling unit, total numbers of units, and such other data as may be required to evaluate compliance with the standards and criteria of these Regulations; and
8. A statement outlining how the proposed development conforms to the Comprehensive Plan embodied in these Regulations and the adopted Plan of Conservation and Development of the Town.
c. Zone Change Map for Recording. All applications for a MUDD shall be accompanied by a property boundary survey, suitable for filing in the Office of the Town Clerk, indicating the area of the proposed zone change relative to existing property boundaries, and the names of all property owners owning property located within the MUDD and the names of all abutting property owners of record. Abutting property owners shall be determined by the most recent records of the Assessor of the Town of East Hampton as of the date of filing of the zone change application for the MUDD. Said survey shall include a key map. Said property boundary survey shall be certified by a Connecticut licensed land surveyor certifying that the survey conforms to the standards of survey and map accuracy respectively of Class A-2 as defined in the Minimum Standards for Surveys and Maps in the State of Connecticut, as the same may be amended from time to time. In the event that the Commission approves a zone change of a lesser area than that requested, the Applicant shall provide an amended zone change map reflecting the zone change as approved.
d. Master Plan. All applications for a MUDD shall be accompanied by a Master Plan as required below:
1. The Plan shall be drawn clearly and legibly at a scale of 1” = 100' or less. Sheet size shall not exceed 24” x 36” and the plan shall be drawn by a professional engineer, architect, landscape architect, or land surveyor registered in the State of Connecticut. The Town Planner may require that up to ten (10) paper prints be provided. Where appropriate, supporting information may be provided in textual rather than graphic form. The Town Planner may approve an alternative scale for all or some of the plan sheets.
2. Any and all of the following information may be required at the discretion of the Commission in accordance with the scale of the proposed development:
a. Key Map. A key map at a scale of 1” = 1000' showing the location of the proposed development and its relationship to existing Town and State roads.
93
b. Adjacent Land Uses. The boundary of the subject parcel or parcels to be rezoned and/or developed, owners of these parcels and adjacent parcels, roadways, structures, and land uses.
c. Existing Site Features. Existing structures, roads, land uses, topography at a contour interval of five (5') feet or less, major and unique natural, scenic, historic, and open space features of the parcel and their relationship to the proposed development.
d. Proposed Land Uses. The proposed density of land uses intended for different parts of the parcel, including the number of residential and commercial units, and the amount of land to be devoted to each land use including the amount and general location of proposed open spaces, recreational areas and facilities, parking, walkways, and other amenities.
e. Proposed Buildings. The general height, bulk, use and location of buildings, including conceptual elevations of the buildings in each phase of the MUDD sufficient to demonstrate to the Commission a consistent architectural theme which will be maintained throughout each phase of the MUDD.
f. Circulation. The proposed location of roads, ownership of roads, parking and pedestrian circulation including tie-ins with existing Town, state and public utility facilities.
g. Water Supply. The name of the water company which will supply potable water to the development and a projection of the number of gallons per day to be consumed by the entire MUDD upon completion.
h. Sewage Disposal. The proposed method for the collection and disposal of all sanitary waste.
i. Stormwater. A comprehensive stormwater quality and management plan that will incorporate low impact development techniques and processes.
j. Surface Water Quality. A statement indicating the quality of existing watercourses through or near the site.
k. 11. Erosion Control. A statement indicating the erodibility of the soils and a general indication of the need for erosion and sedimentation control. All erosion and sediment control measures shall comply with the latest edition of the Connecticut Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control.
l. Watercourses. The location of any inland wetland and watercourse as defined by the town Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations, and map, as amended.
m. Traffic Impact Study. A traffic impact analysis prepared by a Connecticut licensed professional engineer specializing in traffic engineering, evaluating the capacity of existing streets and highways to accommodate the projected traffic which will be generated by the MUDD uses.
n. Pedestrian Impact Study. An impact analysis prepared by a Connecticut licensed professional engineer evaluating the movement of pedestrian traffic within the MUDD and between the MUDD and adjacent uses, which impact analysis shall incorporate recommendations to facilitate pedestrian traffic both within the MUDD as well as between the MUDD and adjacent uses.
o. Parking Analysis. A parking plan for the MUDD prepared by a licensed professional engineer specializing in parking needs and design, which analysis shall determine the amount and location of parking required by the MUDD. The recommendations of the parking analysis shall be incorporated into the Master Plan by the Applicant’s consulting civil engineer; and, when approved by the Commission, shall supersede any and all parking requirements otherwise contained in these Regulations.
p. Constructability Review. A review of the design of the MUDD performed by a licensed professional engineer to determine that the Master Plan, as
94
formulated, is constructible giving due consideration to stormwater drainage, environmental constraints, soil conditions, utility layout and availability and access.
q. Signage Plan. A general signage plan delineating the general signage program for the MUDD, including directional signage. Signage within the MUDD shall not be required to comply with the requirements of Section 7.2 of these Regulations, but shall be subject to the approval of the Commission. In approving the Master Plan, the Commission shall approve, or modify and approve, as the case may be, the signage program for the MUDD. In conjunction with each site plan application for a specific element or phase of development within the MUDD, the Applicant shall present the specific signage proposal for that element or phase of the MUDD, including the size, location, illumination and design of all signage, which signage shall be determined by the Commission to be consistent with the general signage program for the MUDD approved in the Master Plan approval, and which signage shall be consistent with the architectural character and theme of the specific neighborhood within the MUDD.
r. Scheduling. A detailed schedule of development in terms of time and site development area for all proposed phases.
s. Restrictions. The substance of any proposed covenants, easements and restrictions.
t. Further Documentation. Other documentation as may reasonably be required by the Commission to make an adequate determination of the appropriateness of the proposal to the site and of its fulfillment of the intent of these Regulations. The Commission may require information generally required in the final site development plan if it feels such information is necessary to make an informed judgment. Preliminary findings for all site investigations shall be indicated.
e. Subdivision Application. If the Master Plan depicts the division of the subject property so as to create a subdivision or resubdivision, as those terms are defined in the East Hampton Subdivision Regulations, an application under such Regulations shall be required prior to any conveyance of land requiring approval pursuant to such Regulations.
f. Additional Information. A zone change application calls upon the Commission to exercise a legislative function, and to determine that the MUDD applied for will be superior to the underlying zone in achieving the purposes of these Regulations as set forth in Article 6 and Section 6.4.A hereof. It is the obligation of the Applicant to provide any additional information which the Commission may request or require in order to make such a determination. Such information may include, but is not limited to: additional information concerning surrounding land uses, building locations, driveways, streets, topography, watercourses and wetlands, utilities, and the like; and an environmental impact statement prepared by professionals qualified to prepare such studies.
3. Public Hearing, Personal Notice, and Action:
a. Procedure, Notice. The Commission shall act in such manner, and in accordance with such time limits, as are designated for changes of zone in accordance with Section 9.3 of these Regulations and in accordance with the applicable provisions of Section 8-7d of the Connecticut General Statutes. In the event of conflict between the procedures set forth in these Regulations and the General Statutes, the latter shall prevail. In lieu of any notice provided by Section 9.3 of these Regulations, the Applicant shall mail personal notice of the proposed zone change to MUDD to each owner of property within or abutting the MUDD, as their names and addresses appear in the most recent Grand List of the Town Assessor, said notice to be by United States First Class Mail, evidenced by a Certificate of Mailing issued by the Unites States Postal Service. Said notice shall be mailed no less than ten (10) days prior to the initial public hearing on the zone change, and the Applicant shall submit to the Town Planner, at least five (5) days prior to such hearing,
95
evidence of such mailing. The Applicant need not provide similar notice of any continuation of the initial public hearing. The Commission may approve all or part of the zone change requested.
b. Action on Master Plan. The Commission shall approve, modify and approve, or disapprove the Master Plan. Any site plan approval subsequently granted for any use within the approved MUDD shall substantially conform to the approved Master Plan, except to the extent that the Commission approves a departure therefrom. No Certificate of Zoning Compliance or Building Permit shall be issued, nor shall any construction activity of any kind commence, for any work depicted on an approved Master Plan, until such time as a site plan approval in accordance with Section 9.1 of these Regulations has been issued for development to be located in the phase, or on the lot or site, where such development is to occur.
c. Notice of Action and Filing of Map. Upon approval of a MUDD and Master Plan, the Commission shall provide notice to the Applicant and the public, as provided in the General Statutes, and shall cause the approved MUDD zone map to be noted on the official zoning map of the Town of East Hampton by outlining the boundaries of the land affected thereby and indicating the approval date.
d. Recording. The Applicant shall, within ninety (90) days of approval of any MUDD, record notice thereof in the East Hampton Land Records under the name of the record owner(s) of land affected thereby, giving a legal description of the land, and giving specific reference to the approved plan(s) and map(s); and, further, the Applicant shall file in the East Hampton Land Records a copy of the approved plan(s) and map(s), endorsed by the signature of the Commission's Chairman or Secretary.
4. Criteria for Decisions on Change of Zone and Master Plan: In acting on the application for change of zone and the Master Plan, the Commission is performing a legislative function and shall be allowed the discretion granted to Zoning Commissions acting in a legislative capacity by Connecticut law. The Commission shall, in acting upon the Master Plan, consider the Plan of Conservation and Development adopted by the Commission as well as make a determination that the Master Plan is in conformance with the Comprehensive Plan of the Town of East Hampton.
a. General Findings: In general, the application shall allow the Commission to make the following findings in support of any decision to approve the MUDD:
1. The proposed MUDD shall be of such location, size and character that, in general, it will be in harmony with the appropriate and orderly development of the area in which it is proposed to be situated and will not be detrimental to the orderly development of adjacent properties.
2. The location and size of proposed uses, the intensity of operations involved in connection with such uses, the site layout, and their relationship to access streets shall be such that vehicular and pedestrian traffic generated by the use or uses, shall not be detrimental to the character of the neighborhood.
3. The establishment of such MUDD will not unreasonably hinder or discourage the appropriate development and use of adjacent land and buildings or impair the value thereof.
4. The proposed uses permit the development of the site without the destruction of valuable natural assets or pollution of lakes, streams, and other water bodies while providing a design of structures and land uses which is compatible with the shape, size, topography and natural character of the development site.
b. Site Plan Approval:
1. Upon the adoption of a MUDD by the Commission, the Applicant shall prepare a final site plan for the development of each phase of the MUDD. Each phase of the MUDD shall be capable of being fully developed without dependence upon any subsequent phase of the MUDD.
2. Any application for site plan approval shall be submitted to the Commission on a Per Phase basis. All phases of the MUDD shall be designated and approved on an integrated basis and site plan applications for single uses or buildings within a MUDD shall not be
96
approved by the Commission. Any site plan approval granted by the Commission shall require a finding that the architectural style and placement of buildings within the Phase of the MUDD will not adversely impact residential neighborhoods and residential properties abutting the MUDD. In order to assist the Commission in making these findings, the Applicant shall, in conjunction with a site plan application for a Phase of the MUDD, provide architectural information with respect to all buildings in the Phase including screening, building and site illumination, landscaping plans, the location and construction material of any fences, walls, walkways, trash disposal areas and the like.
F. Specific Requirements for All MUDDs
1. Access - Access and circulation ways shall be designed to permit appropriate firefighting equipment, fuel trucks, refuse collection, deliveries and snow removal equipment to operate in a safe and efficient manner.
a. The MUDD shall be served from, or have access to, at least one through improved State owned and maintained Major Arterial Street (as defined in Section 2.2 of these Regulations) which provides adequate circulation and access to other sections of the Town. The design of the highway system in a MUDD shall be formulated to facilitate ingress to and egress from the MUDD without significantly adversely impacting traffic flow and traffic safety on interconnecting Town or State Highways. The Applicant shall bond and construct in the first phase of any MUDD any public highway(s) depicted on the Master Plan, unless the Commission expressly waives this requirement. Nothing herein contained shall limit the use of community owned and maintained streets within a MUDD.
b. The Commission may require temporary turnarounds and street connections to adjoining undeveloped land as necessary for its proper development, except where topography does not permit or where such street connections would adversely affect the neighborhood.
c. The street system shall be designated to permit connection to existing and proposed facilities where necessary for proper functioning of the utility systems or the extension of utilities to adjoining properties.
d. Buildings, walls, fences, planting and other sight obstructions shall be so located and designed that a driver backing out of any garage, carport or parking space has an unobstructed view of approaching traffic.
2. Parking - Parking for all uses shall be in accordance with the requirements of the parking analysis and plan for the MUDD incorporated into the Master Plan and approved by the Commission. The Commission shall, where possible, seek to minimize the construction of parking spaces, and encourage the use of shared parking facilities, mass transit and pedestrian connections.
3. Underground Utilities. All development in a MUDD shall provide for underground installation of all utilities in both public ways and private streets within the MUDD. All development shall provide proper design and construction of storm sewer facilities, including grading, gutters, piping and treatment of turf to handle stormwater, prevent erosion and the formation of dust. Utilities and maintenance facilities shall be in accordance with the requirements and regulations of the appropriate authority having jurisdiction.
4. Pedestrian and Bicycle Circulation. The Commission may, where deemed appropriate, require walkways and/or bikeways within the development to facilitate non-vehicular movement to community facilities within the development and on adjoining properties.
5. Streets.
a. Public Streets. Streets designated on the Master Plan and approved by the Commission to be dedicated to the Town shall conform to the specifications prescribed by the Road Ordinance of the Town of East Hampton, regardless of whether the development requires Subdivision approval in accordance with the East Hampton Subdivision Regulations.
b. Private Streets and Driveways. All private streets and driveways within a MUDD shall be developed in conjunction with a street classification schedule which shall be prepared by a
97
licensed professional engineer and submitted with the Master Plan for approval by the Commission. The schedule shall be developed based upon the nature of the uses which will be served by the street, the anticipated volume of traffic on the street, the street grade and its alignment with intersecting streets, whether public or private. The street classification schedule shall be developed by a licensed professional engineer in order to design a street scheme for the MUDD which adequately accommodates the vehicular and pedestrian traffic which will be generated by the uses to be served within the MUDD, but not to overdesign any such private streets, driveways and pedestrian walkways in order to minimize the amount of impervious area created within the MUDD. Construction specifications for private streets within the MUDD shall be consistent with the construction specifications for a municipally owned street as contained in the East Hampton Road Ordinance (i.e. depth of subbase and base material, application of bearing surfaces, etc., but shall not be required to conform to the typical street cross-section requirements contained therein).
6. Waste Disposal. Adequate sight screening must be provided for all common and commercial garbage collection areas.
7. Setback Requirements, Building Proximity.
a. Where the MUDD abuts any residentially zoned property outside of the MUDD, all buildings or structures shall be at least fifty (50') feet from any residentially utilized building on any parcel adjoining the exterior boundaries of the MUDD.
b. Where a commercial MUDD or a commercial component of a MUDD adjoins an existing single-family home development or approved residential subdivision, the Commission may require sufficient screening to insure privacy from adjoining residences.
c. Setbacks between buildings and structures within the MUDD shall be such as to provide reasonable access to light and air, and access space for service, fire protection and maintenance equipment and operations.
8. Design. The design of any MUDD shall protect neighborhood property values, prevent future deterioration, promote good community living standards, provide for preservation of the character of the Town, provide for feasible management and control of the premises, and serve the purposes of this Section 6.4 and Section 1.2 of these Regulations, specifically including the protection of the public health, safety, and welfare. Site and architectural design shall take advantage of topographic features, provide for landscaping and restoration of all areas disturbed by construction, and complement any adjoining neighborhood. Consistency of scale and complementary architectural design and landscaping standards shall be maintained throughout the various components of the MUDD.
9. Open Space:
a. Definition: All land designated as open space on the Master Plan and not used for the construction of dwellings, commercial buildings, supporting facilities, parking, vehicular circulation, or private yards shall be considered open space. It shall be so arranged and defined that its area, permanent use and control can be established with restrictions or covenants governing any development upon it.
b. Minimum Open Space Requirement: The Master Plan shall provide for not less than twenty (20%) percent of the MUDD to be permanent open space. This requirement shall be satisfied by open space vehicles specifically permitted by this Section 6.4 of the East Hampton Zoning Regulations.
c. Ownership of Open Space: Open Space within a MUDD shall be held in any of the following forms of ownership as shall be approved by the Commission.
1. Owned by a corporation composed of the owners of all lots or other ownership units within the MUDD. When ownership of open space is held by such a corporation, membership in said corporation shall be mandatory for all unit or lot owners, and said corporation shall have powers of assessment and enforcement as set forth in Chapter 828 of the Connecticut General Statutes, the Connecticut Common Interest Ownership Act.
2. Owned by a private conservation trust, the State of Connecticut, the Town of East Hampton, or such other corporate or governmental entity as shall assure the
98
preservation and maintenance of such open space in perpetuity. No application for a MUDD shall be deemed complete without written evidence from the proposed entity that it is willing to accept the ownership and maintenance of such open space.
3. Ownership by the developer or its successors. Ownership of open space by the developer or its successors shall only be permitted in MUDDs where no subdivision of the property is proposed, i.e. where the entire contiguous component of open space is owned and/or managed by a single commercial entity.
4. Any other method of perpetual preservation for open space, active or passive recreation, agricultural, wildlife, or similar purposes; provided, however, that no area reserved for open space shall be used or occupied by commercial buildings or uses, or otherwise available for a charge or fee to the general public, such as riding academies or stables, nurseries, day care centers, retail uses, and the like. Such uses may be included in a MUDD if permitted by the Commission, but shall not be considered “open space”. Notwithstanding the provisions of this paragraph, any golf course and driving range contained within the MUDD shall be considered as open space.
d. General Requirements for Open Space: Regardless of the method employed for the ownership of open space, the instrument of conveyance must include provisions suitable to the Commission for guaranteeing:
1. The continued use of such land for the intended purposes;
2. Continuity of proper maintenance for those portions of open space land requiring maintenance;
3. When appropriate, the availability of funds required for such maintenance;
4. Adequate insurance protection; and
5. Recovery for loss sustained by casualty, condemnation or otherwise.
6. In any event, the Applicant shall file in the East Hampton Land Records prior to the commencement of construction of any Phase of the MUDD, legal documents, including a conservation easement in favor of the Town of East Hampton, which will produce the aforesaid guarantees and assure the use of open spaces for their designated purposes.
e. Alternative Provisions for Open Space: The Applicant may, in complete or partial satisfaction of the open space requirements contained in Section 6.4.F.9.E hereof propose the development of open space or recreational facilities at a location extraneous to the MUDD parcel. The Commission shall have discretion to approve or disapprove any offer of offsite open space or recreational dedication or improvement in complete or partial satisfaction of the open space requirements set forth in this Section of these Regulations.
10. Phasing:
a. Each phase proposed for a MUDD shall be capable of independent existence and operation and shall be consistent with the approved Master Plan.
b. Amenities, such as recreation areas, community buildings, open space, and other similar improvements shall be divided as equally as possible among phases, or shall be completed in the earlier phase(s) of the development, as the Commission may require.
c. Any amenities or improvements for each phase which are designated on the Master Plan for dedication as municipally owned improvements in accordance with the requirements of this Section 6.4. Phases of a MUDD need not be contiguous.
d. For any phase of a MUDD containing dwelling units, such phase shall also include not less than 10,000 square feet of floor area of commercial or recreational development for every seventy (70) bedrooms of residential development contained in such phase, which calculation shall be made on a cumulative basis; i.e. in the event that the commercial or recreational development in any phase of development in a MUDD contains in excess of the minimum required floor area of commercial or recreational development, the excess contained in such phase over the requirement for such phase shall be applied to the satisfaction of the minimum commercial and recreational use development required in future phases of development of the MUDD.
99
e. For purposes hereof, recreational development shall be limited to recreational facilities located entirely contained in a building such as, but not limited to, bowling alleys, video golf facilities, arcades, swimming pools, exercise facilities and gymnasiums.
f. It is recommended that non-residential uses in a MUDD be generally clustered in a village setting, with the residential and commercial development occurring apace either in each phase, or in cumulative phases.
g. Small-scale commercial uses may be included within mixed-use buildings or complexes within a phase, provided that no Certificate of Zoning Compliance at either the Building Permit or Certificate of Occupancy stages shall be issued for any residential use until construction has commenced on the commercial uses within the applicable phase of the MUDD.
11. Other Standards of These Regulations: In addition to the foregoing standards, the Commission shall also apply the standards set forth in all other applicable Sections of these Regulations, other than the bulk regulations, except as otherwise provided herein.
G. Specific Requirements for Residential Development in a MUDD
1. Multi-family Dwellings - In addition to other applicable standards of this Section, Multi-family dwelling complexes within the MUDD shall comply with the following additional requirements:
a. Each multi-family dwelling building shall contain not more than twenty (20) dwelling units nor less than three (3) dwelling units.
b. Each multi-family dwelling building shall not exceed the lesser of (i) fifty-two (52’) feet in height (ii) such height, based upon the location of and access to the building, as has been approved for fire protection purposes by the fire marshal of the Town of East Hampton or (iii) two (2) floors of residential units above commercial or office use.
c. Exterior walls longer than fifty (50') feet shall include an offset for each fifty (50') feet of length of at least four (4') feet, or shall include a commonly accepted architectural feature that breaks the building wall plane.
d. No outside storage or clothes drying area will be provided unless it is completely screened from view from any adjoining property or street. Refuse containers shall be screened from view and provided in sufficient numbers to accommodate refuse from all residents in a sanitary and odorless manner. All accumulated refuse shall be removed from the premises at least once each week.
e. Sidewalks abutting any street, driveway, access or interior circulation road shall only be required in those locations in which the Commission determines, in its discretion, sidewalks are convenient in order to provide for the efficient movement of pedestrian traffic within the MUDD and to and from the MUDD from the adjoining State owned and maintained Major Arterial Street. Proposed sidewalk locations shall be determined by the Applicant’s licensed professional engineer and delineated on the circulation plan included with the Master Plan submitted to the Commission for approval in conjunction with a zone change application for a MUDD.
f. The landscaping and architectural design of multi-family dwellings shall be in harmony with that of the MUDD of which it is a part, and the maintenance of the approved architectural style shall be enforced by declarations and covenants acceptable to the Commission’s legal counsel. Building and site design, lighting, landscaping, walkways, and other site improvements shall create a consistent, complimentary visual atmosphere, and shall incorporate layout, architectural, development and landscaping plans and techniques including, but not limited to: varied, but complimentary roof lines and styles, complimentary building styles, sizes, orientations and exterior finishes, foundation plantings, street trees, bollard lighting for walkways, ornamental gardens, gazebos and courtyard park settings to accomplish the desired effect.
g. Satellite Receivers: A single satellite receiver may be provided for each building in the MUDD; or, each unit may be served by cable television service. Any receiver serving a building or complex of buildings shall be located in a manner which will minimize its visibility.
100
h. Suitable landscaping, as determined by the Commission, shall be provided on all lots on which a multi-family dwelling is located, preserving, wherever possible, the natural landscape. The Commission, may, where necessary to screen abutting single family residential land uses, require the installation of a buffer strip.
2. Zero Lot Line Subdivision - In addition to other applicable standards of this Section, single family dwellings located on individual lots within a MUDD shall comply with the following additional requirements:
a. Lot Size: The minimum lot size shall be 4,000 square feet.
b. Bulk Requirements: Front and rear yard setbacks shall be fifteen (15') feet. There shall be no side yard setbacks requirements in zero lot line subdivisions in a MUDD. The maximum building height for structures in zero lot line subdivisions in a MUDD shall be thirty-five (35') feet.
c. Sidewalks/Walkways: Sidewalks abutting any street, driveway, access or interior circulation road on which the development is located shall not be required unless, in the discretion of the Commission, they are deemed necessary in order to accommodate the safe passage of pedestrian traffic to non-residential components of the MUDD. Walking trails may be proposed by the Applicant as a suitable substitute for sidewalks. All sidewalks shall be owned and maintained by either (i) an association created in accordance with the Connecticut Common Interest Ownership Act or (ii) a developer or phase developer within the MUDD.
H. Specific Requirements for Commercial and Mixed Use Development in a MUDD
In addition to other applicable standards of this Section, commercial and mixed use development within the MUDD shall comply with the following additional requirements:
1. There shall be no required building set back from any streetline within a MUDD, it being the intention of these Regulations to allow the development of a lifestyle community, in the heritage of a traditional New England village, with buildings situated in close proximity to the adjoining street.
2. Building placement shall be subject to the discretion of the Commission in approving a Master Plan for a MUDD.
3. Rear yard setbacks shall be twenty-five (25') feet.
4. Building height in a MUDD shall not exceed fifty-two (52') feet.
5. The Commission may increase the setbacks contained in this Regulation in the event that greater setbacks are required in order to adequately screen the proposed commercial use or building from an adjoining residential development or residential structure located exterior to the MUDD.
6. The architectural design and landscaping of the commercial use or building shall be in harmony with that of the MUDD, and the maintenance of the approved architectural style shall be enforced by declarations and covenants acceptable to the Commission’s legal counsel.
7. Building and site design, lighting, landscaping, walkways and other site improvements shall create a consistent, complimentary, visual atmosphere, and shall incorporate layout, architectural, development and landscaping plans and techniques including, but not limited to:
a. varied, but complimentary roof lines and styles,
b. complimentary building styles, sizes,
c. orientations and exterior finishes,
d. foundation plantings,
e. street trees and bollard lighting for walkways to accomplish the desired effect.
I. Conformance to Recorded Documents
Land included in a MUDD shall be used and developed only in accordance with the recorded documents. Any site plan approval issued for any phase in the MUDD shall substantially conform to the design, use, and other standards of the approved Master Plan, unless modified as provided hereunder.
101
J. Amendment or Extension of Approved MUDDs
1. An application to extend an approved MUDD shall specify the nature of the planned extension(s) and shall be accompanied by a scale plan of the proposed extension(s) in the same detail as is required in an initial application for Master Plan approval and shall be accompanied by a fee in accordance with the applicable fee ordinance establishing fees for land use applications in the Town of East Hampton. Such application shall be initiated by the original applicant or a successor in interest; See Section 9.3 (Amendment) of these Regulations.
2. Any amendment to the Master Plan involving a change of use or any other substantial alteration of the Plan may be requested and acted upon as part of the application for, and action on, an application for site plan approval in accordance with Section 9.1 of these Regulations, as required in this Section 6.4 of the East Hampton Zoning Regulations; or, alternatively, if the Commission determines that such amendment constitutes a Substantial and Material Change in the Master Plan, the Commission may act upon such amendment as a new and separate application for a MUDD under this Section. Such application may be initiated by the original Applicant, a successor in interest, or, where the Commission initiated the original MUDD approval, by the Commission itself, following a public hearing and other procedures as prescribed for a change of zone. See Section 9.3 (Amendment) of these Regulations.
K. Commencement and Completion of Construction
1. For any MUDDs approved pursuant to this Section 6.4, the construction of any building or structure or the establishment of any use depicted on the Master Plan, or any phase thereof, shall be completed by the Applicant, and a Certificate of Zoning Compliance and Certificate of Occupancy, where required, shall be issued, within five (5) years from the effective date of any site plan approval of each individual Phase of the MUDD, as the case may be, which has been issued in accordance with the approved Master Plan.
2. Upon application, the Commission may grant one (1) or more extensions of the aforesaid time limit for a total period of up to five (5) additional years.
3. The foregoing time limits shall be tolled during the pendency of any court appeal of the approval of the MUDD or, for any particular phase or portion of the MUDD, or of any site plan approval issued thereunder.
L. Performance Bonds
The Commission may require performance bonds to insure the completion of any public improvements in connection with any MUDD, for the installation of any infrastructure which, in accordance with the MUDD documents will be available for public use, and for the maintenance of erosion and sediment control measures until each phase of the MUDD is stabilized as delineated on any site plan approved for a use in the MUDD in a form satisfaction to the Town Attorney.
M. Deeds
Any conveyances of Town roads, open space, drainage easements, or other interests in real property to be conveyed to the Town of East Hampton shall be by Warranty Deed, and shall be accompanied by a current Certificate of Title, prepared by an attorney admitted to the bar of the State of Connecticut or a policy of title insurance issued by a title insurance company licensed to transact title insurance business in the State of Connecticut, and certifying or insuring, as the case may be, that title to the real property conveyed or the interest therein conveyed is free and clear of, or superior in right to, any mortgage lien, restriction or other encumbrance materially affecting the use thereof for its intended purpose.
102
N. Outside Storage Applicable to Uses in a Mixed Use Development District
4. No outside storage of materials, products or refuse shall be permitted unless specifically authorized by the Commission, and such authorized outside storage shall be screened in such manner as the Commission may require. All loading areas shall be oriented away from residential areas and public ways and adequately screened from view by appropriate landscaping.
103
ARTICLE 7 - BASIC STANDARDS
Section 7.1. Parking and Loading
(Effective 08/01/2011)
A. Purpose
These parking regulations are adopted for the purpose of providing sufficient parking facilities to serve all existing and proposed uses, while allowing for some flexibility of site design to accommodate the unique characteristics of individual properties.
B. Number of Parking Spaces
1. Facilities for parking shall be provided to serve all building erected, moved, altered or enlarged in excess of twenty-five (25%) percent of their present floor area.
2. Unless modified or waived by the Commission as provided in Section 7.1.D, parking shall be provided and maintained such that the number of spaces shall be:
a. Higher than the number of spaces indicated by the lower threshold, and
b. Lower than the number of spaces indicated by the upper threshold.
Residential-Type Land Uses Lower Threshold Upper Threshold
One- and Two-Family Residential
2 per dwelling unit
-
Multi-Family Residential
1 per dwelling unit
2 per dwelling unit
Resident Trailer Parks
1 per dwelling unit plus 0.5 per employee
1 per dwelling unit plus 1 per employee
Boarding and Rooming Houses, Dormitories
1 for each resident plus 1 for the resident manager
1.5 for each resident plus 1 for the resident manager
Active Adult and Senior Housing
1 per dwelling unit plus 1 per employee
2 per dwelling unit plus 1 per employee
Congregate and Assisted Living
0.5 space per dwelling unit plus 1 per employee
1 space per dwelling unit plus 1 per employee Lodging-Type Land Uses
Bed and Breakfast & Country Inn
1 spaces per guest room or suite
1.2 space per guest room or suite
Hotels
1 per guest room plus 0.5 per employee on the largest shift
1 per guest room plus 1 per employee on the largest shift
Motels, Tourist Homes
1 per guest room plus 1 for the manager
1 per guest room plus 1 per employee on the largest shift Office-Type Land Uses
Business Offices and Financial Institutions
3 per 1,000 square feet GFA
5 per 1,000 square feet gross floor area (GFA)
Medical and Dental Offices
4 for each doctor engaged at the office on the largest shift
5 for each doctor engaged at the office plus 1 for every other employee on the largest shift Commercial-Type Land Uses
Retail, Personal Services
2 per 1,000 square feet GFA
5 per 1,000 square feet GFA
104
Restaurants
1 for every 3 seats
1 per 100 square feet of seating area or 1 for every 4 seats (whichever is greater)
Small Shopping Centers
3 per 1,000 square feet GFA
6 per 1,000 square feet GFA Industrial-Type Land Uses
Industrial and Manufacturing
3 per each 1,000 square feet GFA
3 per each 1,000 square feet GFA or one per each employee on the largest shift, whichever is larger
Light Industrial
2 per 1,000 square feet GFA
8 per 1,000 square feet GFA
Warehouse
1 per 1,000 square feet GFA
1 per 1,000 square feet GFA Institutional-Type Land Uses
Churches and Places of Worship
1 space per 5 seats in
1 space per 3 seats in
Elementary, Middle, and High Schools
1 space per 5 seats in the auditorium
1 space per 3 seats in the auditorium
Museum and Libraries
1 per 1,000 square feet GFA
2 per 1,000 square feet GFA
Social, Fraternal Clubs and Organizations
3 per 1,000 square feet GFA
4 per 1,000 square feet GFA Recreation-Type Land Uses
Gymnasiums, Physical Fitness Centers, Health Spas, Martial Arts Centers, and Dance Studios
2 per 1,000 square feet GFA
4 per 1,000 square feet GFA
Indoor Recreation Facilities
5 per 1,000 square feet GFA
5 per 1,000 square feet GFA
Outdoor Recreation Facilities
As determined by the Commission based on a parking demand study
As determined by the Commission based on a parking demand study
Theaters and Places of Assembly
1 for every 6 potential occupants at maximum capacity plus one for each employee
1 for every 3 potential occupants at maximum capacity plus 1 for each employee Automotive-Type Land Uses
Automotive Sales and/or Rental
1 per 1,000 square feet GFA
3 per 1,000 square feet GFA
Automotive Repair and/or Service
2 per 1,000 square feet GFA
4 per 1,000 square feet GFA Other Land Uses
Roadside Stands
1 beyond residential requirement
5 beyond residential requirement
Day Care Centers
1 space per 8 children at maximum capacity
1 space per 4 children at maximum capacity
Funeral Homes
1 for each “Official Vehicle”. 1 for each employee and 1 for every 8 visitors at maximum capacity
1 for each “Official Vehicle”. 1 for each employee and 1 for every 4 visitors at maximum capacity
Hospitals, Sanitariums, Nursing or Convalescent Homes
1 for every 6 beds plus 0.5 per employee on the largest shift
1 for every 4 beds plus 1 per employee on the largest shift
Commercial Kennel
1 per 1,000 square feet GFA
3 per 1,000 square feet GFA
3. For uses not listed in this Section, the lower threshold and the upper threshold for number of parking spaces required shall be comparable to the closest other similar use as determined by the Commission.
4. Notwithstanding Section 7.1.B, such parking facilities shall be sufficient to accommodate vehicles for all occupants, employees, customers and others normally visiting the building or premise at any one time. The Commission may require, at its discretion, that an applicant provide justification for the number of proposed parking spaces through case studies of similar uses, shared parking analyses, parking demand management, or other means.
105
5. Said parking shall be part of the site plan or prepared as a separate plan and shall include boundary screening and landscaping, landscaped islands, parking sites, traffic circulation patterns, loading areas, storm drainage facilities and traffic access and egress including driveways.
C. Parking Space Requirements for People with Disabilities
1. All off-street parking areas shall include paved parking spaces accessible to people with disabilities.
2. Pursuant to subsection (h) of Section 14-253a of the Connecticut General Statutes, parking spaces for passenger motor vehicles designated for people with disabilities shall be as near as possible to a building entrance or walkway and shall be at least 15 feet wide including 5 feet of cross hatch and twenty feet long.
3. Handicap accessible parking spaces and access aisles shall be provided in the following amounts relative to the total number of spaces provided in the parking area:
a. One parking space accessible to people with disabilities for every 25 parking spaces, rounded up to the nearest whole number.
b. For every six parking spaces accessible to people with disabilities, at least one shall be a van-accessible parking space. Van parking spaces shall be 20 feet long, 16 feet wide including 8 feet of cross hatch.
D. Waivers and Exceptions
1. Intent - This Section of the regulations is intended to set standards for conditions under which a waiver or exception from the general parking requirements may be allowed. The Commission may require the submission of a parking demand analysis as part of any request for a waiver or exception from the general parking requirements.
2. Waivers - Except for buildings used or occupied for residential use, all or part of the parking requirements may be waived by the Commission where the proposed planning, design, and construction includes the following:
a. Sufficient publicly owned or shared parking spaces within 500 feet of the proposed development site.
b. Access to a regularly scheduled transit stop within 500 feet of the proposed development, with service available during the hours necessary to serve the activities of the use for which a waiver is sought.
3. Requests for Parking Below the Lower Threshold - In the case that an applicant believes that the lower threshold parking amounts are in excess of what is needed for the proposed use, the applicant may submit a request with justification to the Commission for a reduction in parking space requirements. The Commission will consider and act on this request concurrent with and as part of the application process.
4. Requests for Parking Beyond the Upper Threshold - The Commission may approve parking lots with more spaces than the allowed maximum provided that all of the spaces above maximum number are constructed of a pervious surface. The Commission may also approve parking lots with additional impervious parking spaces above the allowed upper threshold spaces where the use of pervious spaces would not be environmentally sound and where stormwater management is provided that complies with the Town’s standards.
5. Parking Space Held in Reserve - For phased developments, the Commission may provide that up to 50 percent of the parking spaces required by this Section will not be immediately constructed and may be kept in reserve. Such reserve parking areas must be kept planted and maintained rather than surfaced for parking until such time as the additional parking space is necessary to serve completed phases of the associated development. No above ground improvements shall be placed or constructed upon such reserve parking areas. The areas designated as reserve parking must be clearly depicted on the phased development site plan and the terms and conditions of phasing of the parking area completion, as determined by the Commission, must clearly be set forth in notations on the approved site plan.
106
Stormwater management systems must either be sized to accommodate the full parking area at buildout or developed along with the phased construction of parking areas.
E. Parking Lot Design
At a minimum, all parking lots shall:
1. Have a minimum stall size of nine feet by eighteen feet (9’ x 18’).
2. Be installed at 90- or 45-degree angles (unless parallel parking is being used).
3. Have a 12-foot travel lane for each direction of traffic.
4. Have no greater than three percent (3%) slope.
5. Have a number and location of access drives compatible with traffic circulation patterns both within the site and on the abutting street system.
6. Provide sufficient stacking area (area where cars may need to wait in line to exit onto the street or to enter to circulate in the parking lot), and stacking for at least two (2) vehicles at the inbound access drives to the site.
7. Be designed to not allow any vehicle to protrude or overhang sidewalks or any landscaped area.
8. Minimize potential conflict points between pedestrians, bicycles, and motor vehicles.
9. Required off-street parking facilities shall be maintained as long as the use or structure exists for which the facilities are designed to serve.
F. Pervious Parking Area
1. Parking areas composed of pervious surfaces (such as pervious asphalt, pervious concrete, open course pavers, and other techniques from the Connecticut Stormwater Quality Manual and as approved by the Commission) are encouraged for all land uses and lots, unless there are overriding environmental limitations.
2. Parking areas composed of pervious surfaces may be provided to meet all or part of any required parking spaces on a lot unless prohibited by the Commission.
3. Measures that shall be considered to reduce the amount of impervious surfaces in all proposed parking lots include:
a. Provide pervious parking stall surfaces.
b. Provide pervious overflow parking.
c. Provide pervious snow-storage space.
d. Conserve existing natural areas, including trees on-site.
e. Minimize clearing to the extent practicable while retaining access, sight distance, and safe vehicle flows.
G. Shared Parking
1. Shared Parking - The Commission encourages parking lots for different structures or uses, or for mixed uses, to be shared in any zoning district. At the applicant’s request, shared parking may be provided, subject to the following provisions:
a. A reciprocal written agreement has been executed by all the parties concerned that assures the perpetual joint use of such common parking, a copy of which has been submitted to and is acceptable to the Commission. The Commission may forward such agreements to the town legal counsel for review.
b. The Commission may require the applicant to provide a parking study with all information deemed necessary to its decision-making on a shared parking agreement. This information includes but is not limited to:
1. the type and hours of operation and parking demand, for each use,
2. a site plan displaying shared use spaces in the lot and walking distance to the uses sharing the lot,
107
3. a description of the character of land use and parking patterns of adjacent land uses, and
4. an estimate of anticipated turnover in parking space use over the course of 12 to 24 hours at the site.
c. Parking spaces to be shared must not be reserved for individuals or groups on a 24-hour basis.
d. Uses sharing the parking facility do not need to be contained on the same lot, but shall be a maximum of 500 feet from the parking space in the parking lot which is to be used and allow for safe, convenient walking for most parkers, including safe pedestrian crossings, signage, and adequate lighting. A waiver of the maximum allowable distance from the proposed use to the parking area may be approved by the Commission with written justification and supporting information provided by the applicant.
e. If the conditions for shared parking become null and void and the shared parking arrangement is discontinued, this will constitute a violation of zoning regulations for any use approved expressly with shared parking. The applicant must then provide written notification of the change to the Zoning Enforcement Official and, within 60 days of that notice, provide a remedy satisfactory to the Commission to provide adequate parking.
2. Reduction in Parking Space Required for Shared Parking - Where shared parking is provided for a mixed use of land, the Commission may allow the following, at the applicant’s request:
a. Up to 30% of the parking spaces required for the predominant use on a site may be shared with other uses operating during the same time of day and days of the week. The predominant use is considered to be that which requires the most parking of those sharing the parking facilities.
b. Up to 90% of parking spaces required for uses such as theaters (Movie and Live), public auditoriums, bowling alleys, nightclubs, movie theaters, and similar predominately evening uses may be shared with such uses such as banks, offices, and similar predominately daytime uses.
c. Up to 90% of the parking spaces required for such uses such as Houses of Worship and other uses exclusively in operation during the weekend may be shared with such uses as medical offices, banks, and other similar uses predominately in operation on weekdays.
d. Other reductions may be allowed by the Commission if the applicant produces a credible peak parking demand study that demonstrates a different reduction value is appropriate.
H. Bicycle and Pedestrian Accommodations
1. Intent - This Section of the regulations is intended to promote and support access by bicycle and walking throughout the community. To this end, all parking lots, where practical, must be designed to provide safe and convenient pedestrian and bicycle access as a part of any parking area or parking structure design including safe and convenient pedestrian and bicycle movement to and from public walkways and/or bikeways, streets, or transit stops.
2. Bicycle Access Design Standards - A minimum of two bicycle parking space shall be provided for every 40 off-street automobile parking spaces. Bicycle parking facilities, where practical, shall be designed and installed to include:
a. Spaces that are a minimum of 2 feet by 6 feet per bicycle.
b. The minimum number possible of potential conflict points between bicycles and motor vehicles.
c. Lighting.
d. Provision for locking of bicycles to the rack or bicycle locker.
e. Adequate spacing for access to the bicycle and locking device when the spaces are occupied.
f. Where possible, bicycle parking shall be located within view of building entrances or in view of windows, and/or security personnel stations.
3. Pedestrian Access Design Standards - Provision for safe and convenient pedestrian access shall be incorporated into landscaping plans for any parking area or parking structure. This shall be clearly shown on all site plans. Any parking area designed, constructed, and maintained, as part of a development must be designed such that the flow of pedestrians can be directed though a system of convenient routes that
108
bring them to central walkways leading to main entrances. All walkways, where practical, shall be constructed to provide for:
a. Safe separation of all walkways from motor vehicle traffic through the use of raised sidewalks and/or landscaping between sidewalks and parking spaces and/or driving aisles.
b. Safe, well-articulated pedestrian crossings demarcated with pavement markings, pedestrian warning signs, and lighting.
c. A minimum of 4 feet in width.
d. Inclusion of plantings, benches, and lighting along walkways and at all pedestrian crossings.
e. Design, construction and maintenance to accommodate disabled individuals per Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) requirements.
I. Landscaping Standards for Parking Lot Stormwater Management:
The landscaping requirements in this Section are intended to maximize the natural areas retained in any parking area in order to optimize natural infiltration of rainwater, intercept and manage stormwater runoff, and provide an aesthetic setting for development. In order to accomplish these goals the following standards shall apply:
1. Minimum Landscape Area - Developments with proposed parking areas of fifteen (15) spaces or more shall provide a minimum of fifteen percent (15%) of the total parking area as landscaped open space. Such landscaped open space may be provided in the form of islands, aesthetic landscape treatments, pedestrian refuge/oasis areas, and may include the perimeter buffer between the parking area and adjacent streets, residential/commercial developments, or open space areas.
2. Planting Required - Such landscaped islands and perimeter landscaping shall be planted with a mix of shrubs and trees. Planting plans shall not include invasive species. This list is available from the Department of Energy and Environmental Protection.
3. Location – Unless modified or waived by the Commission, such islands and perimeter plantings should be located:
a. At each parking lot entrance;
b. At the ends of each parking aisle;
c. As intermediate islands in long rows of spaces, located every 15 spaces;
d. As separation between long rows of parking spaces that abut other rows; and
e. As separation between pedestrian walkways and parking spaces and/or driving aisles.
4. Elevation and Grading – Where feasible, landscaped islands should be situated below the grade of the parking spaces and driving aisles such that stormwater runoff flow is directed to and trapped by such islands.
5. Maintenance - Failure to maintain any landscaped area or buffer strip shall constitute a violation of these Regulations.
J. Loading Space Requirements
On the same premises with every building devoted to retail trade, retail and wholesale food markets, warehouses, supply houses, wholesale or manufacturing trade, hotels, hospitals, laundry, dry cleaning establishments or other building where large amounts of goods are received or shipped, erected in any district after the date of the adoption of these Regulations, loading and unloading space shall be provided as follows:
1. Every building or block of building containing more than five thousand (5,000) square feet gross floor area – one loading space.
2. Every building or block building containing more than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet gross floor area – one loading space for each twenty thousand (20,000) square feet or fraction thereof.
3. A required loading space shall be not less than ten (10') feet wide, forty (40') feet long and fourteen (14') feet high.
109
Section 7.2. Outdoor Signs
A. Purpose
The purposes of this Regulation are to encourage the effective use of signs as a means of communication, to maintain and enhance the aesthetic environment, to further the ability of the Town to attract sources of economic development and growth, to improve pedestrian and traffic safety, to reduce the possible adverse effect of signs on nearby public and private property, and to enable the fair and consistent enforcement of these sign regulations.
B. General Requirements
No sign, billboard, or outdoor advertising structure shall be erected, moved, enlarged, reconstructed, or maintained except in accordance with the following:
1. Abandonment: Signs which are unrelated to an active land use, other than a real estate sign or an existing off-premise outdoor advertising sign, shall be considered abandoned or derelict and shall be removed from public view.
2. Interference with traffic: No sign shall be permitted at any location, for any purpose, which could interfere with or obstruct the view of traffic or could be confused with any authorized traffic sign, signal or device.
3. Location: Free standing signs shall be set back a minimum of fifteen (15') feet from the edge of any paved roadway intended for vehicular traffic or use. All signs must be on the property of the intended use and shall not be within the public right of way. Ingress and egress signs may be located on the property of the intended use, immediately adjacent to the public right of way provided that such signs shall not exceed one square foot in area or twenty-four (24") inches in height.
4. Height: Free standing signs shall not exceed ten (10') feet in height. Signs affixed to buildings shall not extend above the highest portion of the building.
5. Materials: Signs shall be comprised and constructed of opaque materials and shall not include any translucent or transparent materials or components for the purpose of transmitting or reflecting light from the sign.
6. Illumination: Any and all illumination used for the purpose of enhancing the visibility of signs shall be arranged so that all light is concentrated on the sign and no light directly or by reflection shall be cast on the street, sidewalk, or adjacent property.
7. Free standing signs: Free Standing signs shall be ground based with the lowest edge of the sign face to be located not greater than thirty-six (36") inches from the ground. This shall be construed as prohibiting signs elevated by poles or other vertical supports unless such elevation does not exceed thirty-six (36") inches.
8. Grade clearance: Signs which are affixed to buildings shall provide at least ten (10') feet of clearance from the lowest portion of the sign to grade.
9. Incidental Signs: Incidental signs, informational in nature, such as "No Parking", "Loading", etc. shall be permitted subject to review by the Commission. No sign with a commercial message shall be considered incidental.
10. Prohibited Signs: All signs not expressly permitted by this regulation are prohibited. Such signs shall include but are not limited to: beacons, pennants, dynamic signs, inflatable advertising devices and temporary signs unless specifically provided for in this regulation or by operation of law.
11. All traffic control signs shall comply with the "Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices." (Amended 4/3/02)
110
C. Signs Permitted in Residential Districts
1. Resident Identification: One sign bearing the name and address of the resident of the premises, not to exceed two (2) square feet in area.
2. Sale of Real Estate: One non-illuminated, real estate sign not permanently affixed to the subject land or building, pertaining to the sale or lease of the land or building upon which it is displayed, not to exceed four (4) square feet in area.
3. Sale of Personal Property: One non-illuminated, sign not permanently affixed to the land or building at which the sale of personal property owned by a person residing on the same premises may be displayed, provided it does not exceed two (2) square feet in area.
4. Sign Advertising Public Auction/Foreclosure: One non-illuminated, sign not permanently affixed to the land or building at which a public auction of property may be displayed on the premises to be auctioned, or on which the property is located, provided it does not exceed six (6) square feet in area.
5. Sign on Construction Sites: One non-illuminated, sign not permanently affixed to the land or building provided it does not to exceed twelve (12) square feet in area.
6. Traffic Signs: State and town traffic locational and directional signs installed for public purposes.
7. Farm Operations: Farm operations may include two (2) free-standing signs, or attached to or painted on the wall of an accessory building, or any combination of the above, provided the total area of the sign or signs does not exceed twelve (12) square feet and no sign is located within fifty (50') feet of a street intersection.
8. Bulletin Boards: Bulletin boards shall not exceed twelve (12) square feet in area not more than six (6') feet in height above the ground.
9. Entrance Signs to Commercial Recreation Areas: One sign at the entrance of a commercial recreation area, not to exceed twenty (20) square feet in area.
10. Off-Premises Meeting Signs: Off-premises signs listing the location of an organization’s meeting, the time and place of meeting, and other pertinent directional information, shall not exceed three (3) in number and each sign not to exceed three (3) square feet in area.
11. Identification of Apartment Houses: Apartment houses may display one sign which shall not exceed twelve (12) square feet in area and shall include the name and address of the building, and the name and address of the management.
D. Signs Permitted in Non-Residential Districts
1. Approval Required - All signs proposed in non-residential districts shall be subject to approval by the Planning and Zoning Commission prior to erection.
2. Identification of Business, Proprietor, or Products -
a. Every place of business may have upon the property on which the business is conducted signs indicating the name of the owner or proprietor, the character of the business and/or the products made or sold on the premises.
111
b. Parcels designed for use by, or occupied by multiple uses or tenants shall utilize signage of uniform size, construction, location and character and shall be depicted to scale in the architectural and/or site elevations as part of the application for site plan approval.
112
3. Area of Affixed Signs -
a. The total area of all signs affixed to buildings shall not exceed the following maximums:
b. Sq. ft. for each linear foot of building frontage:
1. C Zone - 1.5
2. DD Zone - 1.5
3. I Zone - 1
4. VC Zone - 1
4. Area of Free Standing Signs - In the C, I and DD Zones the area of free standing signs shall not exceed the following maximums:
Building square foot size (Non-Residential Use) Maximum Free Standing Signage
<5000 sq ft
25 sq ft
5001-10,000 sq ft
50 sq ft
10,001-15,000 sq ft
75 sq ft
15,000 sq ft
100 sq ft
5. Directory Signs - For sites, subdivisions and/or industrial or business parks in the C, I and DD Zones, utilizing multiple tenants, directory signs may be approved when specifically deemed appropriate by the Planning and Zoning Commission. Such signs shall be directory in nature and shall not exceed fifty (50) square feet.
6. Sale or Lease of Land or Buildings - One temporary sign pertaining to the sale or lease of the land or building upon which it is displayed, not to exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area, provided it is removed within ten days following consummation of the sale or lease.
7. Identification of Land Developers - One temporary sign identifying an engineer, architect, or contractor engaged in the development of land or construction or alteration of buildings provided they are removed within thirty (30) days of the completion of work and not to exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area.
E. Banners Across Public Roads and Highways
Temporary banners across public roads and highways are permitted providing that the following conditions are met:
1. The banner advertises a special event.
2. No more than one banner may be displayed in Town at any one time.
3. No banner shall be displayed more than two (2) weeks prior to the event advertised; the banner shall be removed within two (2) days of the completion of the event.
4. All appropriate agencies shall review the proposal.
113
Section 7.3. Lighting
A. Purpose
The purpose of these lighting regulations is to provide specific standards that promote adequate, energy efficient, non-intrusive lighting as required for public safety while reducing and eliminating adverse effects (such as light pollution, light trespass, glare, and sky glow, consistent with the goals of the International Dark-Sky Association) from on-site illumination upon the use, value, and enjoyment of nearby properties and the community in general. These regulations seek to promote an environment free from elements that may jeopardize the health or welfare of the general public or degrade the quality of life in this town and neighboring towns. B. Definitions Candela - The power emitted by a light source in a particular direction. Foot-candle - A unit of illumination, equal to the illumination of a surface, one (1) square foot in area, on which there is a luminous flux of one (1) Lumens uniformly distributed, or equal to the illumination of a surface all points of which are at a distance of one (1) foot from a uniform point source of one (1) Candela; equal to approximately 10.7639 lux. Abbreviated fc. Foot-lambert - A unit of Luminance equal to 1/? Candela per square foot or 3.4262591 Candelas per square meter (nits). It describes the amount of light that passes through or is emitted from a particular area. Full Cutoff - See fully shielded. Fully Shielded - A light fixture constructed in such a manner that all light emitted by the fixture, either directly from the lamp or a diffusing element, or indirectly by reflection or refraction from any part of the fixture, is projected below the horizontal plane. See Section 7.3.J for examples. Glare - Light produced by a bright source within the visual field that is sufficiently brighter than the level to which the eyes are adapted to cause annoyance, discomfort, or loss in visual performance and visibility. High Intensity and High Contrast Lighting - For the purpose of this regulation, the term high intensity and high contrast lighting refers to any lighting source that produces text, symbols, shapes, or images resulting in a visual effect that is perceived by the eye as intense or distracting, and may include incandescent, vapor/gas discharge, LED, LCD, plasma, holographic, lasers, or any other technology that produces a high contrast with light from ambient sources or high intensity effect. Light Fixture - Complete lighting unit, consisting of one (1) or more lamps (bulbs or tubes that emit light), along with the socket and other parts that hold the lamp in place and protect it, wiring that connects the lamp to a power source, and a reflector that helps direct and distribute the light. Light Trespass - Light being transmitted across property boundaries, onto property not containing the originating light source. See Section 7.3.D.5. Lumen - A measure of the amount of light emitted by lamps. Luminaire - See light fixture. Luminance - The intensity of light reflected or emitted from a unit area of surface, such as a sign face — measured in Nits.
114
Luminous Tube - A transparent or translucent tube filled with a gas or gas mixture (including neon, argon, mercury, or other gasses), caused to emit light by the passage of an electric current, and commonly bent into various forms for use as decoration or signs, such as a neon tube. Does not include common fluorescent tubes or compact fluorescent lamps. Nit - A unit of Luminance equal to one (1) Candela per square meter. Outdoor Athletic Lighting - The illumination of any area, outside of a fully enclosed building, in order to facilitate the conduct of a sport, recreational activity, athletic event, competition, or other outdoor event. Outdoor athletic lighting shall include, but not be limited to, the illumination of tennis courts; miniature golf; tennis courts; football, soccer, baseball, lacrosse, field hockey, track, or other fields; golf driving ranges; equestrian rinks; pitch and putt courses; ice skating or hockey rinks; and all similar uses. Outdoor athletic lighting shall include such activities regardless of sponsorship of the event or ownership of the property. Searchlight - A lighting assembly designed to direct the output of a contained lamp in a specific tightly focused direction (a beam) with a reflector located external to the lamp, and with a swiveled or gimbaled mount to allow the assembly to be easily redirected. Such lights are used commonly to sweep the sky for advertisement purposes. Temporary Lighting - Lighting which will not be used for more than one (1) seven (7) day period within a calendar year with not more than one (1) seven (7) day extension. Temporary lighting is intended for uses which by their nature are of a limited duration (e.g. civic events, construction projects, etc.). See Section 7.3.G. Temporary Transitional Athletic Lighting - Temporary lighting on property owned by the town which has been authorized by the zoning enforcement official and the Board of Education for a contiguous period of not more than ninety (90) days for illumination of outdoor athletic activities. Uniformity (Horizontal) - The ratio of maximum vs. minimum Luminance over an area. C. Standards for All Districts 1. Applicability - The standards set forth in this Section, 7.3.C, shall apply to all new or significantly updated or modified lighting or illuminated signs, except as provided in Section 7.3.G below 2. Glare - All outdoor illumination shall be provided and maintained in a manner that safeguards against glare off the property. 3. Shielding - All outdoor light fixtures with an initial output greater than or equal to one thousand four hundred (1,400) Lumens (typical output of a sixty (60) watt incandescent lamp) shall be full cutoff, and except as provided in Section 7.3.C.6 shall be installed and maintained in such a manner as to be horizontal to the ground so that the cutoff characteristics of the fixture are maintained. The goal is to minimize or eliminate visibility of the light source at the property boundary to the extent practical. All outdoor lighting light fixtures with an initial output less than one thousand four hundred (1,400) Lumens are exempt from this shielding requirement. 4. Efficiency - The preferred standard for lighting efficiency shall be not less than sixty (60) Lumens per electrical watt. 5. Unintentional Luminous Sources: Light emanating from inside a building shall comply with the requirements for light trespass at the property boundary as set forth herein for the applicable Zoning District. 6. Architectural Lighting - Illumination of buildings, flagpoles, signs, architectural, and landscape features shall conform to the following: a. Light fixtures shall be shielded, such as by visors or baffles, to control spillage of light beyond the outside edge of the object intended to be illuminated.
115
b. Light fixtures shall be aimed only at the targeted architectural features and not be aimed across streets, driveways, parking spaces, or sidewalks. c. Illumination of objects other than signs shall not result in the Luminance of the illuminated object exceeding five (5) foot-candles in a Residential District or ten (10) foot-candles in a Business District, Industrial District, PUD, or PDD. For maximum illumination of signs, see Sections 7.3.D.10.c. and 7.3.E.4. 7. Prohibited Lighting - The following types of lights are prohibited in all Districts: a. Strips of light intended to outline or highlight a structure, whether composed of linear light tubes or a sequence of individual illumination sources except as provided in Section 7.3.G. b. Light sources that oscillate or vary in intensity or color to the degree that the modulation is perceptible to the human eye. c. Lasers. d. Luminous tube lights. e. Searchlights. f. Light sources that emit color temperatures in the yellow range (< 2700K) such as sodium vapor lights or in the blue range (> 6500K). g. Illumination of entire buildings. Building illumination shall be limited to security lighting and lighting of specific architectural features pursuant to Section 7.3.C.6. h. Electronic sign boards (i.e. digital billboards), dynamic signs, and signs containing visible high intensity and high contrast lighting other than provided for in Section 7.3.F.3. D. Commercial and Industrial Standards 1. Applicability - The standards set forth in this Section, 7.3.D, shall apply in all Business and Manufacturing Zones, Planned Development Districts, Planned Development Units, Public Utility Districts, and Special Exception Uses in a Residential Zone. Additionally, any commercial or industrial use that is located in a Residential Zone that submits an application for a change to the site will be subject to the more stringent requirements of Sections 7.3.D or 7.3.E. The standards defined herein shall apply to all exterior lighting as well as lighting that is located within a building or structure and which illuminates the exterior. Exemptions: The following uses are exempt from the standards of this Section, 7.3.D: a. Pre-existing, nonconforming lighting installations may be maintained unless the modifications listed below occur and are deemed substantial in the judgment of the planning commission: 1. Replacement, modification, relocation, or addition to light fixtures. 2. Addition to or relocation of lighting poles. 3. Change in light source intensity. 4. Change of use of the site. 5. Replacement, modification, relocation, or addition to buildings on the site. 6. Change in parking lot layout or on-site traffic flow. When a substantial modification occurs, the entire outdoor lighting installation on the site shall be subject to this Section, 7.3.D. Where modifications are proposed which the commission does not consider to be substantial, it may require or permit lighting which more nearly complies with this Section, 7.3.D, even if such lighting does not fully comply with this Section. b. Lighting subject to Section 7.3.F, Outdoor Athletic Facility Standards, shall not be subject to this Section, 7.3.D. c. Lighting specified in Section 7.3.G. 2. General Standards and Guidance - The commercial and industrial lighting standards set forth herein have been developed to minimize illumination while providing safe and efficient entry onto, travel within, and
116
exit from the site. Lighting sources shall be fully shielded and shall not impart an illumination footprint on-site nor off-site greater than the values defined herein. Lighting sources within a site shall generally consist of a uniform color, intensity, and technology. 3. Source, Footprint and Intensity - The following standards for minimum and maximum exterior illumination shall be based on the activity at each site. Foot-candles shall be measured at finished grade level. When more than one (1) activity type (as specified below) is proposed, the illumination level for each activity type shall be between the specified minimum and maximum levels. Activity Type Average Illumination Levels per Grid Cell (Ft-Candle) Minimum Maximum Notes
Parking Lots, Driveways, and Security Lights
0.5
2.5
Walkways and Building Entrances
3.0
10.0
Gas Station Pumps
2.0
10.0
Applies to the area located within 10 feet of the outside edge of the canopy. Areas beyond 10 feet outside the canopy shall meet the illumination standards defined for Parking Lots.
ATMs
2.0
5.0
Applies to the area located within 10 feet of the ATM machine face or outside edge of canopy, whichever is greater. Areas beyond 10 feet outside the canopy shall meet the illumination standards defined for Parking Lots.
Loading Docks
2.0
10.0
Must be time-limited and automatically controlled such that the lighting source is off after activity on or near the dock has been completed. 4. Vertical Distribution and Cutoff - No upward lighting is permitted except as provided in Section 7.3.C.6. Details of such proposed lighting shall be submitted to the planning commission for review and approval. 5. Light Trespass - No more than 0.05 foot-candles is permitted at any property boundary within or abutting a residential zone; no more than two and one-half (2.5) foot-candles permitted at the property boundary where abutting sites have contiguous parking lots and driveways; and no more than one-half (0.5) foot-candles is permitted at any other property boundary. Illuminance generated from a single Luminaire placed at the intersection of a vehicular driveway and public roadway accessing the site is allowed to use the centerline of the public roadway as the site boundary for a length of two (2) times the driveway width centered at the centerline of the driveway. 6. Location of Lights - Exterior lighting shall be subject to the following restrictions: a. Lighting on buildings shall not be mounted on canopy fascias or rooftops. All light fixtures shall be mounted under or below the canopy. Light fixtures within canopies shall be downward facing and mounted flush or recessed. b. Light fixtures shall be located not more than seventeen (17) feet above the finished grade if supported by or attached to a pole or other structure.
117
7. Hours of Primary Illumination - Outdoor lighting shall be automatically shut off or reduced to not more than the minimum level as defined in Section 7.3.D.3 within one (1) hour after the hours of activity (as defined in the statement of use for the site) have ended. Lighting that illuminates a loading dock must be equipped with the capability to automatically reduce or turn off the lighting sources (via motion detection or similar technology) when not in use. Details of the lighting controls shall be presented to the planning commission for review and approval. 8. Unintentional Luminous Sources - Large expanses of internally illuminated windows or wall openings visible from the property boundary are to be avoided. Buildings with a window-wall ratio greater than thirty-five (35) percent on walls that are visible from the property boundary shall be automatically shut off within one (1) hour after the hours of activity (as defined in the statement of use for the site) have ended. 9. Interior Lights - Any interior light fixture with initial output great than one thousand four hundred (1,400) Lumens and mounted such that any part of the light fixture is lower than the upper edge of a window, wall opening, or exterior door must be fully shielded. 10. Data Submission - Certification from a qualified lighting professional shall be provided to the planning commission, stating that the lighting plan complies with the standards of this Section. A computer-generated print-out of the illuminated area in grid plan view using five (5) foot grid spacing is the preferred format and shall depict the average light level at each grid point. Iso-contours may be provided as a less desirable format. Cut sheets with light source distribution curves for all proposed lighting sources shall be provided as part of the application. All lighting sources includes, but is not limited to, architectural lighting, and building- and pole-mounted light fixtures. Exact model, type, and intensity of each illumination source (i.e.; lamp element or elements) installed in each lighting fixture shall be specified. Lighting analyses will take into account the effect of aging and will use the illumination values predicted at ninety (90) percent of lamp life. After installation a qualified lighting professional shall measure the resultant light intensity, and the applicant shall submit documentation that the lighting complies with these regulations. The applicant may request that the planning commission or a designated representative conduct a site visit in lieu of the certification if the applicant believes that the lighting is in conformance with these regulations. The planning commission reserves the right to require as-built measurements following a site inspection. 13. Performance Bonds - No certificate of zoning compliance or certificate of occupancy shall be issued until the improvements required by this regulation and as depicted in the applicant's lighting plan are completed as certified by the authorized land use official, or until their completion has been guaranteed by the posting of a performance bond from a banking institution of sufficient amount to cover the estimated cost of materials and labor, as approved by the zoning enforcement officer. Such performance bonds shall be in the form of cash, passbook assignment, letters of credit, or, if required by Connecticut General Statues, surety bonds. The form of the surety bond shall be to the satisfaction of the commission's legal counsel.
118
E. Residential Standards: 1. Applicability - The standards set forth in this Section, 7.3.E, shall apply to properties located in Residential Zones except for those uses subject to Sections 7.3.D or 7.3.F. Any commercial or industrial use that is located in a Residential Zone that submits an application for a change to the site will be subject to the more stringent requirements of Sections 7.3.D or 7.3.E. Exemptions: The following uses are exempt from the standards of this Section, 7.3.E: a. Pre-existing, nonconforming lighting installations may be maintained unless the modifications listed below occur and are deemed substantial in the judgment of the planning commission: 1. Replacement, modification, relocation, or addition to light fixtures. 2. Addition to or relocation of lighting poles. 3. Change in light source intensity. 4. Change of use of the site. 5. Replacement, modification, relocation, or addition to buildings on the site. 6. Change in parking lot layout or on-site traffic flow. When a substantial modification occurs, the entire outdoor lighting installation on the site shall be subject to this Section, 7.3.E. Where modifications are proposed which the Commission does not consider to be substantial, it may require or permit lighting which more nearly complies with this Section, 7.3.E, even if such lighting does not fully comply with this Section, 7.3.E. b. Lighting subject to Section 7.3.F, Outdoor Athletic Facility Standards, shall not be subject to this Section, 7.3.E. c. Lighting specified in Section 7.3.G. 2. Light Trespass - No more than 0.05 foot-candles is permitted at any property boundary. 3. Location of Lights: Light fixtures mounted to free standing poles shall be installed at a height of twelve (12) feet or less. F. Outdoor Athletic Facility Standards 1. Applicability - This Section, 7.3.F, shall apply to all outdoor athletic lighting as defined in these regulations, regardless of zoning designation. Exemptions: The following uses are exempt from the standards of this Section, 7.3.F.: a. Pre-existing, nonconforming lighting installations may be maintained unless the modifications listed below occur and are deemed substantial in the judgment of the planning commission: 1. Replacement, modification, relocation, or addition to light fixtures. 2. Addition to or relocation of lighting poles. 3. Change in light source intensity. 4. Change of use of the site. When a substantial modification occurs, the entire outdoor athletic lighting installation on the site shall be subject to this Section, 7.3.F; however, the commission may permit lighting which more nearly complies with this Section, 7.3.F, even if such lighting does not fully comply with this Section. b. Lighting specified in Section 7.3.G. 2. Permitted Use - Outdoor athletic lighting with an illuminated play surface of three thousand (3,000) square feet or less and no light fixture(s) mounted to a pole at a height greater than twelve (12) feet are considered an ancillary use and are permitted as of right, subject to the provisions of Section 7.3.C. Outdoor athletic lighting with an illuminated play surface greater than three thousand (3,000) square feet or light fixture(s) mounted to a pole at a height greater than twelve (12) feet is prohibited unless a special exception is approved by the planning commission.
119
3. High Intensity and High Contrast Lighting Scoreboards: Scoreboards comprised of visible high intensity and high contrast lighting sources are permitted for the display of only information directly related to the current athletic activity (such as team names, play time remaining, scores, timeouts, etc.) subject to the provisions of this Section, 7.3, and further subject to the following standards: a. Scoreboards must be turned off thirty (30) minutes after an athletic event. b. Two (2) levels of brightness shall be provided and shall be automatically adjusted for day and night conditions. The preferred technique is a photocell sensor that changes the source brightness for day/night conditions. Timer-based control is an acceptable alternative if the day/night transition is adjusted for seasonal changes. Specific proposal for the day/night change technique shall be defined in the applicant's application. c. The maximum brightness shall not exceed one thousand (1,000) ft.-lamberts for day mode, and shall not exceed one hundred twenty (120) ft.-lamberts for the night mode. d. The applicant shall provide a written certification from the sign manufacturer that day and night time light intensity and color coordinates have been factory pre-set not to exceed the Luminance limits and to not allow changes to the color coordinates, and that these settings are protected from end-user modification by password-protected software or other method as deemed appropriate by the planning commission or their designee. 4. Hours of Operation: Lights shall be shut off within thirty (30) minutes after the event has ended or 10:00 p.m., whichever is earlier; however, operation past 10:00 p.m. may be permitted for special occasions by the zoning enforcement officer if he/she deems such extended operation to be in the greater public interest. G. Exemptions The following uses are exempt from the lighting requirements of these regulations: a. Temporary lighting as defined in Section 7.3.B. b. Temporary transitional athletic lighting, as defined in Section 7.3.B. c. Lighting required by federal regulations (cell towers, etc.). d. Emergency lighting no greater than required by CT Fire Safety Code, or other applicable public safety regulations or codes. e. Subdued, decorative light strings that do not vary in intensity or color such as C-7, C-9, or mini-lights (including LEDs) rated at less than three (3) Volts/string may be used to accent landscaping, trees, or ornamental features of a structure, but not to the extent of drawing attention to the use or site for commercial purposes, nor to attract attention from passing motorists or pedestrians. f. Light strings on property owned by the town, including public highway rights of way of the town or the state. g. Submerged pool lighting.
120
H. Severability If any of the provisions of this Section, 7.3, or the application thereof is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of this Section which can be given effect, and to this end, the provisions of this Section, 7.3, are declared to be severable. I. Law Governing Conflicts Where any provision of federal, state, county, or town law or ordinance conflicts with any provision of this Section, 7.3, the most restrictive shall govern unless otherwise required by law. J. Examples of Light Fixtures
121
Section 7.4. Landscaping
A. Purpose
These landscaping regulations are adopted for the purpose of protecting the general welfare and property values by preserving existing vegetation; providing for the planting of new materials; providing privacy from visual intrusion, light, soil, and noise; preventing the erosion of soil; providing water recharge areas; and improving the quality of the environment and attractiveness of the Town of East Hampton.
B. Applicability / Considerations
Landscaping; grading, vegetation (existing and proposed), retaining walls, walkways, patios, buffers, fences, siting of the building/s and like elements shall be incorporated into all site plans presented for approval. The cohesiveness of the design of landscaping in relation to the site and the general area shall be considered critical to the success of the proposal. The goals of such landscaping shall include the enhancement of architectural features, providing a desirable transition from the streetscape, the preservation of desirable natural features of the site, providing effective separation between properties, providing shade, stabilization of the soils, and providing an attractive visual appearance.
C. Standards
The following standards shall be considered in the design of all site plans presented for approval.
1. Preference shall be given to the utilization of plant species indigenous to the area. Major, existing trees shall be utilized to the greatest extent possible. The use of exotics shall not be encouraged except for areas designed to provide specific visual interest.
2. Trees shall be used when possible and shall meet the following standards:
a. Deciduous trees shall be a minimum of two (2") inch caliper when spaced twenty (20') feet or less apart and shall be a minimum of 3.5 inches when more than twenty (20') feet separate such trees from other plantings.
b. Evergreen trees shall be a minimum of five (5') feet in height (this requirement shall not apply to evergreen shrubs or groundcovers.
c. Flowering, decorative trees shall be a minimum of thirty-six (36") inches in height.
d. All trees shall be installed with proper care and structural support and existing trees must be provided with adequate protection during construction.
3. Shrubs and groundcovers shall be utilized to provide soil stabilization and effective visual and physical separations between buildings, walks, drives and parking areas. The 'live' screening of mechanicals, foundations, and building elements is encouraged.
4. Retaining walls shall not exceed six (6') feet in height, unless expressly permitted by the Commission, and if visible from the street or neighboring properties, shall be of materials having a pleasing textural appearance. The use of natural materials shall be encouraged. All retaining walls must be of a design proven capable of withstanding all forces imposed thereon.
5. Planting beds shall be protected from vehicular or pedestrian traffic through the use of curbing, walks or planters.
6. Buffers, fences and berms shall be utilized alone or in combination to achieve the desired results of visual screening, property delineation, sound attenuation and the like. Visual screening as required by this or other sections of these Regulations, shall utilize evergreen trees not less than five (5') feet in height. Existing buffering shall be considered by the Commission where appropriate.
7. A maintenance bond, as further described in this Section, shall be retained for a period of one year after final approval and certification of zoning compliance is granted, for the purpose of ensuring viability of all plantings.
122
Section 7.5. Storm Drainage and Storm Water Management
A. Purpose
This Section of the regulations is intended to manage the quantity of storm water runoff generated by development, limit water quality impacts from development, minimize hazards due to flooding from storm water runoff, minimize impacts to environmentally sensitive lands, implement the provisions of federal and state regulations, and protect the public health, safety, and welfare.
B. Applicability
All site plans presented for approval shall comply with the following standards.
C. References
The following documents are suggested and/or required as references in using this document:
1. State of Connecticut, Department of Transportation Standard Specifications for Roads, Bridges, and Incidental Construction, Form 813, 1986, and any subsequent amendments or issues.
2. Town of East Hampton Plan of Conservation and Development.
3. Drainage Manual, Connecticut Department of Transportation.
4. Hydraulic Charts for the Selection of Highway Culverts, Circular #5 Federal Highway Administration.
5. Design Charts for Open-Channel Flow, Hydraulic Design Series No. 3, Federal Highway Administration.
6. Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds TR #55, U.S. Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service.
7. Ponds for Water Supply & Recreation Handbook #387, U.S. Department of Agriculture, Soil conservation Service.
8. Flood Flow Formulas for Connecticut, Connecticut Department of Energy and Environmental Protection.
9. Concrete Pipe Installation Manual, American Concrete Pipe Association.
10. Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook, U.S. Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service, Storrs, CT.
11. Design methods other than those found in the above documents may be utilized if such methods are appropriate for the drainage system in question and approved by the Town Engineer.
D. General
1. In the design of all surface and subsurface drainage systems for the construction and/or improvements of land for residential, commercial, institutional, industrial sites, and other facilities, it is imperative that the designer apply the utmost care to protect the life and property of the residents, the public, the Town and the State. All facilities shall be planned and located so as to minimize the potential for damage to the property and all adjacent and/or downstream properties.
2. Proposed drainage facilities shall be designed to accommodate the runoff from the entire upstream drainage area with full consideration given to the effects of potential land development that could reasonably occur under the most current zoning regulations.
E. Drainage Design and Calculations
1. General: All drainage must be designed and certified by a Professional Engineer registered in the State of Connecticut. Storm water flows may be computed by use of the Rational Method or by use of the methods described in the most current edition of the U.S. Soil Conservation Service Technical Release No. 55. Other methods of computing storm water flows may be utilized provided they conform to sound engineering practice. When the Rational Method is used, rainfall intensity-duration-frequency curves for
123
the Hartford area and runoff coefficients contained in the Connecticut Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control shall be used. In general, the use of the rational Method shall not be used in computing flows from watershed drainage areas in excess of two hundred (200) acres.
2. Design Storm Criteria: All storm drainage facilities shall be designed based on the following storm return frequency criteria:
a. On-site storm drainage system and minor channels 10 years
b. Discharge pipes at low points including minor cross culvert 25 years
c. Minor Streams (Upstream drainage area less than 1000 acres) 50 years
d. Major Streams (Upstream drainage area greater than 1000 acres) 100 years
3. Submission of Drainage Information - The following data shall be submitted for review by the Town:
a. Topography contour map(s) with sufficient detail to adequately show the existing and proposed drainage characteristics of the watershed. Drainage area(s) shall be delineated on the map(s).
b. Narrative and calculations addressing at least the following:
1. Method used to calculate stormwater runoff.
2. Storm water runoff characteristics of the property before and after development.
3. Maximum velocity and peak flow at point(s) of discharge from the system(s).
4. Design calculations for all drainage piping, structures and appurtenances. The design engineer shall submit a drainage system summary sheet, similar to that shown in the Connecticut DOT "Drainage manual". A plan identifying the tributary watershed associated with each structure shall also be submitted. A gutter flow analysis sheet, also shown in the Connecticut DOT "Drainage Manual" shall be required by the Town for access drive designs.
5. Calculations addressing the adequacy of off-site drainage features, as applicable.
6. Investigation of the effect large magnitude storm(s) will have on a drainage system designed for a smaller return storm (i.e., what happens to a system sized for a 10 year storm during a 100 year storm event).
4. Hydraulic Design - Except where substantiated by special design studies, storm drain pipes and culverts shall be designed to flow full for the "design storm(s)". Total allowable headwater depths on pipes and culverts should normally be restricted to less than 1.2 times the clear height of the pipe or culvert provided flooding or damage does not occur to roadways, drives, adjacent buildings, sewage disposal systems, water supply systems or other significant features.
5. Drainage at Intersections - Necessary drainage structures shall be installed to properly drain all intersections with existing roads. Intersection grading plans may be required to demonstrate adequate grading at all intersections. Intersection grading plans shall be at a scale of 1"=10' with grading contour intervals of 0.2 feet (max.). Improvements to surface drainage at existing intersections shall be as required to adequately drain the intersections(s).
6. Diversion - The diversion of stormwater runoff from one watershed or watercourse to another shall be avoided whenever possible. Where it is absolutely necessary to create such a diversion, special provisions shall be made to minimize the potential damages which may occur as a result of such diversion and perpetual rights for such diversion, running with the land shall be secured by the developer when required by the Town.
7. Pipe - All pipe for storm drains shall conform to DOT Standard Form and shall be approved for use by the Town. The minimum pipe size shall be fifteen (15") inches. In the event that groundwater or wet conditions are encountered during construction, slotted pipe may be required by the Town.
8. Minimum Pipe Slope - All storm water piping shall be designed to provide a self-cleansing velocity of at least two and one-half (2.5') feet per second when flowing full. Generally stormwater piping shall have a minimum pitch of one half (0.5%) percent. Lesser pitch may be approved by the Town provided the self-cleansing velocity is maintained.
9. Pipe Cover - The minimum clear cover over all pipes shall be three (3') feet.
10. Outlet Structures - All storm drain systems shall be terminated with a flared end section or other approved structure. Special energy dissipaters may be required to prevent erosion.
11. Placement of Drainage Structures - Spacing between sets of catch basins shall be located as necessary to collect runoff and at a maximum of three hundred (300') feet. When outfall pipes exceed four hundred
124
(400') feet, maximum distance between structures shall be four hundred (400') feet. Drainage structures shall be placed at each grade change along a storm drain and at each junction point of two or more storm drains. Inlet structure shall also be located and connected to the drainage system to pick up low spots in areas of the right-of-way or in adjacent lots.
12. Underdrains - The Town may require underdrains to be installed where localized seeps, springs, or high groundwater less than three (3') feet below the proposed grade of an access drive or other traveled way are observed. Underdrains shall be not less than six (6') inches in diameter and shall be perforated PVC. Outlets for underdrains shall be connected directly to drainage structures or shall be terminated with an approved outlet. Underdrains shall be placed in a two (2') foot wide (min.) trench, filled with 3/4 inch stone and the trench lined with filter fabric.
13. Channels - The use of channels to carry stormwater to natural watercourses will not be allowed except in special cases and then only with the approval of the Town.
14. Special Structures - Bridges, box culverts, deep manholes, non-standard endwalls, and other special structures shall be designed in accordance with good engineering practice and shall be subject to the approval of the Town.
F. Drainage of Off-Site Properties
1. No increase in stormwater peak flows or volume of runoff from 2, 10, 25, 50, and 100 year storms shall be allowed unless downstream increases are compatible with the overall downstream drainage system. The following items shall be investigated in determining whether increased peak flows or runoff volumes are compatible with the overall downstream drainage system:
a. The timing of peak flows from sub-watersheds.
b. The increased duration of high flow rates.
c. The adequacy of downstream drainage features.
d. The distance downstream that the peak discharges are increased.
2. When it is determined that stormwater detention structures are required, they shall be designed so that the peak flow(s) or volume of runoff after development shall not exceed nor be substantially less than the peak flow(s) or volume of runoff prior to development for each of the design storm events specified above.
G. Detention Basins
1. Purpose Of Detention - Detention basins, surface or subsurface, shall be constructed for the purpose of limiting peak discharge from the storm drainage system of the developed area where such discharge would adversely affect receiving streams and/or storm systems. The developer shall be responsible for establishing short and long term maintenance of detention structure(s) and appurtenances.
2. Information Required - The following information, as a minimum, shall be submitted for detention structures:
a. Inflow and outflow hydrographs for detention area.
b. Maximum storage volume.
c. Design of emergency spillway or other measures for the release of excess flows beyond that of the design capacity of the structure.
d. Flood routing of all runoff greater than the design capacity of the detention structure.
e. Time which is required for the structure to drain completely.
f. Outlet structure detail.
g. Materials used in construction of the structure.
h. Methods used in construction of the structure.
i. Methods employed to avoid clogging or the discharge outlet.
j. Safety features
k. Proposed landscaping and vegetative measures used to stabilize slopes and bottom surfaces.
125
3. Storm Return Frequency - Detention basins shall be designed and stormwaters regulated for storm return frequencies of 2, 10, 25, 50, and 100 years.
4. Design Procedure - The procedure for computing the outflow from the detention areas shall consist of the development of an inflow hydrograph and the routing of the inflow through the detention basin to develop an outflow hydrograph.
5. Inflow Hydrograph - The inflow hydrograph may be developed by appropriate Soil Conservation Service or other acceptable methods. Routing through the detention basin shall be by application of the standard storage equation.
6. Detention Structure Design - Types and requirements for the detention structure design shall be appropriate for the site and be in general accordance with the SCA Field Engineering Handbook, Connecticut DOT Drainage Manual, or the CT Guidelines for Erosion and Sedimentation Control. All designs shall be approved by the Town.
7. Maintenance Roads - Maintenance roads and easements shall be provided for all detention facilities. The road shall be a minimum of twelve (12') feet wide, capable of providing access for maintenance and emergency vehicles. Grades shall not exceed ten (10%) percent.
8. Fire Protection - Where proposed detention basins involve permanently ponded water and where deemed practical by the Town, access to storm detention basins should be provided for firefighting equipment. The addition of dry hydrants and related firefighting appurtenances within the detention basins shall be coordinated with the Fire Marshal.
9. Fencing - Safety fencing shall be provided as prescribed by the Commission
H. Easements and Rights-To-Drain
1. General - All applications proposing easements as a part of the development shall submit properly executed written easements and deeds describing the land involved and privileges of the Town and/or property owners(s) in a form eliminating any Town liability for installation and maintenance, satisfactory to the Town. Said easements shall be submitted to the Town prior to final approval.
2. Easements Dedicated to the Town - Drainage easements for drainage systems located outside of the street right-of-way lines shall be a minimum of twenty (20') feet wide centered on the pipe and shall be adequate to provide access and maintenance to all drainage features. Easements shall be provided for channels and shall be of minimum width to include a ten (10') foot access strip in addition to the width of the channel from top of bank to top of bank.
3. Easements Not Dedicated to the Town - The location and size of these easements shall be established in the same manner as easements for establishing short and long term maintenance for the drainage system within said easements. The Town shall be granted the right to enter such easements to maintain, repair, and/or modify the installations.
4. Rights-To-Drain - Where downstream drainage features are not adequate to handle the increase in flows, the applicant shall secure drainage rights from the affected property owners, in writing. Such rights shall be noted on the final plans and shall be secured prior to final approval. Rights-to-Drain shall include the right for the Town to enter and maintain existing and proposed facilities if the drainage system is to be owned by the Town and shall be in a form satisfactory to the Town.
5. State Highway Department (DOT) Permit - Where a proposed storm drainage system connects with a State Highway for its appurtenances, the developer shall obtain a permit for the connection from the Connecticut Department of Transportation and shall present a copy of said permit to the Town prior to final approval.
126
Section 7.6. Excavation, Filling And Grading
A. Purpose
It is the intent of this Section to regulate the excavation or removal of earth materials, and the filling and grading of land within the Town to protect the public health and safety, to encourage the orderly development of the Town and to provide for the restoration of property following any excavation, grading or filling to minimize any unnecessary accelerated erosion and sedimentation.
B. General
No excavating or removal of earth materials, no filling or grading of land, by any means shall be permitted except in conformance with these Regulations.
C. Permit Requirement
1. A Permit as herein described, shall be required for all excavation, filling or grading except as follows:
a. Earth moving activities in connection with and clearly essential to the construction or alteration of a building on the same premises, or the installation of appurtenances to the use of the land, such as septic systems, swimming pools, utilities, walls or fencing, provided that required permits (i.e. Building, septic, zoning, etc.) for such construction or installation and the proposed earthwork is specified in such permit application.
b. Excavation, filling or grading in accordance with specific plans that have been approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission covering the lots, roads, drainage and other improvements in an approved subdivision, site development plan or Special Permit Use, provided that an erosion and sedimentation control plan was approved as part of any such approval.
c. Incidental filling, grading or excavation related to normal maintenance, repairs or landscaping of developed property.
2. If excavation, filling or grading under any of the exclusions listed above is conducted in such a manner as to circumvent the purpose of this Section, or so as to appreciably change the ground water table or alter drainage basins or flows in a manner inconsistent with public health, welfare or safety, the Zoning Enforcement Officer or the Planning and Zoning Commission may pursue any enforcement procedure described in the Connecticut General Statutes, and require the owner of the property to obtain a permit as described in this Regulation prior to resuming such work.
D. Special Permit
1. Application Requirements - The Planning and Zoning Commission may grant a Special Permit authorizing the excavation, filling or grading of land subject to the following standards and conditions, in addition to those described in Section 9.1 and 9.2, where applicable: (effective 12/06/03)
a. An application fee of one hundred dollars ($150.00)
b. A map of the property to be excavated, filled or graded at a scale of one inch equals forty feet (1"=40'), with existing and proposed contours at two (2') foot intervals. Existing contours shall be shown for a minimum of twenty (20') feet beyond the perimeter property lines.
c. Existing and proposed drainage plans
d. Names of current adjacent property owners, streets and access
e. Proposed commencement and completion dates
f. Purpose of work
g. Detailed plans, specification and other information necessary to describe the method, measures and other devices to be utilized to prevent and/or minimize erosion and sedimentation during
127
and after any proposed activities. This plan shall be in accordance with the provisions of Section 7.7.
h. Other such information as the Commission may require.
2. Considerations for Approval - The Commission, in considering and reviewing such application shall consider and be guided by the following: (effective 12/06/03)
a. Actions from the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Agency and Advisory comments received from the Conservation Commission (All applications must be presented to the Inland Wetlands and Water Courses Agency and the Conservation Commission prior to Special Permit Public Hearing.)
b. Potential effects of erosion and sedimentation affecting the area, both on and off site
c. Slopes, grades and elevations of abutting streets and properties
d. Property values and uses in the surrounding area
e. Effects on roads and traffic
f. Any approval by Connecticut DEEP or Army Corps of Engineers
g. The recommendations of the Town Engineer, Town Staff, or any expert testimony the Commission requests or receives.
h. Possible effects of the proposed work with regard to flood or pollution, either before or after completion of the proposal.
i. The suitability, character and development potential of the finished project.
j. A site plan and/or narrative to reestablish and restore the excavated area, in part and/or in whole, upon completion of work. (Amended 4/3/02)
3. Bond Required - The Commission shall require a bond, performance and/or maintenance, in a form acceptable to the Commission, for the purpose of ensuring the faithful performance of the approved work. The amount of this bond shall be based on the estimated cost of the work entailed in the proposal, shall be submitted by the applicant, and be reviewed and approved by the Town Engineer. No bonds shall be released until the Commission receives certification by Staff that the work is completed as approved. A Bond shall be required for restoration in an amount as approved by the Town Engineer. (Amended 4/3/02)
4. Time Limits - Special Permits issued by the Commission shall be for a period not to exceed one year. Permits are renewable by the Commission upon receipt of:
a. Application fee as described in Section 7.7.D
b. Evidence indicating compliance with the permit as approved, consisting of progress plans, photographs, and/or a report from Town Staff attesting to such compliance.
c. Compliance with the Requirement of Section 9.2, Special Permit, including all appropriate fees. (Amended 4/3/02)
5. Progress Report - The Commission, at any time, may ask for a progress report and/or copies of project logs for the purpose of determining compliance with the provisions of this Section. Failure to comply shall result in revocation of the permit and the applicant's surrender of the bond for the purpose of restoring the site to a condition consistent with the purposes of this Section.
E. Administrative Permits
In certain cases where the area to be worked does not exceed five thousand (5000) square feet, an administrative permit may be issued by the Zoning Enforcement Officer after review of the proposal by appropriate Town Staff, subject to all provisions set forth in these Regulations with the following exceptions.
1. No public hearing is required
2. Application fee shall be $25.00
3. Administrative permits shall be issued for a period not to exceed six (6) months.
128
Section 7.7. Erosion and Sediment Control
A. Purpose
This Section of the regulations is intended to implement methods and techniques for minimizing erosion and sedimentation in East Hampton.
B. Applicability
A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan shall be submitted with any application for development when the disturbed area of such development totals more than one-half (1/2) acre. Only a single family dwelling that is not a part of a subdivision of land shall be exempt from the submission of a soil erosion and sedimentation control plan.
C. Review Agency
For the purposes of this regulation, the East Hampton Inland Wetlands and Water Courses Agency shall be the review body, or agent, to the East Hampton Planning and Zoning commission for all proposed disturbances of land greater than one (1) acre. Nothing in this Section shall be construed as limiting the agent(s) described above from submitting applications to the State of Connecticut Department of Energy and Environmental Protection, the Soil Conservation Service or other relevant parties for review prior to final recommendation for certification or denial. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to submit all required plans to the relevant agencies for review.
D. Definitions
Certification - A signed, written approval by the Planning and Zoning Commission that a soil erosion and sedimentation control plan complies with the applicable requirements of these Regulations.
County Soil and Water Conservation District – Connecticut River Coastal Conservation District established under Subsection (a) of Section 22a-315 of the General Statutes. (effective 12/06/03)
Development - Any construction or grading activities to improved or unimproved real estate.
Disturbed area - An area where the ground cover is destroyed or removed leaving the land subject to accelerated erosion.
Erosion - The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by water, wind, ice or gravity.
Grading - Any excavating, grubbing, filling (including hydraulic fill), or stockpiling of earth materials or any combination thereof, including the land in its excavated or filled condition.
Inspection - The periodic review of sedimentation and erosion control measures shown on the certified plan.
Sediment - Solid material, either mineral or organic, that is in suspension, is transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by erosion.
Soil - Any unconsolidated mineral or organic material of any origin.
Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Plan - A scheme that minimizes soil erosion and sedimentation resulting from development and includes, but is not limited to, a map and narrative.
129
E. Requirements for Certification/Approval of Erosion and Sedimentation Control Plan
1. To be eligible for certification, a soil erosion and sedimentation control plan shall contain provisions to adequately control accelerated erosion and sedimentation and reduce the danger from storm water runoff on the proposed site based on the best available technology.
2. Such principles, methods and practices necessary for certification are found in the 2002 Connecticut Guidelines for Soil erosion and Sediment Control, as amended.
3. Alternative principles, methods and practices may be used with prior approval of agents of the Commission. (effective 12/06/03)
4. Plan Requirements – The soil erosion and sedimentation control plan shall contain, but is not limited to:
a. A narrative describing:
1. The development
2. The schedule for grading and construction activities including:
a. Start and completion dates
b. Sequence of grading and construction activities;
c. Sequence for installation and/or application of soil erosion and sedimentation control measures
d. Sequence for final stabilization of the project site
e. Name, address and evening telephone number of individual(s) responsible for implementation of the Erosion and Sediment Control Plan
b. The design criteria for proposed soil erosion and sedimentation control measures
c. The construction details for proposed soil erosion and sedimentation control measures
d. The installation and/or application procedures for proposed soil erosion and sedimentation control measures
e. The operation and maintenance program for proposed soil erosion and sedimentation control measures
f. A site plan that is in compliance with Section 9.1 of the East Hampton Zoning Regulations
g. Any other information deemed necessary and appropriate by the Commission or its designated agent.
5. Minimum Acceptable Standards -
a. Plans for soil erosion and sedimentation control shall be developed in accordance with these Regulations using the principles as outlined in the 2002 Connecticut Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control as amended. Soil erosion and sedimentation control plans shall result in a development that: minimizes erosion and sedimentation during construction; is stabilized and protected from erosion when completed; and does not cause off-site erosion and/or sedimentation. (effective 12/06/03)
b. The minimum standards for individual measures are those in the 2002 Connecticut Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control, as amended. The Commission may grant exceptions when requested by the applicant if technically sound reasons are presented, that accomplish the same goals as the Connecticut Guidelines. (effective 12/06/03)
F. Certification or Denial of Erosion and Sedimentation Plans:
1. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall certify a soil erosion and sedimentation control plan after it is determined by its designated agent(s) that said plan complies with the requirements and objectives of this regulation. When the soil erosion and sedimentation control plan fails to comply with these Regulations, the Commission shall deny certification of the plan.
2. When the Planning and Zoning Commission or its agent(s) requires that a soil erosion and sedimentation control plan be submitted to the Soil and Water Conservation District and/or other agencies for review and comment, it shall be the responsibility of the applicant to submit the plans to the appropriate agencies. Comments from review agencies shall be submitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission as part of the application.
130
G. Conditions of Approval
The following conditions shall be required of all applicants upon approval/certification of plans in accordance with this Section:
1. The estimated cost of measures required to control soil erosion and sedimentation and for site stabilization shall be covered in a performance bond in accordance with the provisions specified under Section 9.1.E of the East Hampton Zoning Regulations.
2. Zoning Approvals shall not be issued for construction on the site until the erosion and sedimentation control plan is:
a. Certified by the Planning and Zoning Commission, and
b. The specified control measures, as outlined in the plan, are installed properly.
3. The developer/owner shall be responsible for maintaining all erosion and sedimentation control measures and facilities in proper working order throughout the life of the project.
H. Inspection
Inspections shall be made by the Commission or its designated agent(s) during development to ensure compliance with the certified plan and that control measures and facilities are properly installed and maintained. Weekly or daily logs of inspections performed by the applicant may be required, as requested by the agent(s) referred to in this Section.
I. Enforcement
Enforcement of the Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Regulations shall be the responsibility of the Planning and Zoning Commission or its designated agent(s). Failure to properly install and/or maintain any erosion and sedimentation control measure may result in the issuance of a stop work order until the problem is satisfactorily corrected.
131
This page intentionally left blank
132
ARTICLE 8 - SPECIAL REGULATIONS
Section 8.1. Prohibited Uses
1. Any use not specifically permitted by the East Hampton Zoning Regulations.
2. Junk yards, including, but not limited to motor vehicles. (More than one unregistered motor vehicle or parts thereof shall constitute a violation of this regulation.)
3. Solid waste disposal sites, not including municipal transfer stations.
4. Uses or activities which constitute or involve the treatment storage, or disposal of hazardous waste, hazardous materials, hazardous substances or toxic waste as the above terms are defined in the Federal and State Resource Conservation Recovery Act, Comprehensive Environmental Response Compensation Liability Act or Toxic Substance Control Act, or other relevant Acts or Documents. This provision shall in no way be construed to permit or allow by Special Permit other uses or activities not otherwise provided for in this Regulation or Section.
Section 8.2. Non-Conforming Conditions
Any non-conforming use or building, lawfully existing at the time of adoption of these Regulations or of any amendments thereto, may be continued, and any building so existing, housing such non-conforming use, may be reconstructed in accordance with this Section.
A. Interpretation
Nothing in these Regulations shall be construed as authorizing or approving the continuance of the use of a structure or premise in violation of the Zoning Regulations in effect at the time of the adoption of these Regulations. The burden to prove valid non-conforming status shall rest on the owner of the premise in question.
B. Rendering to Safe Condition
Nothing in these Regulations shall be construed to relieve a property owner from the responsibility of maintaining or rendering a building, structure or premise to a condition deemed safe and healthful by proper authorities.
C. Alteration, Repair and Reconstruction
Any legal existing non-conforming building or structure may be:
1. Reconstructed, repaired or rebuilt, only to its previous floor area, when damaged or destroyed by fire, flood, collapse or other such accidental event, only if such work is commenced within twelve (12) months of such damage.
2. Repaired or reconstructed as made necessary by normal wear and tear. (Effective January 1, 2008)
133
D. Change in Use
No non-conforming use may be changed except to a conforming use or, with the approval by the Planning and Zoning Commission of an application for a Special Permit, in accordance with Section 9.2 to another non-conforming use, not more objectionable, and deemed to be more conforming, provided any aspect of the use is not extended or enlarged (revision effective July 8, 2006).
E. Reversion
No part of a conforming lot, use or building may return to non-conformity once such non-conformity is abandoned or extinguished.
F. Non-Conforming Lots of Record
1. Lots made non-conforming by changes made to Zoning Regulations may be developed in conformance to these Regulations. Such lots must be legally existing at the time of any such changes in the Regulations, and the burden to prove such non-conforming status shall be on the applicant for such development.
2. Subject to the provisions of Section 8-26a(b) of the Connecticut General Statutes, contiguous, non-conforming lots created prior to adoption of Subdivision Regulations (5/1/49), or existing as the result of divisions not requiring subdivision, shall be considered one non-conforming lot when such lots are of the same ownership and have contiguous frontage.
G. Maximum House Size Allowed on Non-Conforming Lots of Record in the R-1 Zone
For the purposes of preventing the overcrowding of land, promote public safety, and allow for the orderly development of neighborhoods; the following shall be the maximum house sizes permitted on non-conforming lots of record in the R-1 Zone:
Lot Size Maximum House Size (Habitable space) Maximum First Floor Area
less than 5,000 sq. ft
1500 sq. ft.
750 sq. ft.
5,000 - 10,000 sq. ft.
1800 sq. ft.
900 sq. ft.
10,001 - 19,999 sq. ft.
2200 sq. ft.
1100 sq. ft.
H. Enlargement of a Permitted use on Non-Conforming Lots
Buildings containing a permitted use, but which does not conform to the requirements of the Regulations regarding height, floor area, percentage of lot coverage, setbacks or parking facilities, may be enlarged or altered provided:
1. Such enlargement contains no more dwelling units than now exist.
2. Additions are constructed in accordance with the applicable yard and height requirements, or with the approval of the Zoning Board of Appeals, are not closer to the lot lines than the existing building or structure (revision effective July 8, 2006).
134
Section 8.3. General Provisions
A. Density
No more than one dwelling unit per lot shall be constructed or used per lot, except as expressly provided for in these Regulations.
B. Interior Lots
1. Area - Each interior lot shall contain twice the minimum lot area required for the zone in which it is located.
2. Access –
a. Each interior lot shall have access to a street.
b. Such access shall be part and parcel of such lot and shall be a minimum of twenty-five (25') feet wide and shall comply with Public Works standards, relative to grade and construction.
c. The length of the access shall be not less than the minimum lot depth for the zone in which it is located and shall not exceed six hundred (600') feet.
d. The measurement of the access way length shall be done by measuring along its center line from the edge of the town road abutting the access way to the front lot line. (Effective: August 24, 2007)
3. Yard Requirements - The setback requirements shall be in accordance with each zone.
4. Location -
a. No interior lot shall be located to the rear of another adjacent interior lot.
b. Maximum number of adjacent rear lot access way shall be (2) two (Amended 4/3/02)
C. Corner Visibility
On a corner lot, no wall, fence, or other structure shall be erected; and no hedge, shrub, tree or other planting shall be maintained, between the building line and the street line, as to create a traffic hazard by obstructing the view. For the purposes of enforcing these Regulations, the opinion of the East Hampton Police Department and/or the East Hampton Traffic Authority shall prevail.
D. Lots on Narrow Streets
In the case of lots fronting on streets less than fifty (50') feet wide, (street width includes pavement & right of way) the front yard required for the zoning district shall be increased by one half (1/2) of the difference between fifty (50') feet and the actual width of the street. (Amended 4/3/02)
E. Projections into Yards
1. Nothing in these Regulations shall prohibit the projection of not more than one (1') foot into a required yard setback by pilasters, eaves, cornices or other architectural features.
2. Overhangs and cantilevers shall be allowed to project two (2') feet into the required front yard.
F. Access to Lots
1. Applicable Standards - Access to lots, parcels, tracts or other units of land, from public streets, roads and highways must be made in compliance with these Regulations, the Town of East Hampton Street Standards, Town of East Hampton Subdivision Regulations and State of Connecticut D.O.T. Standards.
2. Responsibility of Applicant - Responsibility to obtain proper permits for such access is the sole responsibility of the applicant for such access. No unauthorized access will be permitted.
135
3. Standards - The following shall apply to access from all lots to streets and roads.
a. General: Access drives shall be constructed such that the flow of road drainage is not impeded, water from the lot is not directed onto the road, safe sight distance is achieved, and the required number of vehicles, in accordance with Section 7.1, may be parked off the road in all weather conditions.
b. Grade: The apron Section, which is that portion between the edge of the road pavement and the street line, or front line, shall have a maximum grade of three percent (3%) slope. The next ten (10) feet shall not exceed five percent (5%) slope, and the remainder shall not exceed fifteen percent (15%) slope.
c. Surface: The drive apron shall be paved with a minimum of two (2) inches, compacted depth, bituminous concrete. The remainder of the drive will be surfaced as follows:
1. 0-10 percent slope; minimum of two (2") inches processed gravel or stone
2. 10-15 percent slope; minimum of two (2") inches bituminous concrete.
4. The Director of Public Works and/or the Planning, Zoning, and Building Department shall have authority to increase these minimums as site conditions dictate.
5. Access to unpaved roads or streets shall comply with any or all requirements of the Public Works and/or the Planning, Zoning and Building Dept.
G. Height Limitation
1. The building height limit shall be construed as the height of any part of a building or structure above the average finish grade of the lot.
2. Spires, cupolas, towers, chimneys, flagpoles, mechanical penthouses, ventilators and other similar features, occupying in aggregate not more than ten (10%) percent of the total roof area, and not used for human occupancy, may be erected to a reasonable and necessary height.
H. Water Supply and Sewage Disposal
1. All lots used for residential, commercial or industrial purposes shall provide for adequate, healthful water supply and proper sewage disposal for the uses intended.
2. All lots and proposed uses shall comply with the provisions of all laws, codes, regulations, statutes and ordinances applicable to the proposed use.
3. The departments and/or agencies responsible for ensuring compliance to the above requirements shall include, but not be limited to, the Town Sanitarian, East Hampton Water Pollution Control Authority, State of Connecticut Dept. of Health Services, State of Connecticut Department of Public Utilities Control and the State of Connecticut Department of Energy and Environmental Protection.
I. Accessory Buildings
An accessory building is a structure detached from the principal building(s) and is arranged, designed or intended to serve as accessory and subordinate thereto.
1. Location and Size Permitted - Accessory buildings shall be located only in compliance with the front setback requirements of the applicable zone.
2. Residential Use - Accessory buildings shall not be configured for use, or be used, as a dwelling unit.
3. Special Setback Provisions -
a. Small Structures - Accessory buildings not more than twelve (12') feet in height and two hundred (200) square feet in area shall be located not less than six (6') feet from any rear or side boundary line.
b. Large Structures - Accessory buildings greater than twelve (12) feet in height or two hundred (200) square feet in area shall comply with all applicable setback requirements of the applicable zone in which they are located. Such accessory buildings shall not exceed one story in height.
136
The size of accessory buildings proposed shall not be construed as sufficient hardship for setback variance or lot coverage variance requests.
4. Construction and Completion - No accessory building shall be constructed prior to the construction of the principal building on the lot. This Section shall not prohibit the completion of an accessory building prior to the principal building when the construction of both is concurrent.
5. Size Of Accessory Buildings and Private Garages –
a. Accessory buildings and private garages for the sole use of occupants of the premises shall not exceed the area required for more than three (3) vehicles on one lot and for one additional such vehicle space for each ten thousand (10,000) square feet by which the area of the lot exceeds one acre (one vehicular space shall be construed, for the purposes of this Section, as 15 ft. x 30 ft., hence a 3 vehicle space building or garage shall not exceed 45 ft. x 30 ft.).
b. In no case shall an accessory building or buildings exceed an aggregate total of 3000 sq. ft.
6. Accessory Buildings Used to Contain Livestock for Personal Use - Buildings used to house livestock for personal use shall comply with the applicable provisions of Section 8.4.C.
J. Accessory Uses
An accessory use is one that is strictly incidental and subordinate to the principal use and cannot exist without the principal use.
1. Recreation Vehicles Not more than two recreational vehicles, including boats (as defined by the CT Department of Motor Vehicles) shall be permitted as accessory uses on a lot in any Residential Zone unless the vehicles shall be:
a. Parked or stored at all times in a fully enclosed structure, or if parked outdoors, not located within the required front yard, unless located on the driveway.
b. Not used for living, business purposes or continuous recreation purposes while parked or stored on a residential lot. (Living purposes does not include temporary stays by guests of up to one month)
2. Tag Sales –
a. For the purpose of selling personal items may be allowed for a period of no longer than 3 times per year, each for 3 consecutive days.
b. Any tag sales which are longer than this time period shall be considered a Commercial business and will require Special Permit approval.
c. It will not be considered a commercial tag sale where one item is placed on a piece of property for sale for an extended period (i.e.: motor vehicle etc.)
3. Commercial Tag Sales (Flea Markets) – Shall be allowed by Special Permit under Section 9.2 of these regulations in non-residential zones only (revision effective October 1, 2009).
137
Section 8.4. Standards For Specific Uses
A. Garages And Motor Fuel Filling Stations
1. General Requirements - Where permitted elsewhere in these Regulations, public garages for storage, repair or other use, and filling stations shall be permitted only after approval of the proposed action by the Zoning Board of Appeals, pursuant to Section 14 of the Connecticut General Statutes. Such approval must be obtained prior to submitting an application to the Planning and Zoning Commission for Special Permit and Site Plan Review in accordance with Sections 8.6, 9.1 and 9.2 (effective 12/6/03).
2. Location - No facility under these Regulations shall have its vehicular entrance or exit within five hundred (500') feet from any school, church, public park or playground.
3. Special Provisions - Any facility under these Regulations shall show, prior to approval that;
a. No increase of traffic or fire hazard in the area.
b. It will not depreciate the property values or essential characteristic of the area.
c. No residential use of the property shall occur.
d. No motor vehicles shall be stored or parked nearer to the street than the building line, and that no repair of vehicles shall occur out of doors.
e. No building containing less than fifteen hundred (1500) square feet shall be used for the repair of motor vehicles.
B. Alcoholic Beverages
1. Location - No building or structure shall be used for the sale, exchange, storage for the purpose of sale or exchange, retail or wholesale, of alcoholic beverages if such building is located:
a. In any residential zone except as permitted in Section 8.4.L. (Effective 12-1-2015)
b. Within five hundred (500') feet of a:
1. church,
2. school or other institution for the purpose of caring for children,
3. hospital, or
4. charitable institution, public or private.
c. This distance shall be measured as a straight line from any entrance of either building.
2. Exceptions -
a. Grocery stores - Stores chiefly engaged in the sale of groceries, which have a permit to sell beer, shall not be regarded as selling or storing alcoholic beverages for the purpose of the distance requirement in Section 8.4.B.1
b. Sale of alcoholic beverages may be allowed in any zone under a temporary, charitable or organization permit, for a period not to exceed fifteen (15) days, only when specifically approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
c. Sale of alcohol for on-site consumption as an ancillary use in the C, VC, or MUDD Zones may be approved within 500 feet of the uses described above when the Commission determines that such sale will not adversely affect the health, safety, or welfare of persons attending the uses as described in Sec 8.4.B.1.b. Any change in ownership of permitted facility requires review and/or approval of the Commission.
C. Agriculture and Livestock
1. Purpose - The purpose of this Section is to provide adequate safeguards to preserve and protect agricultural uses and the keeping of domestic livestock and to ensure that these uses do not create a negative impact on adjacent uses.
2. Applicability -
a. This Regulation shall not be considered applicable to the growing of garden crops for the use of the occupants of the property.
138
b. Agriculture shall mean "The use of land for agricultural purposes, including farming, dairying, pasturage, horticulture, floriculture, animal and poultry husbandry, etc., when such use is the principle use of the land".
c. For the purpose of enforcement, the Animal Control Officer is designated to enforce this Section.
3. Classification of Livestock - Livestock kept for personal use, except dogs, cats, and other small, domesticated animals, shall be classified as follows:
a. Class 1 - Farm livestock, small: animals such as poultry and other fowl, rabbits, and animals similar in size and weight.
b. Class 2 - Farm livestock intermediate: animals such as goats, sheep and hogs.
c. Class 3 - Farm livestock, large: horses, cattle, and animals of similar stature.
4. Acreage - There shall be:
a. a minimum of three-fourths (3/4) acre in lot area for the first Class 2 yearling or older being kept and an additional one-half (1/2) acre for each additional Class 2 yearling or older.
b. a minimum of three-fourths (3/4) acre above the minimum lot size for the first Class 3 yearling or older being kept, including horses, and an additional (1/2) acre for each additional yearling or older.
5. Fencing - Adequate fencing shall be installed and maintained to contain all livestock within the premise.
6. Setback - All structures and enclosures, except perimeter fencing, shall be located not closer than one hundred feet (100') from any street line and not closer than forty feet (40') from any lot line.
7. Use of Buildings - Buildings shall be used to house all livestock, vehicles, implements, and supplies related to agricultural and personal livestock uses. Outside storage shall be prohibited.
8. Sanitation - All living quarters of livestock shall be maintained to control pollution, rodents, insects and odor. The keeping of manure must not create a health hazard nor shall it be in a location where it can be detected by neighboring properties.
9. Lighting - External floodlighting shall be appropriately shaded and directed to prevent transmission beyond the lot where it originated and prevent objectionable brightness, as determined by the Zoning Enforcement Officer.
D. Commercial Stables
1. In accordance with Sections 9.1 and 9.2 and the standards of this subsection, the Planning and Zoning Commission may permit, as a Special Permit, the commercial use of land, buildings and other structures for the following horse related activities:
a. riding academies,
b. livery and boarding stables,
c. animal and convalescent stables,
d. rental and hacking stables,
e. breeding stock farms, and
f. private club riding stables.
2. Acreage: The barns, riding rings, corrals and accessory facilities shall be contained within one parcel of suitably drained land consisting of at least ten (10) acres.
3. Parking:
a. Sufficient off-street parking facilities should be provided to accommodate all users and visitors to the property, including spectators, for horse shows or similar events.
b. The roads for entering and leaving the property shall not be located or placed in a manner to create pedestrian or vehicular traffic hazard on the public street or highway.
c. There shall be five (5) off-street parking spaces plus one space for each five (5) users, based on the capacity of the stalls provided.
4. Health -
a. Stable manure must not create a health hazard from an air and water pollution standpoint to the community in general or the persons inhabiting or using the surrounding acreage, and therefore, the stabling of horses shall conform to all regulations of local and state health authorities.
139
b. Toilet facilities shall be provided for in accordance with local health requirements for normal operations as well as for horse shows and similar activities.
5. Fencing: Adequate fencing shall be installed and maintained to contain the horses within the property.
6. Public Safety -
a. Fire control facilities for the barns, buildings and other facilities used for normal operations as well as for horse shows and similar activities shall be acceptable to the Town Fire Chief.
b. Personnel and facilities to control traffic and pedestrian movement at public shows or other activities shall be provided in a manner acceptable to the Town Police Chief and at the expense of the operator or owner of the stable.
7. Noise - The use of public address systems, the conduct or the instruction of riders, training of horses and the spectator participation in competitions shall be modulated and continuously controlled in order to avoid becoming a nuisance to surrounding neighbors.
8. Setback - No building, riding ring, corral or manure pit used for or in conjunction with the operations, shall be located in a manner that any part thereof shall be less than one hundred feet (100') from the nearest line of any road, street or highway abutting the property or any side and rear boundary line.
9. Use of Buildings - The use of temporary buildings or trailers for the stabling of horses in excess of seven (7) days is prohibited. There shall be no storage of supplies outside of permanent buildings.
10. Maintenance - The areas should be landscaped to harmonize with the character of the neighborhood. The land shall be so maintained that it will not create a nuisance as determined by the local zoning authority. The manure storage area shall be so screened that it will not be unsightly.
11. Lighting - External floodlighting shall be appropriately shaded and directed to prevent transmission beyond the lot where it originates and prevent objectionable brightness, as determined by the Planning and Zoning Commission and/or the Zoning Enforcement Officer.
E. Commercial Kennels
Commercial kennels may be allowed as Special Permit uses in accordance with Section 9.2 in the Commercial (C), Industrial (I), R-3 and R-4 Zones and the following special provisions:
1. General -
a. All kennels shall be planned in accordance with Connecticut General Statutes 22-342 and proposals shall be submitted to the East Hampton Canine Control Officer for review.
b. All kennels shall be designed to provide adequate provisions to limit the emission of sound from the property.
c. Adequate provisions for the proper treatment of waste shall be in accordance with the Connecticut Public Health Code and, if applicable, the Water Pollution Control Authority.
d. Evidence shall be shown that professional affiliation with the American Boarding Kennels Association or similar organizations has been maintained and that the guidelines and standards of such organizations are followed.
e. All animals shall be confined indoors between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
f. A site plan in accordance with Section 9.1 shall be submitted and shall be in compliance with the provisions therein.
2. Commercial and Industrial Zones -
a. Lot must contain a minimum of forty thousand (40,000) square feet.
b. Commercial kennels proposed in these zones must be so designed that all animals at all times, including exercise, must be housed inside the enclosed weather tight perimeter of the building. Such indoor kennels must provide:
1. Adequate ventilation
2. Inside exercise and run areas
3. Provisions to store all materials and supplies within the building
140
4. Evidence that the building design has considered acoustic attenuation to the greatest degree possible.
3. R-3 and R-4 Zones -
a. Lot must contain ten (10) acres minimum.
b. Kennels in these zones may utilize outdoor exercise and run areas for animals if it can be shown that the building or site characteristics and/or the proposed location provide adequate assurance that the sound of all kennel activities shall be confined to the property.
F. Commercial Recreation
Commercial recreation, as described in this Section, and where permitted by Articles 3 thru 6 of these Regulations shall be by Special Permit only, in accordance with Sections 9.1 and 9.2 (Site Plan Requirements and Special Permit Requirements) and in compliance with the following provisions.
1. Permitted uses -
a. Outdoor athletic activities, including facilities for skating, skiing, sledding, swimming, and racquet sports.
b. A golf course, of not less than nine (9) holes as a principal recreational use, and a par three (3) golf course or putting greens and driving range as accessory to a major recreational facility, but expressly prohibiting miniature golf, putting greens and driving ranges as a principal use.
c. Riding academy or hunt club as a principal use and the keeping and boarding of horses for riding, instruction, and exhibition.
d. Outdoor picnic facilities, including barbecue pits and outdoor fireplaces, and as accessory use to a major recreational facility.
e. Social and recreational facilities for dining and dancing, including banquet, meeting, receptions, assemblies and entertainment, provided such activities are accessory to and a part of an indoor/outdoor recreational enterprise.
f. Lodge, or inn furnishing lodgings and/or meals to transients as accessory to a recreational use, but not as a principal use, provided that no living accommodations shall include cooking facilities.
g. Activities similar to those listed above that are commonly provided by such organizations as day camps, swimming and tennis clubs and other recreational enterprises and that are listed in the application and on the site plan may be approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission subject to such additional safeguards as the Commission may require.
h. Rental of camp sites subject to the following:
1. During the period from April 1st to the following October 31st, the rental of camp sites is permitted. A service building containing a potable water supply and complete bathing and toilet facilities in accordance with the requirements of the Connecticut Public Health Code shall be required.
2. During the winter season the rental of sites for temporary occupancy by transient trailers, travel trailers, recreational vehicle and park mobile trailers is permitted, provided that a trailer or other such unit shall not be dismounted from its wheels. Campgrounds are temporary recreational uses and every camper must maintain a permanent residence elsewhere (effective 12/6/03).
3. No full time school age children are allowed for more than two consecutive weeks during the Connecticut public school calendar year (effective 12/6/03).
4. Proper provision shall be made for the temporary storage, collection, and disposal of water and garbage.
5. The total number of rental sites shall not exceed eight (8) for each acre of area of the entire tract or parcel of land, and a site for the exclusive use of one (1) occupying family shall contain not less than three thousand (3,000) square feet, nor have a width or depth less than forty (40) feet (effective 12/6/03).
141
6. The standards as allowed by the bulk tables for each zone, pertaining to public health and safety shall be used by the Planning and Zoning Commission in determining the requirements for improvement in areas used for trailer sites.
7. Except as above, residential use shall be limited to existing dwellings and new accommodations for persons employed on the premises only.
8. Accessory uses and structures customarily incidental to a permitted use.
9. Signs in accordance with Section 7.2.
i. Places of worship and parochial schools.
2. Special Provisions -
a. The minimum tract shall be fifty (50) acres.
b. Evidence of adequate potable water supply and sanitary sewage disposal to provide for the maximum requirements of the proposed uses shall be submitted for approval by the Town Director of Health and by state agencies having jurisdiction.
c. No structure except a single family dwelling shall be less than one hundred (100') feet from the nearest public highway or less than five hundred (500') feet from the nearest dwelling located on land under other ownership.
d.
e. Off-street parking shall be provided as required in the Zoning Regulations. No parking area shall be located less than one hundred (100') feet from a public highway, and where located less than one hundred (100') feet from any other property line shall be protected by a landscaped buffer strip not less than forty (40') feet wide.
f. The volume of sound from music and public address systems shall be so controlled as to prevent objectionable noise off the premises.
g. Outdoor barbecue and like activities shall terminate at ten (10:00) p.m., and all other outdoor activities shall terminate at midnight.
G. Mobile Homes And Trailers
No mobile home or trailer shall be occupied for domestic or business purposes except as provided for in this Section, or in Section 8.4.F when used in conjunction with an approved Commercial Recreation use.
1. Storage - These Regulations shall not prevent the storage of an unoccupied mobile home or transportable trailer owned by the occupant of the principal dwelling unit located on the premises. Such storage shall be to the rear of the dwelling and shall be no closer to the boundaries of the property than is as allowed by the bulk tables for each zone relative to setbacks for rear and sidelines.
2. Temporary Permits –
a. The use of a mobile home or trailer for occupancy during the construction of a principal dwelling may be permitted as a Special Permit use after a Public Hearing in accordance with Section 9.2. Such permits shall be valid for a period of twelve (12) months, after which one extension of six (6) months may be granted. The following shall be required of all applicants for temporary trailer permit prior to occupancy:
1. Approval by the Town Health Department that sanitary facilities meet all applicable codes and standards.
2. Approval by the Town Health Department of the potable water supply.
3. No Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued for the principal dwelling until the temporary trailer or mobile home detached from sanitary facilities and water supply and is removed or properly stored in accordance with this Section.
b. Temporary trailers for non-residential use shall be allowed as accessory to construction of principal buildings when specifically approved by the Commission as part of an approved site plan in accordance with Section 9.1. Such temporary trailers shall be removed prior to issuance of final certificate of occupancy.
142
H. Car Wash
Car washes shall be permitted in the Commercial, Industrial and Village Center Zones, except that car washes are expressly prohibited in the Lake Watershed Area and are subject to Special Permit and Site Plan approvals in accordance with Sections 9.1 and 9.2 of these regulations.
1. The applicant shall show the site has sufficient water supply for the use either by well capacity or connected to a public water supply system.
2. All wastewater and liquids used in the car wash operations shall be collected by a self-contained treatment system on the property. Said system shall be so designed as to remove all detergents, chemicals, sand and other solids from the used wash system. In addition, all wash water shall be discharged into a public sewer. Approval of the East Hampton Water Pollution Authority shall be required. Said self-contained treatment system shall be subject to approval by the Commission
3. Vehicular circulation shall be controlled for safe entrance and exit, and all vehicles awaiting service or being served shall be parked or stacked behind the building line.
4. There shall be sufficient stacking and queuing spaces in front of the entrance of the car wash facility which do not interfere with on-site or off-site traffic flow. Entrance and exit driveways shall be of a minimum width to support safe entrance and exit and shall have adequate radius for junction with existing traveled ways.
5. The cars shall be stored in an orderly fashion in a lane or lanes not less than 10 ft wide. The stacking area shall require 20 ft of length of each lane for each vehicle.
6. No parking shall be permitted on site except for vehicles of employees, service representatives or vendors. No overnight parking shall be allowed except for service vehicles working on equipment. Number of parking spaces shall not exceed 10, for facilities which are stand-alone car washes.
7. Vacuum spaces shall be 20 ft in length and 12 ft wide. Ingress and egress into and from a vacuum space is permitted from the stacking area, escape lane or exit.
8. All areas for the washing, drying, vacuuming and parking of motor vehicles or any other use of the premises, shall be surfaced with an asphaltic, bituminous, cement or other properly bound pavement so as to provide a durable and dustless surface, and shall be graded and drained as to dispose of all surface water accumulation within the area.
9. All site and floor drains which may receive detergent, oil or other chemicals shall be connected to the sanitary sewer system, water reclamation system or any other equipment satisfactory to the Town Health Director. Such drainage shall not in any case be directed to storm sewers or natural watercourses.
10. The applicant shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Commission that buffer areas, noise levels, environmental controls, including waste water recycling, sludge and sediment handling shall be adequately provided for.
11. The premises shall be properly lighted, such lighting to be so arranged as to reflect the light away from any public street or right-of-way and from any adjoining premises located in a residential zone or premises used for residential purposes.
12. Any trash or storage area shall be enclosed by a suitable opaque fence or plant screening
13. Motor vehicle car washes shall be screened from any adjacent residential property and/or residential zone by an opaque fence or with evergreen screening, not less than 6ft in height at time of planting. The specific fence permitted shall be subject to the approval of the Planning and Zoning Commission.
14. Any holding tanks shall be located to the rear of the property
15. The applicant must show that the facility will not have an environmental impact on existing or abutting watersheds and/or aquifers upon which the facility is located.
16. Engine degreasing will not be a permitted activity at any car wash facility (Revised 4/23/02)
143
I. Bed & Breakfast
This Section of the regulations is intended to allow for the offering of overnight accommodations and breakfast to travelers for a fee in residential areas where a home has structural and/or site characteristics which lend themselves to a Bed and Breakfast - type setting. It is not the intent of these regulations to allow Bed and Breakfast establishments in conventional residential developments settings in town. It is the intent of this Section to insure that Bed and Breakfast operations do not infringe upon the privacy, peace and tranquility of surrounding residents nor decrease the aesthetic or real value of surrounding properties.
Bed and Breakfast operations as defined in these regulations may be permitted in Residential Zones as a Special Permit, under Section 9.2 of these regulations provided that in addition to these regulations the following requirements must be met. The applicant shall provide written confirmation from the Health Official, Building Official and Fire Marshall that all requirements of the applicable Health, Building and Fire Codes, as they apply the Bed and Breakfasts, can be met.
1. Maximum length of stay per guest is 14 days
2. Bed and Breakfasts must be owner – operated and be the principle residence of the owner. The applicant must be the owner at the time of the application.
3. The Bed and Breakfast shall be an accessory use of an owner occupied residence and include of all requirements of the zoning regulations
4. The Bed and Breakfast establishments shall be contained within the existing footprint of the residence
5. No more than 50% of the floor area of the residence shall be used for guest sleeping accommodations. This provision shall not apply to outbuildings used as part of the bed and breakfast establishment, however, under no circumstances shall an outbuilding contain more guestrooms than the owner occupied principal residence
6. No building addition or free standing building shall be constructed in order to accommodate or otherwise make room for the bed and breakfast establishment, except for additions for structures required under local or State Health and Safety codes. An existing outbuilding may accommodate rooms, but shall not be added on to or enlarged, provided it conforms to the minimum yard requirements of the respective zone.
7. Exterior alterations may be made to existing buildings or structures in order to preserve a valuable historic property, promote adaptive reuse of buildings, or comply with local State health and safety code requirements. However, in all cases, such alterations must be considered minimal exterior modifications of the building or structure which are compatible with the character of the area, ensure the residential character of the buildings, and preserve the existing features of the building.
8. Additions to the residence for primary use of the residence are allowed provided they are not an expansion of the Bed and Breakfast establishment
9. No more than 3 guest rooms rated for double occupancy are permitted in a structure which the owner is a resident
10. There shall be a maximum of two (2) guests per room (18 or older)
11. Complete bathrooms shall be provided at a rate of one per two guest rooms
12. Access to each guest room shall be via a main entrance or foyer within the residence. No guest room shall have a separate exterior access except as may be required by fire or building code or where an outbuilding is to be used. The Commission may grant a waiver for an additional access/s by a ¾ vote of the entire membership
13. The owner of the Bed and Breakfast Establishment shall make the Guest Book available to the Town, which shall record the lengths of stay, at the request of the Zoning Officer within 10 days of written receipt for same
14. The lot shall be of adequate size and shape to provide one parking spot for each guest room, employee and property owner screened from public view and preferably located to the rear of the residence where possible.
15. The Commission may require fencing, earth berms, evergreen vegetation or other buffers to reduce visual conflicts with neighbors
16. No guest, employee or owner parking shall be located on the street
144
17. Bed and Breakfast establishments shall be permitted no more than one suitable free standing sign to identify the property, provided the area of the sign does not exceed 6sq feet as measured on one side, which shall contain no lighting with the exception of indirect lighting which shall be specifically reviewed and subject to approval as part of the Special Permit review for its consistency and compatibility with the area in which the Bed and Breakfast is located (revision effective July 8, 2006).
18. A waiver for the number of guest rooms may be allowed with a ¾ vote of all of the members of the Commission members, where the Commission determines that the structure and size of property will not impact abutting property owners.
J. Country Inn
This Section of the regulations is intended to provide for the short term rentals of not more than (14) fourteen guest rooms, with the serving of meals. It is the intent of this Section to allow for these rentals, while still keeping the rural character of the Town intact.
Country Inn as defined in these regulations may be permitted in Commercial, POR, VC and DD Zones as a Special Permit, under Section 9.2 of these regulations provided that in addition to these regulations the following requirements must be met. The applicant shall provide written confirmation from the Health Official, Building Official and Fire Marshall that all requirements of the applicable Health, Building and Fire Codes, as they apply the Bed and Breakfasts, can be met.
1. Maximum length of stay per guest is 30 days
2. Country Inns may be owner – operated or professionally managed. The applicant must be the owner at the time of the application.
3. The Country Inn may be an accessory use of an owner occupied residence.
4. The Country Inn must conform to all requirements of the zoning regulation (revision effective July 8, 2006).
5. Exterior alterations may be made to existing buildings or structures. The Commission promotes adaptive reuse of buildings, and encourages the preservation of any historical structures.
6. No more than 14 guest rooms rated for double occupancy are permitted in a structure
7. There shall be a maximum of two (2) guests per room
8. Complete bathrooms shall be provided at a rate of one per guest rooms
9. Access to each guest room shall be via a main entrance or foyer within the residence. No guest room shall have a separate exterior access except as may be required by fire or building code or where an outbuilding is to be used. The Commission may grant a waiver for an additional access/s by a 3/4/ vote of the entire membership
10. The owner of the Country Inn shall make the Guest Book available to the Town, which shall record the lengths of stay, at the request of the Zoning Officer within 10 days of written receipt for same
11. The lot shall be of adequate size and shape to provide one parking spot for each guest room, employee and property owner, screened from public view and preferably located to the rear of the residence where possible.
12. The Commission may require fencing, earth berms, evergreen vegetation or other buffers to reduce visual conflicts with neighbors
13. No guest, employee or owner parking shall be located on the street
14. Country Inns shall be permitted no more than one suitable free standing sign to identify the property, in compliance with Section 7.2 (Outdoor Signs) of these regulations and shall contain no lighting with the exception of indirect lighting which shall be specifically reviewed and subject to approval as part of the Special Permit review for its consistency and compatibility with the area.
15. Shall not include facilities for cooking in rooms, but may include meals served by the owner to guests.
16. Meals for dinner and Sunday brunch can be offered to the general public as an accessory use. When meals are offered to the general public all parking shall be in accordance with Section 7.1 of these regulations
145
17. Shall be designed so that normal access shall be from a centralized point and comply with all parking and road standards.
18. Review shall include but not be limited to appropriateness to the neighborhood, Architectural Character, and Historic Preservation
19. A waiver for the number of guest rooms may be allowed with a ¾ vote of all of the members of the Commission members, where the Commission determines that the structure and size of property will not impact abutting property owners
K. Swimming Pools
1. Applicability - Pools used for swimming or bathing shall be in conformity with these Regulations, however, these Regulations shall not apply to any pool less than twenty-four (24") inches deep or having a surface area less than one hundred (100) square feet, except when such pool is equipped with a water filtration/recirculation system.
2. Permits - No swimming pool shall be constructed, installed or used until all permits are obtained from the appropriate offices requiring such permits. (Building, Zoning, Health, State of Connecticut, etc.)
3. Plans - Before any permit for a swimming pool is issued, plans, including a plot plan showing elevations, shall be submitted to all appropriate offices requiring such plans. Details of construction, location, enclosure and water disposal system shall be shown to be in compliance with all regulations.
4. Yard Requirements -
a. Private Pools/Residential Zones -
1. A private pool is permitted as an accessory use in all residential Zones.
2. Pools shall be located to the rear of the front plane of the dwelling and shall be a minimum of fifteen (15') feet from side or rear boundaries.
b. Public/Semi-Public Swimming Pools - Public/semi-public swimming pools shall be allowed as an accessory to a permitted use in accordance with all regulations relative to the zone in which the swimming pool is located.
L. Farm Brewery
1. Purpose: It is the intent of this section to preserve and encourage agricultural activities in the Town of East Hampton through flexible uses.
2. Definition: The small scale production of malt beverages from the fermentation of malt with or without cereal grains or fermentable sugars or hops, provided that 20% by weight of said hops, cereal grains and other ingredients, excluding water, are grown by the farmer-brewer on site or sourced within a 50 mile radius.
3. Applicability:
a. Farm Breweries are allowed in any zone.
b. Facility and production therein is to be in conformance with Section 9.1.
c. Finished product to be sold at wholesale.
d. Tasting rooms, tours, and sale of alcoholic beverages on-site may be allowed by Special Permit and in conformance with Sections 8.4.B, 9.1, and 9.2.
e. Finished product shall not exceed 50,000 U.S. gallons per calendar year.
f. The property shall be no less than 10 acres in size.
g. Parking shall be in conformance with Section 7.1.
M. Accessory Dwelling Units
The purpose of this regulation is to allow for the creation of Accessory Dwelling Units (ADU) within the R-1, R-3, and R-4 Zones with the purpose of providing housing for the elderly, single persons, or small families. In addition, creation of additional housing in the already developed areas in town will reduce the pressure to develop raw land in other parts of town. This regulation is designed to ensure that in creating
146
accessory dwelling units, the single family character of the existing principal dwelling and the surrounding neighborhood is retained. Special Permits for accessory dwelling units are approved pursuant to Section 9.2.
Accessory Dwelling Units may be considered only if the following conditions are met:
1. The property is located in the R-1, R-3, or R-4 Single Family Residential Zones.
2. Any lot being considered for an ADU permit shall conform to the current East Hampton Zoning Regulations with regards to minimum lot size and coverage. Lots with pre-existing non-conforming structures may be considered for ADUs.
3. Approval from the Health Department (and State as necessary) shall be obtained prior to the issuance of a Special Permit if the site is served by a Septic System.
4. Off street parking shall be provided and be accomplished so as not to disrupt the single family character of the lot. Additional parking to accommodate the ADU shall not exceed two additional parking spaces beyond the existing condition.
5. No more than one ADU may exist on any property at one time, be it attached or detached.
6. Accessory Dwelling Units shall not be recognizable from the street as a residence and shall not be given a separate street address from the main residence.
7. The owner of the property shall reside on the property in either the primary residence or the ADU at all times (a hiatus from residency of up to 120 days within any twelve (12) consecutive month period shall not constitute a violation).
8. If requested, the applicant shall allow the property to be inspected for compliance by Town Staff.
9. Application to the Zoning Board of Appeals to vary any part of Section 8.4.M, or any other portion of the regulation to allow for the construction of an ADU shall be prohibited.
10. Existing, unpermitted ADUs in any zone are subject to administrative approval. If the existing unpermitted ADU does not conform with this regulation, the use may remain but shall not be expanded.
A. Detached Accessory Dwelling Units
For Detached Accessory Dwelling Units, the following applies in addition to the requirements listed in Section 8.4.M above:
1. In the R-3 zone, the lot must contain at least 1 acre more than the minimum lot size.
2. In the R-4 Zone, the lot must contain at least ½ acre more than the minimum lot size.
3. An ADU shall be no less than 200 square feet and no more than 900 square feet, or 1/2 (whichever is less) of the total area of the accessory structure as measured from the outside walls.
4. There shall be no more than two bedrooms in the ADU.
5. Stairways leading to an accessory dwelling unit above the first floor of an accessory structure must be contained within the exterior walls of the building.
B. Attached Accessory Dwelling Unit
An Attached Dwelling Unit is a unit created within, or attached to the principal dwelling unit. For attached Accessory Dwelling Units, the following applies in addition to the requirements listed in Section 8.4.M above:
1. In the R-3, and R-4 Zones, the lot must contain at least ½ acre above the minimum lot size required for the zone.
2. The building to which an accessory apartment may be added shall be no less than 1,000 square feet before the addition of the ADU.
3. The maximum floor area of the ADU shall not exceed 900 square feet.
4. There shall be no more than two bedrooms in the ADU.
5. Stairways leading to an accessory dwelling unit above the first floor of the primary dwelling unit shall be enclosed by walls leading all the way to the ground and shall not be appended to the front of the existing building.
147
6. Separate access to any accessory dwelling unit shall not be located on the building’s front façade unless 2 doors existed at the time of conversion and the resulting building emulates the character of the existing street side appearance of the principle structure or makes the structure more compatible with the surrounding residential structures.
148
Section 8.5. Active Adult, Congregate And Senior Housing
A. Purpose
The purpose of this regulation is to provide for adequate housing for the older population in the community. It is intended to serve as an incentive to private interests to gear their efforts toward high quality housing for this fast growing segment of our society (revised effective date 8/9/03).
B. Definitions-
ACTIVE ADULT HOUSING – Dwelling units for elderly occupancy in detached, semi-detached, attached or two storied structures or any combination thereof, including condominium, apartment, cooperative and congregate units (effective 12/06/03)
ASSISTED LIVING FOR THE ELDERLY – Dwelling units for elderly occupancy in two or three story structures, which provide three meals per day, personal care services, transportation and housekeeping services. (effective 12/06/03)
CONGREGATE HOUSING – A dwelling providing shelter and services for the elderly which may include meals, housekeeping and personal care assistance.
HOUSING FOR THE ELDERLY – Housing designed for people 55 years of age or older.
ELDERLY OCCUPANCY - Occupancy of any dwelling unit may be limited to (revision effective 7/8/06):
? Persons who are 55 years of age or older,
? A spouse of an occupant pursuant to (a ) above and who resides in the same unit
? Occupants pursuant to (b) above, who survives his or her spouse
? Occupants pursuant to (b) above, whose spouse has entered a long term continuing care facility (revision effective 7/8/06).
C. Approach
1. Active Adult, Congregate and Senior Housing and Assisted Living for the Elderly may be permitted in the R-1, C, and DD zones and shall conform to the requirements of these regulations, except that the following requirements are designed for special housing needs for the elderly (revision effective 7/8/06).
2. Active Adult, Congregate and Senior Housing and Assisted Living for the Elderly may be subject to Site Plan approvals and Special Permit approvals in accordance with Sections 9.1 and 9.2 of these regulations (revision effective 7/8/06).
D. Permitted Uses
1. The entire site shall be devoted to elderly housing and related accessory uses in the R-1, C and DD zones.
2. Developments in the DD zone shall retain the front primary road portion of the property for uses allowed within that zone and shall be a minimum of 250 ft deep and 2.5 acres.(DD use only)(This does not apply to rear lots) (Amended 4/3/02)
3. Non-critical care facility, i.e. Clinic, medical office, drug dispensary, etc.
4. Outdoor recreation and open space uses
5. Assembly uses, i.e. cafeteria, meeting/community building, auditorium, library, etc.
6. Shops serving the development, i.e. pharmacy, gift/craft shop, convenience store, etc. Such use shall not exceed 3% of the square foot area of the total dwelling uses
7. Emergency/Immediate Medical Care Facility
149
E. Bulk Table Requirements
This table shall supersede the bulk table in the R-1, C & VC zones for elderly housing requirements
(elderly use only)
Minimum Lot Area (square feet)
3 acres
Minimum Lot Width (feet)
150
Minimum Lot Frontage (feet)
125
Minimum Rear Lot Frontage (feet)
50
Maximum Lot Coverage (percent)
50%
Minimum Front Setback (feet)
50
Minimum Side Setback (feet)
25
Minimum Rear Setback (feet)
50
Maximum Building Height (feet)
35 *
Minimum Open Space
40%
Minimum distance between structures
Shall exceed the average height of both structures
* The Commission may approve a structure that exceeds 35 feet and has three (3) stories, provided all other requirements are met.
F. Maximum Density and Dwelling Unit Sizes:
1. Maximum density proposed shall not exceed 3 units per acre
2. Minimum floor areas per dwelling unit
Housing for the Elderly Assisted Living
Efficiency Unit
525 square ft
400 square ft
One Bedroom Unit
650 square ft
525 square ft
Two Bedroom Unit
800 square ft
650 square ft
3. Balconies, decks, and common elements shall not be included in the floor area requirements.
4. The number of efficiency units of not more than 400 square feet in an Assisted Living Facility shall be limited to no more than 50% of the total units to be constructed.
5. Developments containing more than ten (10) dwelling units shall have a distribution of unit types, in the judgment of the Commission to provide for efficiency, I and 2 bedroom dwelling units. Condominiums and Apartments shall not exceed 6 units per building.
150
G. Utilities
1. All utilities shall be underground
2. All developments shall be served by public sewer. All appropriate approvals must be obtained from the East Hampton Water Pollution Control Authority.
3. Public water supply shall be required or a community water supply system approved by the Connecticut Dept. of Health, Department of Public Utilities Control, or other agencies having jurisdiction in this regard. The developers shall insure the system’s viability in accordance with all applicable laws, regulations and/or codes.
4. Access to water supply may be required on site and shall be approved by the Fire Marshal.
H. Parking Requirements
1. Parking spaces shall be as follows:
a. Active Adult & Senior Housing- spaces shall be provided at a rate of 2 parking spaces for each dwelling unit (effective 12/6/03).
b. Assisted Living and Congregate Housing - .60 spaces for each dwelling unit (effective 12/6/03)
c. Handicapped parking shall be in accordance with ADA requirements
2. All other parking requirements which pertain to the facility shall be in accordance with Section 7.1 of these regulations
I. Road/Driveway Standards and Storm Drainage
1. Road/driveway standards and storm drainage shall comply with the East Hampton Street Standards and Section 9.1.A of the Zoning Regulations.
2. An erosion and sedimentation control plan as per Section 7.7 of the Zoning Regulations shall be a part of the plan.
3. Streets that may be dedicated to the Town shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the East Hampton Street Standards.
J. Buffer Requirements
1. Street Frontage- each lot shall provide a landscaped buffer strip of at least 10 feet in width along the street line. The buffer shall be landscaped and maintained with a mixture of evergreens, deciduous shrubs and/ or flowering and deciduous shade trees so that it develops a natural screening.
2. A buffer area of at least 25 feet in width shall be provided along all side and rear property lines and maintained to provide adequate privacy and sound minimization between residential uses in this Section and the adjacent uses
3. A landscaped buffer of 50 feet shall be provided between any commercial and residential use on the same property.
4. The landscaping requirement may be waived by the Commission if it finds the existing natural landscaping is sufficient to provide the intended buffer.
5. All outside storage areas shall be suitably screened on all sides by a structure (fence, wall or other suitable device) or a natural buffer.
K. Open Space and Recreation Areas
1. There shall be a minimum of 40% left for open space, which shall be dedicated to the property owners in the development for maintenance purposes.
2. Recreational areas/uses are allowed in conjunction with the type of population living in the development and shall be limited to use by those in the development or their guests.
151
3. Where required, sidewalks shall be 5 feet in width to accommodate personal vehicle transportation of the elderly. Sidewalks shall be installed and constructed with convenient access to other project facilities and will comply with the East Hampton Street Standards.
L. Architectural Review, Lighting and Landscaping
1. Architectural requirements shall include the following:
a. Exterior elevations of each building
b. Floor plans showing each type of dwelling unit
c. Types of exterior building materials and exterior design
d. Landscaping plan including types of vegetation proposed, including provisions for year round maintenance. Where applicable a landscaping bond may be required
2. Architecture should enhance the rural and historic character of the Town of East Hampton
3. Lighting:
a. Fixtures shall be located on the site to assure safe and adequate night-time lighting and shall be located and screened so as not to create any off-site nuisances
b. Fixtures should be in harmony with the character and architectural design of the project
M. Handicapped Access
1. Not less than 10% of the units shall be handicapped accessible
2. All handicapped units shall comply with Article 5 of the State of Connecticut Supplement to the BOCA Building Code April 1987 or as may be amended. All accessory buildings within the project shall be accessible to the handicapped
3. Assisted Living for the Elderly shall comply with the Uniform Federal Accessibility Code for board and care facilities.
N. Bonding
1. A performance bond to assure completion of the project shall be filed in accordance with Section 9.1.E. The amount of the bond shall be approved by the Commission.
2. Bonding may be allowed through project phasing with the approval of the Commission
3. Where site improvements are to be dedicated to the Town or public improvements are proposed a 10% maintenance bond will be required and held for a period of one year.
O. Phasing
If the construction of the development is to be done in phases, the plans shall identify all phase lines, acreage and housing densities of each phase, construction sequences and the extent of phasing site improvements such as roads, drainage, water lines, sanitary sewer lines, buffer areas, water, etc.
P. Special Requirements
1. Developments shall comply with the Common Interest Ownership Act of the State of Connecticut
2. Upon approval of the Special Permit, the property owner shall record in the Town Clerk’s office a restrictive covenant establishing an Association ( where applicable), listing all restrictions and requirements under the Association, including but not limited to the requirements for age 55 and older occupancy , maintenance agreements for landscaping, plowing and open space.
3. The applicant shall provide for one or more sites with a covered structure along a main highway and/or within the development as pick up sites for busses or other pick up services.
152
Q. Development Requirements/Evaluation Criteria
1. The application should preserve existing large trees 24” or larger, stone walls, and other man made features which provide character to the site and to the Town of East Hampton (revision effective July 8, 2006).
2. Traffic circulation within the site, traffic load or possible circulation problems on existing streets and pedestrian safety.
3. Accessibility, architecture, relationship between buildings, character of the neighborhood, impact to adjacent properties.
4. Minimization of soil and tree removal.
5. Avoidance of environmentally sensitive areas.
153
Section 8.6. Open Space Subdivisions
(Effective 07/01/2011)
A. Findings
The Commission finds that in some cases the strict adherence to traditional land development and subdivision techniques within the Town of East Hampton has resulted in:
1. The consumption of areas containing valuable recreational, agricultural, forested, and other unique natural resources;
2. The construction of extensive roads and other improvements requiring maintenance by the Town of East Hampton;
3. The development of sites without specific consideration of the limitations of, or opportunities offered by, the existing topographical and soil conditions; and
4. The destruction of significant historic sites, geological features, severe slopes, scenic vistas, significant stands of trees, water courses, wetlands, wildlife habitat, or other areas of environmental value, natural beauty or historic interest.
B. Purpose
The purpose of Section 8.6 is to respond to the foregoing findings by providing for the following:
1. To allow adequate opportunities for development under these regulations;
2. To allow for greater flexibility and creativity in the design of residential developments;
3. To encourage the permanent preservation of open space, agricultural land, forestry land, wildlife habitat, other natural resources including aquifers, water bodies and wetlands, and historical and archaeological resources;
4. To encourage protection of sensitive water and wetland resources in order to maintain and protect the integrity of the Salmon River Watershed and other cool water systems;
5. To encourage a less sprawling and more efficient form of development that consumes less open land and conforms to existing topography and natural features;
6. To minimize the total amount of disturbance on the site;
7. To further the goals and policies of the Town of East Hampton’s Plan of Conservation and Development; and
8. To facilitate the construction and maintenance of housing, streets, utilities, and public services in a more economical and efficient manner.
C. Definitions
OPEN SPACE SUBDIVISION - A subdivision approved in accordance with this Section 8.6. A development pattern that arranges the layout of buildings, roads, and utilities in a compact area so as to preserve a large portion of the site for community open space.
CONVENTIONAL SUBDIVISION - A parcel of land which is divided in accordance with the requirements of the East Hampton Zoning and Subdivision Regulations.
DEVELOPMENT RESTRICTION - A restriction which perpetually prohibits further development or use inconsistent with or inimical to the enhancement, preservation, and protection of a defined area for the benefit of fish, wildlife, plants, or other similar ecosystems; or which perpetually preserves such areas predominantly in their natural scenic or open condition; but which does not involve any significant alteration of development of the restricted area in a manner which is inconsistent or inimical to the preservation and protection of the restricted area.
154
NORMAL LOT SIZE - The lot size, expressed in acres or square feet, normally applicable to the zoning district in which the proposed Open Space Subdivision is located.
OPEN SPACE - Land within an Open Space Subdivision which is subject to a Development Restriction and permanently set aside for public or private use and will not be developed unless otherwise provided for in this regulation. The Commission may permit a small portion of the open space to be paved or built upon for structures accessory to the dedicated use or uses of such open space (e.g., pedestrian walks and bike paths) so long as it supports the purposes of the open space and is consistent with state and local level environmental protections.
TOTAL AREA - The total area of the proposed Open Space Subdivision expressed in acres.
UNBUILDABLE AREA - The area, expressed in acres, within the proposed Open Space Subdivision which is comprised of wetlands, watercourses, flood zone A per FEMA maps, existing and proposed streets and highways, easements and rights of way (R.O.W.) for vehicular access and utilities, and slopes of twenty-five (25) percent or greater. For purposes of this definition, easements and rights of way of an undefined width shall be deemed to be twenty-five (25) feet in width.
YIELD PLAN - A preliminary concept site plan included as part of an application for an Open Space Subdivision that shall be used to determine the maximum number of allowable lots for an Open Space Subdivision. The yield plan shall be based on Conventional Subdivision regulations and shall comply with all applicable standards and regulations of the East Hampton Subdivision Regulations, Section 9.1 Site Plan Review, and provisions of federal, state and local law.
D. Authority
The Commission shall act as the Special Permit Granting Authority for Open Space Subdivision applications.
E. General Eligibility Requirements
The Commission shall accept and review an Open Space Subdivision application only if it complies with the following eligibility requirements.
1. The development may only be permitted in the R-2, R-3, or R-4 zones.
2. The development shall result in a minimum of five (5) lots as determined by the yield plan (see Section 8.6.F.3.B).
3. The development shall only include detached single family dwellings and permitted accessory uses. All other uses shall require the Normal Lot Size and be subject to approval of the Commission in accordance with the applicable sections of these Regulations. In addition, any other use which is proposed after the approval of the Open Space Subdivision shall require an amendment to the Special Permit granted under this Section 8.6 in accordance with the applicable sections of the Zoning Regulations.
F. Application Procedures and Requirements
1. Waiver of strict compliance –
a. Strict compliance with any procedures or application requirements within this Section 8.6.F may be waived by the Commission through a ¾ majority vote if the Commission finds that providing a waiver does not hinder the Commission’s ability to review the application against the design and performance standards of this regulation due to the unique conditions on the site and the waiver is consistent with the Section 8.6.B (Purpose) of this regulation.
b. Any request from an applicant for a waiver from this Section 8.6.F must be submitted in writing to the Commission and must clearly identify the provisions for which a waiver is being sought,
155
and if applicable, must describe the alternative information being provided or method of compliance.
c. In addition, such request shall be accompanied by a statement setting forth the reason or reasons why, in the applicant’s opinion, the granting of such a waiver or waivers would be in the public interest and consistent with the intent and purpose of an Open Space Subdivision.
2. Application Procedures - The following procedures apply to an application for an Open Space Subdivision:
a. Pre-Application Conference:
1. The Commission recommends that, prior to submission of an application for an Open Space Subdivision, the applicant initiate a pre-application conference with the Commission and its staff to discuss conceptual aspects of the proposed Open Space Subdivision compared to a proposed Conventional Subdivision. The applicant is encouraged to prepare and present conceptual plans for informal consideration by the Commission for both concepts.
2. The pre-application conference is recommended to facilitate the general consideration of site conditions affecting the development of the subject site before the applicant proceeds with the application and the preparation of final maps, plans, and documents required to accompany such application.
3. Following the pre-application conference, the Commission will provide informal, non-binding suggestions to the applicant as to whether to proceed with an application under this 8.6 or to adhere to the Conventional Subdivision requirements of the applicable sections of the East Hampton Subdivision Regulations.
4. The Applicant may submit more than one design for an Open Space Subdivision to the Commission for discussion purposes. Neither the pre-application conference, the informal consideration of preliminary plans, nor the Commission’s suggestion, shall be deemed to constitute approval of any portion of a subdivision application.
b. Public Hearing -
1. Public hearings on the Special Permit and the Open Space Subdivision Application shall be held concurrently.
2. Prior to the close of the public hearing, the Commission shall recommend the development Plan (either the Open Space Subdivision Plan or the Conventional Subdivision Plan) that it considers the most beneficial to the Town.
3. Within seven days of the Commission’s recommendation, during the public hearing, the Applicant shall elect which plan he/she wishes to pursue and communicate this choice in writing to the Commission.
4. An Open Space Subdivision shall also require approval by the Health Director. These application and review processes shall be administered concurrently to the greatest extent practical.
3. Application Requirements - An application for the approval of an Open Space Subdivision shall require the following information.
a. A proper and complete Special Permit and Subdivision application form including a check made payable to the Town of East Hampton in the amount specified in the Fee Schedule, and all required supporting information.
b. Ten (10) copies of a Yield Plan that shall be used to determine the maximum number of allowable lots for the Open Space Subdivision. The contents of a Yield Plan shall include:
1. Parcel boundaries, north arrow, date, legend, title "Yield Plan," and scale;
2. The name and address of the record owner or owners, the applicant, the landscape architect, the design engineer and/or land surveyor that prepared the plan;
3. The names, approximate location, and widths of adjacent streets;
4. Existing topography at 2-foot contour intervals;
5. Map of soils using NRCS soils mapping;
6. The location of all on-site local, state, and federal regulatory resource boundaries and buffer zones which shall be clearly identified, and all wetland flag locations shall be numbered and placed upon the Yield Plan;
156
7. Lot lines with approximate areas and frontage dimensions, or unit placements and proposed common areas;
8. Location and extent of rights-of-way and general location of stormwater management systems; and
9. If available, the location and results of any test pit investigations for soil profiles, percolation rates and determination of seasonal high ground water table.
c. Ten (10) copies of a project narrative describing the proposed Open Space Subdivision and demonstrating compliance with all the standards and regulations of this Section 8.6.
d. Ten (10) copies of the proposed plan of the Open Space Subdivision in compliance with this Section 8.6, the East Hampton Subdivision Regulations, and Section 9.1 Site Plan Requirements unless otherwise provided for under this Section 8.6 or specifically waived pursuant to Section 8.6.F.1.
e. Ten (10) copies of any additional information as the Commission may require for a review of the proposed Open Space Subdivision in order to reach a determination of the impact of the Open Space Subdivision on the surrounding area. Such additional information may include, but is not limited to, the following: information concerning surrounding land uses, building locations, driveways, streets, topography, water courses and wetlands, utilities and other information of a similar nature and purpose.
f. Where applicable, ten (10) copies of the proposed certificate of incorporation, if any, bylaws, rules and regulations of any association or corporation of the lot owner within the proposed Open Space Subdivision.
g. Ten (10) copies of the proposed covenants and restrictions to be placed in the deeds of conveyance to the lot owners, and copies of any proposed deeds, agreements, conveyances and restrictions necessary for the creation of Open Space, including a precise statement of the proposed Development Restriction.
G. Design Process
At the time of the application for the Special Permit and Open Space Subdivision, applicants are required to demonstrate to the Commission that the following design process was considered in determining the layout of proposed streets, lots, house placement, and designation of all common areas and open space. The design process shall be performed by a multidisciplinary team of which one member must be competent in landscape architecture.
1. Step One - Identify Open Space Areas -
a. Identify Regulated Open Space Areas including:
1. Wetlands, ponds and water courses;
2. 100-year floodplains;
3. Significant Natural Communities defined by the CT DEEP;
4. Areas with potentially State and Federally listed endangered, threatened or special concern species as per the current State and Federal Listed Species and Significant Natural Communities Map published by the CT Geological and Natural History Survey of the CT DEEP;
5. Structures and features listed on the National or State Register of Historic Places; and
6. Upland Review Areas as defined by the East Hampton Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Agency.
b. Identify Unregulated Open Space Areas including:
1. Slopes that exceed 20%;
2. Any portion of a contiguous forest area over 20 acres in size;
157
3. Site-wide vegetated cover types including, but not limited to: meadow, coniferous forest, deciduous forest, mixed forest, old field, open wetland, forested wetland, and scrub (survey not required for unregulated areas, applicant may use interpretation of aerial photography to map in combination with field reconnaissance);
4. Potential contiguous open space or connective green belts;
5. Prime farmland;
6. Areas that have recreation value as recommended by the Parks and Recreation Department and/or the Recreation and Open Space Section of the Plan of Conservation and Development;
7. Unregulated cultural features such as historic sites and structures, archeological sites, and scenic views.
2. Step Two - Locate House Sites - Locate approximate house sites outside the Regulated Open Space Areas and, to the extent practicable, outside Unregulated Open Space Areas on suitable soils. The first lot for a house site shall be measured at a minimum distance of one hundred (100) feet from the existing Town road for which the Subdivision is proposed.
3. Step Three - Align Streets and Driveways - Trace a logical alignment for local streets to the house sites. Streets and driveways shall follow the existing topography of the parcel where feasible to minimize cuts and fills. A street plan shall be designed which shall maintain the rural character of the Town.
4. Step Four: Draw in Lot Lines - Draw in lot lines in accordance with the applicable requirements of Section 8.6.H.
H. Design Standards and Controls
The following General and Site Specific Design Standards shall apply to all applications for Open Space Subdivision and shall govern the development and design process:
1. General Design Standards -
a. The landscape shall be preserved in its natural state, insofar as practicable, by minimizing tree and soil removal. Any grade changes shall be in keeping with the general appearance of the neighboring developed areas. The orientation of individual building sites shall be such as to maintain maximum natural topography and cover. Topography, tree cover, surface water buffers, and natural drainage ways shall be treated as a framework for designing road and lot configuration rather than as malleable elements that can be changed to follow a preferred development scheme.
b. Streets shall be designed and located in such a manner as to maintain and preserve natural topography, significant landmarks, and trees; to minimize cut and fill; and to preserve and enhance views and vistas on or off the subject parcel.
c. Development shall be related harmoniously to the terrain and the use, scale, and architecture of existing buildings in the vicinity that have a functional or visual relationship to the proposed buildings.
d. All open space (landscaped and usable) shall be designed to add to the visual amenities of the area by maximizing its visibility for persons passing the site or overlooking it from nearby properties.
e. The removal or disruption of historic, traditional or significant uses, structures, or architectural elements shall be minimized insofar as practicable, whether these exist on the site or on adjacent properties.
2. Site Specific Design Standards -
a. Minimum area, yard and coverage requirements -
1. Minimum front yard - thirty (30) feet
2. Minimum side yard - ten (10) feet
3. Minimum rear yard - twenty-five (25) feet
4. Maximum building coverage - twenty (20) percent
158
5. Maximum building height - thirty (30) feet
6. Footnote - minimum lot size, length and frontage to be excluded.
b. Buildable Area -
1. Any lot with reduced lot area approval shall contain a minimum contiguous area of no less than the minimum lot area as required through separating distances as specified under the State of Connecticut Public Health Code as may be amended and shall contain no land defined as unbuildable under Section 8.6.C of these regulations.
2. Buildable area shall not include areas of vehicular travel easements, rights of ways, utilities, drainage easement area, restrictive cutting easements, conservation easements, and other easements for public or private facilities.
c. Clearing Limits - Clearing shall be limited to a maximum of twenty-thousand (20,000) square feet per lot.
d. Parcel Road Frontage Requirements - In the case of an Open Space Subdivision the property line for the first house shall be no closer than one-hundred (100) feet from the road on which the subdivision will gain entry and/or at least one-hundred (100) feet from a property line of a lot which fronts the local road access.
e. Roads and Sidewalks -
1. All roads shall comply with Town Road Standards except where specifically provided for.
2. Where the Open Space Subdivision will be maintained by an association, the Commission may reduce the road width to eighteen (18) feet for cul-de-sacs, with the number of lots determined at the discretion of the Commission and consistent with State laws, codes, and regulations.
3. Reinforced shoulders may be required where the road width is proposed to be narrower than the required road standard to allow for off street parking, and or to provide additional surface for emergency vehicles.
4. Sidewalks may be required where street width has been reduced, where construction of new sidewalks will connect to an existing system, or where the Commission deems sidewalks would be beneficial to the health, safety and welfare of the community.
5. Internal trail systems may also be required where applicable, and may include sidewalks
f. Cul-de-sacs -
1. Requirements for maximum cul-de-sac length shall not apply to an Open Space Subdivision.
2. Islands in cul-de-sacs are encouraged to maintain rural character. Islands may be of a recessed nature to provide for drainage and/or emergency vehicle staging areas.
g. Aesthetics -
1. Where an Open Space Subdivision will be constructed with groupings of lots, a minimum fifty (50) foot buffer shall be required between groupings (adjacent lot lines).
2. A grouping shall not exceed five (5) lots.
h. Street Trees -
1. All lots shall have minimal lot clearing.
2. Natural vegetation shall remain along the street to create privacy for each lot.
3. Where clearing has eliminated all vegetation, street trees, at least two per each lot, shall be required.
4. Caliper measurements and root ball specifications for all trees and shrubs shall conform to the American Standard for Nursery Stock ANSI Z60.1-2004 as amended.
i. Erosion and Sedimentation Control -
1. Construction and design shall follow the 2002 CT Erosion and Sediment Control Guidelines as may be amended.
2. Porous materials may be considered for use in road, sidewalk and driveway construction. (e.g., porous sub base, cement, asphalt) where soil types and conditions permit, and only where a private association is proposed).
j. Conformance -
159
1. Any lot with reduced area approved under the provisions of this Section 8.6 shall be deemed to be a conforming lot notwithstanding the Normal Lot Size; provided, however, that such lot meets the requirements of other applicable sections of the Regulations and the East Hampton Subdivision Regulations.
2. Any such lot shall be designated on the approved Open Space Subdivision Plan which is presented for recording, except as otherwise designated in these regulations.
k. On-site Pedestrian and Bicycle Circulation - Walkways, trails and bicycle paths shall be provided where appropriate to link residences with recreation facilities (including parkland and open space) and adjacent land uses where appropriate.
I. Open Space and Development Restriction
Open Space Subdivisions shall comply with the following Open Space requirements:
1. Required Open Space -
a. The R-2, and R-3 Zones shall require a minimum of 40% Open Space.
b. The R-4 Zone shall require a minimum of 50% Open Space.
2. Use of Open Space -
a. Dedicated open space shall be used for wildlife habitat, conservation, protection of water resources and the following additional purposes - historic preservation, outdoor education, low impact recreation, aquifer protection, agriculture, horticulture, forestry, a combination of these uses, and shall be served by suitable access for such purposes.
b. Applicants are strongly encouraged to locate open space to provide additional buffer areas to sensitive surface water resources and wetland areas.
c. The Commission may permit a small portion of the open space to be paved or built upon for structures accessory to the dedicated use or uses of such open space provided said improvements support the purposes of the conservation area and is consistent with state and local level environmental protections.
d. Under no circumstances shall stormwater from impervious cover within open space be allowed to drain directly to existing wetlands or water courses without adequate pre-treatment for pollutant removal.
e. At the discretion of the Commission any subdivision that results in 20 lots or more may be required to provide land suitable for active recreation which may consist of an open area suitable for organized sports, or onsite pedestrian and bicycle circulation with public access.
3. Contiguous Open Space -
a. The open space shall be contiguous.
b. Open space will still be considered contiguous if it is separated by a roadway or other unobstructed way.
c. The Commission may waive this requirement through a ¾ majority vote for all or part of the required open space where it is determined that allowing noncontiguous open space will promote the goals of this bylaw and/or protect identified Regulated and Unregulated Open Space Areas.
4. Dedication of Open Space –
a. Open Space shall be dedicated, by conveyance, in fee simple, to one of the following -
1. An association or corporation composed of the owners of all lots within the Open Space Subdivision;
2. The Town of East Hampton;
3. The State of Connecticut;
4. A private not-for-profit conservation trust which ensures the preservation and maintenance of the Open Space in perpetuity; or
5. Such other private or governmental entity which ensures the preservation and maintenance of the Open space in perpetuity and is acceptable to the Commission.
160
b. The applicant shall designate in the application which of the foregoing entities are proposed to own the Open Space, but as part of the approval of such application, the Commission may modify such designation to require ownership by an entity set forth in subsections 8.6.I.4.a.1-3 above.
c. The Commission may not require ownership by a private entity as described in subsections (8.6.I.4.a.4-5) which shall be approved only when proposed by the applicant.
5. Location of Open Space -
a. The Commission may modify any application so as to designate Open Space in locations other than those proposed.
b. In determining whether the proposed entity is appropriate to own the proposed Open Space, or whether to require Open Space in locations different from those proposed, the Commission shall consider the following factors;
1. the ownership of any existing open space on the adjacent properties, or the proximity to non-adjacent open space which might reasonably interconnect with the proposed Open Space in the future;
2. the proposed use of the Open Space for active or passive uses, and the extent of maintenance, supervision, or management required;
3. the potential benefits which the Open Space might provide to residents of the Town or the State, if it were accessible to them;
4. the size, shape, topography, and character of the Open Space;
5. the recommendation of the East Hampton Plan of Conservation and Development;
6. the recommendations of any State or Town agencies, including but not limited to the Town Council, Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Commission, the Parks and Recreation Commission, the Conservation-Lake Commission, the regional planning agency and the Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection.
6. Alteration of Open Space - Any excavation, filling, regrading or alteration of Open Space; any construction or expansion of any building, structure or other improvements thereon, or any paving or surfacing of Open Space subsequent to the date of approval of the Open Space Subdivision shall require an amendment to the Special Permit under this Section 8.6 and in accordance with the applicable sections of these Regulations.
7. Evidence of Acceptance - If Open Space is to be owned by a private not-for-profit conservation trust or corporation, the State of Connecticut, the Town of East Hampton or another entity, the application shall contain written evidence from the proposed entity satisfactory to the Commission, stating that it is willing to accept ownership of and responsibility for the preservation and maintenance of the Open Space.
8. Required Provisions - Regardless of the manner of ownership of the Open Space, the instrument of conveyance must include provisions satisfactory in form and substance to the Commission to ensure -
a. The continued use of such land for the intended purposes;
b. The continuity of proper maintenance for those portions of the Open Space requiring maintenance;
c. When appropriate, the availability of funds required for such maintenance;
d. Adequate insurance protection; and
e. Recovery for loss sustained by casualty, condemnation, or otherwise.
9. Boundary Lines - The boundary lines of all Open Space shall be set in the field and marked by permanent, readily-visible markers where such lines intersect any lot line, road or perimeter line within the proposed Open Space Subdivision and at such points as may be required by the Commission to ensure identification in the field.
10. Recording -
a. At the time the approved Open Space Subdivision Plan is filed, the applicant shall record on the East Hampton Land Records all legal documents required to ensure the aforesaid guarantees.
b. The applicant shall also furnish documentation, in the form of a certificate of title or other acceptable legal document, that shows the title to the property is free and clear of any encumbrances or defects and may be wholly transferred to another entity without difficulty.
11. Right to Enforce and Inspect -
161
a. A right to enforce the terms of the Development Restriction and to inspect the open space shall be conveyed to the party that will own the open space, or to their designee.
b. Any deed of conveyance shall contain language providing the holder of the Development Restriction with the right to obtain reimbursement for all costs it reasonably incurs for maintenance, repairs or restoration of the open space.
c. These fees may include attorney’s fees where any legal action is successfully taken to enforce the terms of the Development Restriction.
12. Association Requirements - If the Open Space is to be dedicated to an association or corporation of lot owners then the Commission may set additional requirements, including, but not limited to the following.
a. Creation of the association or corporation prior to the sale of any lot;
b. Mandatory membership in the association or corporation by all original lot owners and any subsequent owner; and
c. The association or corporation shall have the power to assess and collect from each lot owner a specified share of and where necessary provide reserves the costs associated with maintenance, repair, upkeep and insurance of the Open Space.
J. Decision of the Planning and Zoning Commission
1. Decision Criteria –
a. The Commission may approve, approve with conditions or deny a Special Permit application for an Open Space Subdivision.
b. A Special Permit for an Open Space Subdivision may be granted by the Commission if it determines that the proposed Open Space Subdivision has less detrimental impact on the property than a Conventional Subdivision and finds that the following factors are present:
1. The Open Space Subdivision, unless otherwise provided under these regulations, complies with all applicable standards and regulations of this Section 8.6, the East Hampton Subdivision Regulations, the Roadway Standards, Section 9.1 Site Plan Review, and provisions of federal, state and local law.
2. The Open Space Subdivision achieves greater flexibility and creativity in the design of residential or unit development and achieves greater avoidance of environmentally sensitive areas and water resources than a Conventional Subdivision.
3. The Open Space Subdivision promotes the permanent preservation of open space, agricultural land, forestry land, wildlife habitat, other natural resources including aquifers, water bodies and wetlands, and historical and archaeological resources.
4. The Open Space Subdivision promotes a less sprawling and more efficient form of development that consumes less open land and conforms to existing topography and natural features better than a Conventional Subdivision.
5. The Open Space Subdivision provides beneficial utilization of suitable soil and topographic conditions and protection of soils and topographic conditions not suitable for development.
6. The Open Space Subdivision reduces the total amount of disturbance on the site including, but not limited to soil and tree disturbance.
7. The Open Space Subdivision is consistent with the intent of Planning and Zoning to promote the public health, safety and welfare of the Town of East Hampton and the East Hampton Plan of Conservation and Development.
8. The Open Space Subdivision facilitates the construction and maintenance of streets, utilities, and public services in a more economical and efficient manner.
9. The maintenance, insurance and other burdens placed upon the residents of the Open Space Subdivision, and/or the Town of East Hampton are acceptable.
10. The level of access to the areas of Open Space afforded to members of the general public is adequate.
162
11. The proposed traffic circulation within the Open Space Subdivision, traffic load or possible circulation problems on existing streets and pedestrian safety are considered.
12. The accessibility, architecture, relationship between buildings within the Open Space Subdivision, character of the surrounding neighborhood, and impacts to adjacent properties is considered.
13. The recommendations of the Town Council, the Board of Finance, the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Commission, the Conservation Commission, the Parks and Recreation Department, and any other public or private agencies or authorities providing comment to the Commission are considered.
2. No building permit or certificate of occupancy shall be issued by the Building Inspector, nor shall the Town accept any street, should the Conservation Plan, Subdivision Plan or Site Plan be changed in any way without the approval of the Commission.
K. Severability
If any provision within the regulations of this Section 8.6 is held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of these provisions shall not be affected thereby.
163
Section 8.7. Wireless Telecommunication Facilities
A. Purpose
The intent of this Section is to make provisions to permit the location of wireless communication towers, antennae and facilities in the Town of East Hampton, while protecting neighborhoods and minimizing the adverse visual and operational effects of wireless communications facilities. More specifically, the purposes are:
1. To encourage the joint use of any new or existing towers.
2. To accommodate the need for wireless communications antennas while regulating their location and number.
3. To encourage creative design measures to minimize adverse visual effects of wireless communications facilities through property design, siting and vegetative screening.
4. To avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower failure or from falling ice through engineering and careful siting of towers.
5. To site facilities below visual ridgelines.
6. To reduce the number of antennas or towers needed in the future.
B. Definitions
The following terms and concepts are used throughout this Section.
Antenna(s) - A device used in communications which transmits or receives telecommunications or radio signals. Examples include panel, whip and dish antennas.
Band - A clearly defined range of radio frequencies dedicated to a particular purpose.
Channel - A segment of a frequency band. Also referred to simply as "frequency".
Co-location - Locating wireless communications equipment from more than one provider on a single tower. This reduces the need to build a new communications tower. A co-located telecommunication facility may include accessory structures such as cabinets and sheds for associated telecommunication equipment.
Common Carrier - A public radio service in which a single licensee provides one-way or two-way service to multiple users.
Communications Facility - A land use facility supporting antennas and microwave dishes that send and/or receive radio frequency signals.
Communications Tower - A structure that is intended to support antennas and other telecommunications equipment in the provisions of wireless telecommunications service. Examples include monopoles, lattice and guyed towers.
Digital Technology - Digital technology converts voice and data messages into digits that represent sound intensities at specific points of time and data content.
Dish Antenna - A dish-like antenna used to link communications sites together by wireless transmission of voice or data. Also called microwave antenna or microwave dish antenna.
Electromagnetic Field (EMF) - The local electric and magnetic fields that envelop the surrounding space. The most ubiquitous source of EMFs is from the movement and consumption of electric power, such as with transmission lines, household appliances and lighting.
164
FAA - Federal Aviation Administration
Federal Communications Commission (FCC) - The Federal agency responsible for licensing and regulating wireless communications providers. The FCC has primary regulatory control over communications providers through its powers to control interstate commerce and to provide a comprehensive national system in accordance with the Federal Communications Act.
Interference - Disturbances to reception caused by radio frequency waves or other electric fields.
Monopole - A structure composed of a single spire used to support communications equipment.
Panel Antenna -An antenna or array of antennas designed to concentrate a radio signal in a particular area. Panel antennas are typically flat, rectangular device approximately six (6) square feet in size, also called directional antennas.
PCS - Personal Communication Service(s)
Radio - A generic term referring to communication impulses, sounds, and pictures through space by means of electromagnetic waves.
Wireless Telecommunication Facility -Antenna, telecommunication equipment, communications towers, monopoles and/or other support structures used together in conjunction with the provision of wireless communications services. These services may include, but are not limited to cellular communications, personal communications services and paging.
C. Location Preference & Priority
The order of locations shall be in the following priority:
1. On existing structures such as buildings, smokestacks, water towers and ground signs.
2. On existing or approved towers.
3. In industrial and commercial zones where the existing topography, vegetation, buildings or other structures provide the greatest amount of screening.
4. On new towers on bare ground with visual mitigation in Commercial, Industrial, and Design Development zones.
5. On new towers in the R4, R3 and R2 residential zones, where the existing topography, vegetation, buildings or other structures provide the greatest amount of screening.
D. Permitted Uses
The following uses, which generally pose minimum adverse visual effect, shall be deemed permitted uses in all zoning districts subject to Sections 8.7.E-8.7.J of these regulations.
1. Commercial wireless telecommunications sites where the antenna is mounted to existing towers, utility poles, water towers, light standards, bridges or other structures not classified as buildings provided the following standards are met:
a. No changes are made to the height of such structure.
b. No panel antenna shall exceed sixty (60) inches in height and twenty-four (24) inches in width.
c. No dish antenna shall exceed 1 meter (39.4 inches) in diameter.
d. All equipment buildings or boxes shall be subject to Section 8.7.I of these regulations.
2. Commercial wireless telecommunication facility structure mounted to the rooftop or façade of a building in any non-residential zone, provided the following standards are met:
165
a. These structures include: panel antennas, not to exceed sixty (60) inches in height, twenty-four inches in width and/or six inches in depth; whip antennas, not to exceed forty-eight inches in height; and/or dish antennas not to exceed one meter in diameter.
b. The shed used for the housing or equipment does not exceed one hundred and fifty square feet in area nor exceed eight feet in height and/or cabinets used for the housing of equipment shall not exceed of sixty inches in height by sixty inches in width by sixty inches in depth.
c. No change is made to the height of existing structure.
d. All telecommunications structures shall be shielded from view from all surrounding streets and driveways used by the general public.
e. Shall be of a material or color which matches the exterior of the building or structure.
f. Façade mounted structures shall not protrude above the building structure and roof top structures shall not exceed the rooftop by more than ten (10) feet.
3. Commercial wireless telecommunication sites where a monopole tower is located on property occupied by one or more existing towers, provided the following standards are met:
a. All attempts are first made to co-locate the antenna on existing poles and towers.
b. The height of the tower to be constructed shall not exceed the height of the tallest tower on the property.
c. All accompanying equipment buildings and/or boxes shall be screened and fenced as required in Section 8.7.I of these regulations.
E. Special Permit Uses
The Planning and Zoning Commission may grant a special permit in accordance with Section 9.2 of these regulations, authorizing the establishment of a wireless telecommunication facility in the R-2, R-3, R-4, DD, I or C zones. The establishment of a wireless telecommunication facility shall be in conformance with Sections 8.7.F-8.7.J of these regulations and shall comply with the following:
1. A wireless telecommunication provider shall co-locate on existing communication towers, whenever possible.
2. All structures, excluding the communication tower, associated with wireless telecommunication facilities shall not exceed the height requirements of the zoning district in which the structure is located.
3. No facility shall be located within two hundred (200) feet of an existing building.
4. All equipment building/boxes or equipment areas shall comply with the minimum property line setbacks for a principal building in the underlying zone.
5. Towers shall be structurally designed to provide for co-location by at least three users.
6. The Planning and Zoning Commission, at its sole discretion, may require the technical expertise and study of an independent third party when reviewing either a special permit or site plan application pertaining to wireless communication facilities. The cost of third party technical studies shall be incurred by the applicant. The location of al structures associated with wireless communication facilities shall be subject to site plan approval in accordance with Section 8.7.F of these regulations.
F. Site Plan/Application Requirements
1. All applications shall meet the standards as described in Sections 8.7.F-8.7.J of these regulations and each applicant shall include a map showing:
a. The extent of the provider's planned coverage within the Town of East Hampton
b. The location and service area of the proposed wireless telecommunication site
c. The search radius for the proposed wireless telecommunication site support materials that show the location of tall structures within one-quarter mile radius of the site proposed and that the owners of those locations have been contacted and asked for permission to install the antenna of those structures and denied for other than economic reasons.
166
d. Existing and approved locations of all other telecommunication sites in the Town of East Hampton, including the applicants
e. Existing towers owned/used by applicant within one-half mile of the borders of the Town of East Hampton.
2. Other General Requirements:
a. A plan showing where and how the proposed antenna will be affixed to a particular building or structure.
b. Details of all proposed antenna and mounting equipment including size and color
c. Elevations of all proposed shielding and details of materials including color
d. The elevation of all proposed equipment buildings/structures with details of all proposed fencing including color
e. All proposed landscaping with list of plant material
f. Height of the tower
g. Proximity of tower to residential structures and residential district boundaries
h. Nature of uses on adjacent and nearby properties
i. Surrounding topography; within 1,000 feet, at intervals not exceeding five (5) feet
j. Design of the tower with particular reference to design characteristics that have the effect of reducing or eliminating visual obtrusiveness
k. A design drawing including cross section and elevation of all proposed towers
l. A topographic profile showing the proposed tower and its associated equipment from adjoining properties
m. Proposed ingress and egress from the site
n. A soil report shall be submitted to verify the design specifications of the foundation of the tower and anchors for the guy wires, if used
o. The commission may require that applicants provide simulations of tower locations and impact. Such simulation may entail the tethering of balloons or other devices necessary to visualize the proposed facility
G. Tower and/or Antenna Standards
The following standards for towers, rooftop-mounted antenna, and façade mounted antenna must be as follows:
1. Towers -
a. The tower shall be designed and constructed to all applicable standards of the American National Standards institutes, ANSI/EIA-222-E manual, as amended.
b. The proposed support structure shall be required to accommodate a minimum of three users, including other wireless communication companies and local police, fire and ambulance companies unless it is determined to be technically unfeasible based on information submitted by the applicant.
c. Towers not requiring special FAA painting or markings shall be painted a non-contrasting dull blue, grey, or other neutral color.
d. No tower shall be located on municipally owned land designated as open space or for recreational use.
e. All towers in residential zones shall be a monopole design unless specifically approved by the Commission. A monopole tower shall be designed to collapse upon itself.
f. No signs shall be permitted on any tower or antenna.
g. No lights or illumination shall be permitted unless required by the FCC or FAA
h. The tower shall be surrounded by a chain link fence or wall not more than eight feet in height. If barbed wire is included in the fence, it shall be within the eight foot height limit.
i. Tower under antenna shall be the minimum height necessary to satisfy the technical requirements of the proposed telecommunications facility and future uses.
j. All towers must comply with setback requirements of the zones in which they exist.
167
k. All towers in all zones shall not be closer than the height of the tower, plus 25%, from any property line.
2. Rooftop Mounted Antenna -
a. Shall be attached to a non-residential structure or building, which building or structure is the principal building or structure on the lot.
b. Shall be of a material or color which matches the exterior of the building or structure
c. Shall be exceed a height of ten feet above the highest part of the structure or building
d. Shall be set back from the roof edge a minimum of ten feet or 10% of the roof depth, whichever is greater
e. Satellite and microwave dish antennas shall not exceed six feet in diameter and shall be located or screened so as not to be visible from abutting public streets.
f. Shall not occupy more than twenty-five percent of the roof area.
3. Facade Mounted Antenna -
a. Shall be attached to a non-residential structure or building, which building or structure is the principal building or structure on the lot.
b. Shall project not more than two feet beyond the wall or façade of the structure
c. Shall not project more than five feet above the cornice line.
H. Equipment Building Standards
Any accessory building or structure associated with wireless communication facilities shall comply with the following:
1. Each building/structure shall not contain more than 150 square feet of gross floor area or be more than eight feet in height.
2. Shall comply with the setback requirements for accessory buildings for the zone in which it is located.
3. If located on the roof of a building, shall be designed to blend with the color and design of the building to the extent possible.
4. All equipment building/boxes shall be surrounded by a chain link fence and the area landscaped.
I. Maintenance Requirements
1. The applicant shall submit a detailed maintenance plan including schedule and extent of maintenance. The plan shall cover both the facility site itself and the ingress and egress from the site.
2. Any tower that ceases operation under this Section for 18 months will be dismantled and removed.
J. Factors Upon Which Approval/Denial is Based
The appropriate elements of a municipal zoning decision to either approve or deny any application includes the following:
1. Detailed analysis of alternative sites, structures, access, and antennas
2. Worse-case combined modeling of radio frequency power densities
3. Detailed propagation and antenna separation analysis relative to facility height.
4. Tower sharing to facilitate the telecommunications needs of municipalities and other entities in order to reduce the need to construct additional towers.
5. Assessment of the tower structure type.
6. Consideration of future use or re-use of the site with provisions for facility removal and site restoration.
7. The applicant's comprehensive development and management plan for erosion and sedimentation control as well as, architectural treatment, environmental, and cultural considerations.
168
ARTICLE 9 - PROCEDURES
Section 9.1. Site Plan Requirements
A. Purpose
The purpose of this regulation is to ensure that development in the Town of East Hampton is done in a manner consistent with the goals of these Regulations as stated in Section 1.2, to provide direction and guidance in the design of such development and to facilitate creative, sound, attractive, site sensitive uses of land.
B. Design Standards
All site plans presented for approval shall apply all of the following standards and concepts to all buildings, parking areas, drives and roads, landscaping, open space, and other design elements of the proposal. The applicant shall show that effort to comply to the greatest degree possible with these standards has been made. Failure to address these standards shall constitute adequate reason for rejection of the site plan.
1. Site Sensitivity –
a. All site plans presented for approval shall show that the design presented represents the least impact on the site that is practicable.
b. The existing grades of the site shall be altered to the least extent.
c. Effort must be clearly shown that existing site conditions have been taken into account and that areas of greatest sensitivity such as steep slopes, wetlands and watercourses, existing meaningful vegetation, and adjacent, existing and potential, uses have been considered in the design proposal.
2. Architecture -
a. The design of the building/s shall be demonstrated to have been chosen with substantial care being applied with regard to various architectural elements, relative to the size, shape, material and textural aspects of the buildings being presented for approval.
b. Building services and mechanicals such as fuel tanks, air handling units, ventilation devices and the like shall be concealed from view as much as is possible.
c. Surrounding properties must be taken into account and designs presented must be compatible with and not detract or have a negative impact on neighboring and/or adjacent properties.
3. Site Access and Parking -
a. All site plans presented for approval shall demonstrate substantial sensitivity to the issues of site access and parking location and design. The design shall be such that minimal impact to the streetscape results.
b. Curb cuts shall be kept to the minimum number possible, while maintaining adequate circulation and vehicular, pedestrian and fire safety. Shared access of neighboring properties through the use of easements and common drives is encouraged.
c. Parking areas shall be set back from public streets as much as possible and shall be reasonably screened from public view through the use of landscaping.
d. Parking areas shall be provided with landscaping in an amount not less than ten (10%) percent of the required pervious surface requirement for the zone.
e. Internal drives and parking areas shall be clearly delineated and provided with adequate directional elements to ensure proper vehicular use of the site.
f. The paving of drives and parking areas shall consist of three (3") inches of bituminous concrete, properly compacted. Design utilizing surface treatment other than bituminous concrete shall satisfy the Commission that such alternate will provide adequate service to the use/s proposed.
g. Slopes, curves and the general configuration of drives, parking areas and pedestrian ways shall be shown to promote safety and convenience.
169
h. Loading areas shall be clearly defined and shall be configured to provide minimal disturbance to vehicular and pedestrian traffic.
4. Signage and Site Lighting -
a. All site plans presented for approval shall contain fully detailed plans showing all signage and site lighting.
b. In addition to the requirements of Section 7.2, regarding maximum number and size of signs, the following standards shall be met.
c. Signs shall be of a consistent, unified design type with regard to shape, materials and location on building.
d. Directional signs shall be as unobtrusive as possible and shall be so placed as to give maximum benefit.
e. Site lighting shall be utilized to illuminate the site as unobtrusively as possible. All lighting shall be directionally oriented and effectively shielded to avoid glare and off site light pollution.
f. Standard on-site lighting shall be no greater than seventeen feet (17') in height from foot of base to top of fixture.
5. Utilities -
a. All available utilities shall be supplied to the site at the time of construction.
b. The Commission reserves the right to require placement, or provisions to allow placement of utilities presently unavailable, but likely to be available at a later date. Such utilities shall include, but not be limited to sewer, water, gas, CATV and the like.
c. All utilities shall be placed underground unless specifically and expressly permitted by the Commission.
d. Dumpsters and all on-site refuse containers shall be enclosed and screened as much as practicable from view.
C. Minimum Requirements for Submission for Site Plan Approval
The following information and materials shall be presented prior to review and approval of all site plans.
1. An application, in a form supplied by the Commission, accompanied by the application fee as prescribed thereon.
2. Plans describing the proposed work in full detail, including all of the following, as applicable. (Unless specifically requested by the Commission or its staff, all plans shall be at a scale of 1" equals 40', and shall be prepared and certified by a State of Connecticut licensed Land Surveyor and shall meet or exceed the accuracy standards for a "Class A-2 Transit Survey".)
a. General: (revised – effective Aug 9, 2003)
1. The name and address of the applicant, owner of record, name of the proposed development and all abutting and adjacent property owners.
2. Name, address and professional seal of the individual(s) responsible for the preparation of the site plan or any of its parts or components (Surveyor, engineer, soils scientists etc.).
3. Title & address of project.
4. Zoning data, including zone, minimum parking, maximum lot coverage %, lot dimensions, minimum lot size, etc.
5. A location map, 1" equals 1000', showing site in relation to existing Town roads, complete legend, title block and coversheet at a scale of 1”=100’, where applicable.
6. Date, including all revisions, north arrow (magnetic or true grid), scale and sheet numbers.
7. Approval blocks as necessary, for example Inland Wetlands, Zoning Board of Appeals and Planning and Zoning Commission on all pages.
8. Base flood elevation data, flood zone and flood plain where applicable.
170
b. Plan detail requirements (revised – effective Aug. 9, 2003):
1. Location, dimensions, total area, and general topography of the site.
2. Site layout – existing and proposed, also show areas of clearing.
a. contours, every 2ft (for each lot), note basis on how contours are drawn
b. trees and shrubs
c. special site features, i.e., water courses, wetlands, wooded areas, rock outcrops, stone walls and all trees in excess of twenty-four inches (24") DBH (diameter at breast height) and other significant physical features, natural or manmade)
d. location and capacity of utilities
e. existing use or uses, buildings and structures
f. driveways and parking areas, % slopes
g. all slopes in excess of twenty-five (25%) percent shall be shown (Slopes shall be expressed at one hundred (100') foot intervals)
h. footing and curtain drains
i. location of iron pins & monuments
3. Site layout - proposed
a. contours, every 2 ft (for each lot)
b. land, building and structure uses, whether residential or non-residential and land area assigned to each type of use
c. percent land coverage by use --residential, non-residential, parking, open space, other (specify)
d. 4. percent land coverage for all buildings and structures and by type of buildings and structures and by type of building or structure
e. relationship between land uses and between land and buildings
f. provision for erosion and sedimentation in accordance with
g. Section 7.6 and the State of Connecticut Erosion and Sediment Control Guidelines as revised
h. footing and curtain drains
i. location of iron pins & Monuments
j. driveways % & parking areas and % of slopes
4. Pedestrian and vehicular circulation and flow
a. location and design of public and private streets, and common drives
b. location and design of public and private pedestrian walkways, sidewalks, malls and paths
c. existing and anticipated traffic flow
5. Off -street parking
a. location of off-street parking areas and/or facilities
b. location, dimensions and number of off-street parking spaces
c. location and dimension of off-street parking spaces
d. location and dimensions of parking barriers, bumper guards, wheel stops and the like
e. pavement type and drainage
6. Open Space
a. Location and amount of area by type--parks, lawn areas, landscaping, buffer areas, recreation facilities and the like.
7. Landscaping
a. location, type, number and minimum size of trees and/or shrubs
b. and other plants, with designations whether to be retained as existing or to be new plantings
c. treatment of seeding, sodding and water elements
d. pavement types, for vehicular and pedestrian movement, and
e. recreation areas
171
f. type, height and density of any proposed screening or fencing
g. provisions for year-round maintenance of landscaping
8. Identify and show if property is within an aquifer protection area, Lake Pocotopaug watershed or Salmon River protection area.
9. Map, block, lot and zone of parcel
10. Utilities and Services
a. utilities proposed -- water, sewage disposal, electricity, gas, drainage and lighting & all pertinent data
b. capacity of proposed utilities and amount of additional flow produced for existing systems or water courses utilized
c. location of piping, wiring, conduits, catch basins and the like if within an area not presently served, but within a water utility plan, the adaptability of the utility system to municipal services when provided
d. provisions for garbage collection and removal and for snow removal.
e. note utility poles & numbers
f. all utilities within 200ft of the parcel
11. Building(s) and/or Structures(s)
a. dimensions and gross square foot area by type of non-residential use, entrances and exits
b. general architectural design and appearance
c. relationship between and massing of buildings or structures
d. type and colors of building materials, exterior facade and
e. facing, and fire retardant characteristics
f. special architectural features
g. Signs
h. elevations
? location, height, size, and dimensions for all signs, for
? design, color(s), lettering, lighting, intensity appearance of all signs
12. Any existing and/or proposed covenants, easements, or other provisions relating to the development and maintenance of the proposal, public facilities and the like, necessary for the welfare and maintenance of the development and the best interests of the Town.
13. Future division of the property among landowners, either by building or other reasonable separations.
14. Schedule of construction, including any staging plan, for buildings, structures, parking, open space, landscaping, community, facilities and the like.
15. Review and approvals of any other official, agency, or department.
D. Applicants Responsibilities
1. All applicants and authorized agents shall be responsible for timely submission of all pertinent data, plans, notification of abutting property owners, and referral of proposal to Town agencies and boards.
2. The Town of East Hampton shall be responsible for notification of adjacent municipalities, regional planning agencies and other statutorily required notification.
3. The applicant is also responsible for employing whatever means necessary to understand these and all applicable regulations and statutes that may apply to the proposal.
172
E. Bonds Required
1. The completion of all site improvements proposed shall be assured by the following provisions:
a. Performance Bonding - Items considered for performance bonding shall be all site improvements, excluding landscaping, erosion control measures, and the actual construction of principal buildings, and shall include, but not be limited to the installation of all roads, drives, utilities, drainage measures, recreation areas and buildings, substantial grading, such as cuts and fills, retaining walls, walks, and all other site improvements.
b. Landscape Bonding - All vegetative measures and installations proposed on the approved plan, including some provision for the protection and/or replacement of existing vegetation utilized by the proposal, shall be bonded as described in the provisions of this Section.
c. Erosion Control Bonding - All measures specifically provided for the purposed of erosion and sediment control shall be assured by the deposit of cash or the issuance of an irrevocable letter of credit. Surety bonds shall not be accepted for erosion control measures.
2. Types of Bonds Accepted
a. Performance and landscape bonds shall be accepted in cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or surety bond.
b. All forms of surety, except cash, shall expire not less than one (1) year after issuance.
c. The Commission and/or its staff shall reserve the right to refuse bonding forms proposed, if found to be inappropriate.
3. Bond Amounts -
a. The applicant shall provide bonding in the amount of the total cost of all improvements covered, including all inflation factors.
b. These totals are subject to mandatory review and approval by professional staff.
4. Developer's Agreement -
a. All forms of surety required by this Section shall be subject to a Developer's Agreement that shall include the conditions of default and all other relevant provisions required to assure the proper completion and operation of the proposal.
b. Model agreements shall be made available from the Planning, Zoning and Building Department.
5. Release of Bonds -
a. Upon inspection, and/or issuance of a Certificate of Zoning Compliance, the applicant may, upon written request, seek release of the bond(s).
b. The Commission shall accept, reject or modify such request as deemed necessary.
c. No bonds shall be released until provisions for a maintenance bonding is in place.
6. Maintenance Bonds - All work shall be covered for a period of at least one year, and not in excess of three (3) years, by a bond in the amount of at least ten (10%) percent of the original bond.
F. Commission Meeting, Hearings and Decisions
1. The Commission shall review site plans and shall hold meetings consistent with the requirements of Sections 124 and 126 of Connecticut General Statutes, as applicable.
2. The Commission reserves the right to hold Public Hearings on any site plan or amendment thereto, as presented.
3. The Commission shall not be required to hear applications for site plan approval previously denied by the Commission, for a period of six (6) months from the date of such denial.
G. Filing of the Approved Plan and Pertinent Documents on the Land Records
1. All site Development Plans and pertinent documents upon approval by the Commission or Board and after execution of bonds described herein before, shall be filed or recorded by the developer and at his expense, in the Office of the Town Clerk and any plan not so filed or recorded within ninety (90) days following its approval by the Commission shall become null and void.
173
2. No such Site Development Plan and pertinent documents may be recorded or filed by the Town Clerk until its approval has been endorsed thereon, and a surety bond executed, and the filing or recording of a Site Development Plan and pertinent documents without such approval and bond shall be void.
3. Upon completion of the project, and prior to issuance of Zoning Compliance Certificate, the applicant shall submit "As Built" drawings and upon issuance of Zoning Compliance shall file "As-Builts" on the land records prior to bond release.
H. Additional Requirements and Independent Reviews
1. If the Site Development Plan involves any activity that may have a significant impact on public health, safety or welfare, including by not limited to pollution of traffic or environmental concerns, the applicant shall be required to submit additional information addressing the impact.
2. If the Commission deems that peer review of that information or other information voluntarily submitted by the applicant is warranted, or if the Commission deems that independent testing or review is warranted, that applicant will be required to pay the cost of that peer review or independent testing. (revised – effective date Aug 9, 2003)
I. Amendments
The applicant may submit and the Commission may approve amendments to a recorded, approved site plan.
174
Section 9.2. Special Permits
A. Purpose
The purpose of this regulation is to provide the ability for the Commission to take into account a series of special provisions prior to the approval of a number of uses, as specified in Articles 3 - 6 of these Regulations.
These are uses, that due to various factors, including but not limited to, the intensity of use, the appropriateness of the location chosen for such use, environmental concerns, the generation of significant traffic, the potential of adjacency of unlike uses, the tendency of such uses to inappropriately affect the goals of the Plan of Development, the potential of adverse reaction relative to property values, infrastructure constraints of the Town, the ability of such uses to dominate development in a given area, and the potential for significantly altering the character of the areas and/or the Town, shall make compliance with the following standards necessary prior to approval of any such uses.
B. Minimum Requirements
1. The following, in addition to all other relevant sections of these Regulations shall be complied with prior to approval
a. A site plan in compliance with Section 9.1 and all other relevant regulations.
b. All approvals of local agencies, as required.
c. Application and submittal of all fees in accordance with the requirements of the Commission and as administered by the Planning, Zoning and Building Department.
d. All materials necessary to demonstrate the following:
1. The proposed use or development can be demonstrated to have a distinct benefit to the Town.
2. The proposed use or development shall have no negative impacts, such as the concerns referenced in Section 9.2.A, on neighboring properties.
3. The proposed use or development represents an appropriate use particularly suited to the property in question.
4. The proposed use or development represents the least impact reasonable to the environment upon the site and those areas likely to be affected by such use, during or after construction and/or development.
5. The proposed use or development is consistent with the Plan of Development as adopted by the Commission.
6. The proposed use or development significantly and specifically advances the purposes, as applicable, of these Regulations, as described in Section 1.2.
7. The Hours of Operation, if applicable, shall be reviewed and deemed appropriate for both the proposed use and the neighboring properties (Effective 12-01-2015).
8. The terms “Seasonal”, “Daytime Hours”, and “Evening Hours” of Operation shall be specifically defined by the Commission during the Special Permit application process (Effective 12-01-2015).
C. Documentation Required
The Commission may consider, but is not limited to input from the following agencies, in determining compliance with Section 9.2.B.
1. Written commentary from Town staff such as the Planning, Zoning and Building Department, the Public Works Department, the Health Department, the Walter Pollution Control Authority, the Fire Marshal, the Police Department and/or the Traffic Authority, the Town Assessor, the Economic Development Commission, the Inland Wetlands and Water Courses Agency, the Conservation Commission, the Board of
175
Education, the Parks and Recreation Commission and the representative of any other local boards and commissions deemed relevant by the Commission.
2. Written commentary from other official departments, agencies or entities including, but not limited to, relevant Regional Planning Agencies, the Soil Conservation Service (SCS), the Cooperative Extension Service (CES), the State of Connecticut Department of Energy and Environmental Protection (DEEP), Department of Transportation (DOT), Connecticut State Traffic Commission (STC), Department of Public Utilities Control (DPUC), Department of Housing (DOH), State of Connecticut Health Department and Connecticut River Assembly (CRA), etc.
3. Written commentary or studies, commissioned by and/or presented by the applicant, shall be required to include, but not be limited to, traffic, fiscal impact, environmental impact, land use and all other information deemed necessary to support application for Special Permit Approval
D. Commission Decisions
The Commission shall decide upon all applications for Special Permits in accordance with the provisions of this regulation and any special provisions for Special Permits, as may be found in other relevant sections of these Regulations. The Commission shall have the authority to approve, deny or to approve with conditions, all applications brought for consideration. The reasons for such action shall be clearly stated and shall be considered part of the public record of all such applications.
E. Public Hearing Required
All applications for Special Permit under this Section shall be required to be presented at a public hearing, in accordance with the provisions of Connecticut General Statutes, Section 8-3.c., and Section 9.4 of these Regulations.
176
Section 9.3. Provisions For Amendment And Zone Change
A. Purpose
The purpose of this regulation is to give minimum standards that shall be required to amend these Regulations and/or to change zone boundaries established by these Regulations.
B. Statutory Requirements
1. No such regulation or boundary shall become effective or be changed until after a public hearing in relation thereto, held by a majority of the members of the Commission or a committee thereof appointed for that purpose consisting of at least five (5) members, at which parties in interest and citizens shall have an opportunity to be heard. Notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be published in the form of a legal advertisement appearing in a newspaper having a substantial circulation in such municipality at least twice at intervals of not less than two days, the first not more than fifteen (15) days nor less than ten (10) days, before such hearing, and a copy of such proposed regulation or boundary shall be filed in the office of the Town of East Hampton for public inspection at least ten (10) days before such hearing, and may be published in full in such paper. In addition to such notice, the Commission shall, by regulation, require notice of the Application to each owner of property within or abutting the land which is the subject of the hearing, as their names and addresses appear in the most recent Grand List of the Town Assessor, said notice to be by United States First Class mail, evidenced by a Certificate of Mailing issued by the United States Postal Service. Said notice shall be mailed no less than ten (10) days prior to the initial public hearing, and the Applicant shall submit to the Town Planner, at least five (5) days prior to such hearing, evidence of such mailing. The Applicant need not provide similar notice of any continuation of the initial public hearing. The Commission shall require a fee as prescribed by the Commission to be deposited with the Planning, Zoning, and Building Department. (Amended 07/30/2012)
2. Regulations and boundaries shall be changed or repealed only by a majority vote of all the members of the Commission, except as otherwise provided in Chapter 124 of the Connecticut General Statues. If a protest against a proposed change if filed at or before a hearing with the Commission, signed by the owners of twenty percent (20%) or more of the area of the lots included in such proposed change or of the lots within five hundred feet (500') in all directions of the property included in the proposed change, such change shall not be adopted except by a vote of two-thirds (2/3) of all the members of the Commission.
3. All petitions requesting a change in the regulations or the boundaries of zones shall be submitted in writing and in a form prescribed by the Commission and shall be considered at a public hearing within the period of time permitted under Chapter 124, Section 8-7d of the Connecticut General Statutes. The Commission shall act upon the changes requested in such petition. Whenever the Commission makes any change in a regulation or boundary it shall state upon its records the reason why such change is made. The Commission shall not be required to hear any petition(s) relating to the same changes, or substantially the same changes, more than once in a period of twelve (12) months (revision effective May 15, 2006).
4. Zoning Regulations or boundaries or changes therein shall become effective at such time as is fixed by the Commission, provided a copy of such regulation, boundary or change shall be filed in the office of the Town of East Hampton and notice of the decision of the Commission shall have been published in a newspaper having a substantial circulation in the municipality before such effective date.
C. Submissions Required for Regulation Amendment or Zone Change
The following materials shall be submitted to the Commission prior to regulation amendment or zone change.
1. Regulation Amendment:
a. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant/petitioner to present the full text of proposed change, including reasons, and comprehensive analysis, as required by the Commission, of all, if
177
any, impacts, such change shall have to neighboring properties, zones, or the Plan of Development, as adopted by the Commission.
b. Such analysis may include, but shall not be limited to traffic studies, fiscal impact analysis, environmental studies, infrastructure capabilities, and the like.
2. Zone Change:
a. Complete and accurate (A-2 Survey) of the entire area to be considered, including but not limited to, topographical information, accurate location of all buildings within proposed area, all buildings within five hundred (500') feet of the area proposed, all easements, covenants and other legal constraints existing and/or proposed for the area or parcels therein.
b. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant/petitioner to present the full scope of such change, including reasons, and comprehensive analysis, as required by the Commission, of all, if any, impacts, such change shall have to neighboring properties, zones, or the Plan of Development, as adopted by the Commission.
c. Such analysis may include, but shall not be limited to traffic studies, fiscal impact analysis, environmental studies, infrastructure capabilities, and the like.
D. Amendments Initiated by the Commission
The following shall be the procedure when the Commission deems it necessary or desirable to amend the Zoning Regulations or to amend or change the Zoning Map:
1. Regulation Amendment
a. Petition: The Commission shall file with the Town Clerk a copy of all proposed changes to the Zoning Regulations. This copy shall be filed with the Town clerk at least fifteen (15) days before any scheduled public hearing.
b. Public Hearing: The Commission shall schedule a public hearing for any proposed Zoning Regulation change. The scheduling of this hearing shall be at the discretion of the Chairman.
2. Zone Changes
a. Petition: The Commission shall file with the Town clerk a statement identifying the appropriate location of the property involved in the zone change, the present and proposed zoning of the property, and the acreage affected by the change.
b. Map: The Commission shall file with the Town clerk one (1) copy of a map showing the boundaries of any proposed zoning of the property.
3. Notification: When the commission is considering a zone change which will affect twelve (12) or fewer property owners, the Commission shall notify those property owners, as their names and addresses appear in the most recent Grand List of the Town Assessor. Said notice to be by United States First Class Mail, evidenced by a Certificate of Mailing issued by the United States Postal Service. Said notice shall be mailed no less than ten (10) days prior to the initial public hearing at which the proposed zoning change is to be discussed. No additional notice need be provided of any continuation of the initial public hearing. When the Commission is considering a zone change which will affect more than twelve (12) property owners, the Commission shall publish in a newspaper with local circulation a map showing the acres affected by the proposed zone change. Such map shall be published not more than fifteen (15) days nor less than ten (10) days before the public hearing at which such zone change will be discussed.
4. Public Hearing: The Commission shall schedule a public hearing for any proposed zoning map change. The scheduling of this hearing shall be at the discretion of the Chairman. (Amended 07/30/2012)
178
Section 9.4. Administration And Enforcement
A. Enforcement
1. The purposes of this Section are to outline and describe the processes, the procedural requirements, and the actions necessary to utilize and implement these Regulations.
2. It further authorizes and designates the Zoning Enforcement Officer as its enforcement authority to enforce all provisions of these Regulations.
3. In the case where no Zoning Enforcement Officer has been so designated and appointed, the Commission shall serve as the enforcement authority.
B. Applications and Fees
1. All requests for approval for land uses described in these Regulations shall be made by application, supplied by, and obtained from the Planning, Zoning, and Building Department.
2. All such applications shall be accompanied by all fees required by and described in such application or in these Regulations.
3. The applicant shall be responsible for submitting accurate information and all factual errors shall be the responsibility of the applicant.
4. The finding of any such errors and inaccuracy, at any stage of a regulated land use, shall constitute a violation of these Regulations and may cause the revocation of any or all approvals previously obtained.
5. Any plan that requires a variance(s) in order to meet the requirements of these regulations, must obtain the needed variance(s) from the Zoning Board of Appeals before it can be presented for review by the Planning and Zoning Commission (revision effective May 15, 2006).
C. Submissions Required
All information required by these Regulations shall be submitted to the Planning, Zoning and Building Department accompanied by application(s) referenced in Section 9.3.A in the following quantities and within the time frames listed below:
1. Site Plan and/or Special Permit Approval - Ten (10) copies of all materials 30 days prior to the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Planning and Zoning Commission (revision effective July 8, 2006).
2. Zone change and/or Regulation amendment - Ten (10) copies of all materials thirty (30) days prior to the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Planning and Zoning Commission.
3. Variances and Zoning Board of Appeals Approvals - Seven (7) copies of all materials two (2) weeks prior to the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Zoning Board of Appeals.
4. Applications Required for Uses Allowed as of Right and Administrative Approvals - Two (2) copies of all materials submitted at the time of application.
D. Revisions
1. The Commission shall not be required to accept revisions of plans and materials after applications have been placed on the agenda for action.
2. Major revisions, unless specifically authorized or initiated at the request of the Commission, shall be considered only upon withdrawal and re-application.
E. Minimum Accuracy Standards for Maps
All maps, plot plans and surveys shall be prepared by a Connecticut licensed land surveyor and shall be certified by the preparer to be a map of "A-2" accuracy.
179
F. Required Notification
1. The applicant shall be responsible for all notification requirements except the legal advertisement, which shall be placed by the Town pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes.
2. For all matters requiring action by the Commission or the Zoning Board of Appeals the applicant shall be responsible for the following notifications.
a. Notification to each abutting property owner, as their names and addresses appear in the most recent Grand List of the Town Assessor. Said notice to be by United States First Class Mail, evidenced by a Certificate of Mailing issued by the United States Postal Service, advising the abutters of the proposal, the location, and the time and date and place of the meeting at which such proposal shall be heard. Said notice shall be mailed no less than ten (10) days prior to the initial public hearing, and the Applicant shall submit to the Town Planner, at least five (5) days prior to such hearing, evidence of such mailing. The Applicant need not provide similar notice of any continuation of the initial public hearing. (Amended 7/30/2012)
b. A sign or signs shall be placed on the subject property, at least fifteen (15) days prior to the meeting at which the proposal shall be heard. The sign(s), which shall be no less than ten (10) square feet in area, shall state the following: THIS PROPERTY IS SUBJECT TO ACTION BY THE PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION or THE ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS, the date, time and place of the meeting. Such signs shall be of durable material(s), have black lettering two (2") inches (minimum), white background, shall be located so as to be clearly visible from the public street nearest the front of the property. Signs posted shall be no further apart along public streets than five hundred (500') feet. All signs shall be placed at the applicant's expense and shall be removed immediately after the appeal period [fifteen (15) days] has expired.
G. Procedure Upon Approval of Proposal
1. Upon approval of any proposal, and following any appeal period applicable, the applicant shall seek to obtain all relevant permits or approvals from the Planning, Zoning, and Building Department.
2. Applications for building and zoning Certificate of Approvals shall be made available and upon payment of all applicable fees and compliance with all relevant standards, such permits and approvals shall be issued.
3. Failure to comply with all provisions, conditions, codes, ordinances and the like shall authorize the Zoning Enforcement Officer to cause the revocation of such permits and certificates of approval.
H. Zoning Certificates of Approval
1. No land shall be used and no building or structure shall be constructed, reconstructed, extended, enlarged, in whole or in part, for any purpose, until a Zoning Certificate of Approval for the proposed work or use has been issued by the Zoning Enforcement Officer.
2. The following shall apply to all applications for Zoning Certificate of Approval:
a. No building permit for the construction, reconstruction, or addition to any building or structure shall be issued until a Zoning Certificate of Approval has been obtained from the Zoning Enforcement Officer.
b. A Zoning Certificate of Approval shall not be issued for any proposal, on any property, on which exists a violation of these Regulations.
I. Certificate of Occupancy
Certificate of Use and Occupancy shall be issued in accordance with the provisions of the Connecticut Building Code but shall not be issued prior to the Certificate of Zoning Compliance.
180
J. Certificate of Zoning Compliance
Prior to issuance of Certificate of Use and Occupancy, and/or release of all surety held by the Town relative to the project or proposal, a Certificate of Zoning Compliance must be issued by the Zoning Enforcement Officer, which shall certify that all proposed development has been performed and completed in accordance with the provisions of these Regulations.
K. Procedure When Regulations are Violated
The procedures shall be in accordance with Section 8-12 of the Connecticut General Statutes.
L. Partial Unconstitutionality
If any term, part, provision, section or regulation shall be held unconstitutional or ineffective in whole or in part by any court of competent jurisdiction, then to the extent that it is not unconstitutional or ineffective such term, part, provision, section, regulation or penalty clause shall be in full force and effect; nor shall such determination be deemed to invalidate any remaining term, part, provision, section, regulation, or penalty clause of these Regulations.
181
Section 9.5. Appeals
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall have all powers and duties prescribed by law and by these Regulations, which are more particularly specified as follows:
A. General
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hear and decide appeals of any person or persons aggrieved by any order, requirement, or decision of any administrative official in the enforcement of these Regulations, provided that such appeal is taken to the clerk of the Board within fifteen (15) days of the receipt of the order, requirement or decision.
B. Prescribed Regulatory Matters
1. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hear and decide all matters upon which it is required to pass by the Zoning Regulations.
2. The Board shall consider the character and use of adjacent land and buildings, the number of people residing or working in the vicinity and traffic conditions on neighboring streets, and no variance shall be granted that is injurious or detrimental to the neighborhood or the general safety and welfare.
C. Variances
1. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall vary or adapt the strict regulations in the case of exceptionally irregular, narrow, shallow or steep lots, or other exceptional physical conditions, whereby such strict application would result in practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship that would deprive the owner of the reasonable use of the land or building involved.
2. In granting any variance, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall prescribe any conditions that it deems to be necessary or desirable.
3. However, no variance in the strict application of any provision of these Regulations shall be granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals unless it finds:
a. That there are special circumstances or conditions, fully described in the findings, applying to the land or building for which the variance is sought, which circumstances or conditions are peculiar to such land or buildings and do not apply generally to land or building in the neighborhood, and that said circumstances or conditions are such that the strict application of the provisions of these Regulations would deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of such land or building.
b. That, for reasons fully set forth in the findings, the granting of the variance is necessary for the reasonable use of the land or buildings.
c. That the granting of the variance will be in harmony with the general purpose and intent of these Regulations, and will not be injurious to the neighborhood or otherwise detrimental to the public welfare. In addition to considering the character and use of adjoining buildings and those in the vicinity, the Board, in determining its finding, shall take into account the number of persons residing or working in such building or upon such land and traffic conditions in the vicinity. Any variance shall not become effective until it is filed in the Office of the Town Clerk. (Amended 4/3/02)
4. Notwithstanding the foregoing and pursuant to Chapter 124, Section 8.6 of the Connecticut General Statutes, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall not grant variances of use in any zone.
182
APPENDIX A - RECORDS RETENTION
A-1 ZONING
ITEM NUMBER
RECORD SERIES TITLE
MINIMUM RETENTION REQUIRED
DISPOSITON
Application, including supportive materials
for site plan (surveys, site layout)
M10-170
a. Approved
10 years after issuance of decision
destroy*
M10-175
b. Denied
2 years after denial decision
destroy*
M10-185
Certificate of Zoning Compliance
10 years after issuance of decision
destroy*
M10-195
Decision letter
10 years after issuance of decision
destroy*
M10-205
Legal notice - pre hearing/decision
1 year after decision
destroy*
(M1-255)
Tapes, audio - zoning matters
1 year after minutes are approved unless pending
destroy*
appeal, then retain 1 year after appeal decision
Zone changes
M10-215
a. Application
2 Years after issuance of decision
destroy*
M10-220
b. Maps
Permanent
maintain in municipality
(M1-215)
c. minutes of public meetings
Permanent
maintain in municipality
(including hearings)
M10-255
d. Supportive materials
2 years after issuance of decision
destroy*
M10-235
Zoning regulations ( as amended)
Permanent
maintain in municipality
ZONING REGULATIONS
* Municipalities may destroy records only after receiving the signed approval form (RC-075, rev. 2/2005) from the Office of the Public Records Administrator. Retention periods established on this schedule are minimum retention requirements. Records may be retained for longer periods of time.
183
A-2 SITE PLAN REVIEW
ITEM NUMBER
RECORD SERIES TITLE
MINIMUM RETENTION REQUIRED
DISPOSTION
Application, including supportive materials
for site plan ( survey, sites layouts)
M10-245
a. Approved
10 years after issuance of decision
destroy*
M10-250
b. Denied
2 years after denial of decision
destroy*
M10-260
Decision letter (includes site plan and survey
10 years after issuance of decision
destroy*
M10-270
Legal notices
1 year after appeal period
destroy*
(M1-215)
Minutes of public meetings (including hearings)
permanent
maintain in municipality
Performance bond for developer
M10-280
a. Copy
2 years after released
destroy*
M10-285
b. Original
return to developer after release
return
Site plan
M10-295
a. Built
Life of use
maintain in municipality
M10-300
b. Not executed
5 years from issuance of decision of approving
authority CGS 8-3 (i), (j)
M10-305
c. Revised site plans
Life of use
maintain in municipality
(M1-255)
Tapes, audio - zoning matters
1 year after minutes are approved unless pending
destroy*
appeal, then retain 1 year after appeal decision
ZONING REGULATIONS
* Municipalities may destroy records only after receiving the signed approval form (RC-075, rev. 2/2005) from the Office of the Public Records Administrator. Retention periods established on this schedule are minimum retention requirements. Records may be retained for longer periods of time.

6/4/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=8894889,8895033,8895088,8895138,8895160,8895200,8895245,8895253,27043137,8895346,8895348,8… 1/44
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
A.
B.
Town of East Hampton, CT
Tuesday, June 4, 2019
Chapter 28. Design Review Board
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town Council of the Town of East Hampton 4-25-2006 (Ord. No. 3.05).
Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning and Zoning Commission — See Ch. 104.
§ 28-1. Purpose.
To ensure that development in the Town of East Hampton is in accord with the Plan of Conservation and
Development and does not adversely affect surrounding properties, the Town Council establishes this
Design Review Board (“DRB”) to serve as an advisory body to the Planning and Zoning Commission
("P&Z") and Zoning Board of Appeals (“ZBA”) on matters of commercial site and building design. The
DRB is charged with reviewing all projects regarding nonresidential exterior construction and renovation
submitted to the P&Z and ZBA, and suggesting ways to preserve, enhance and add to the design or
appearance of proposed projects.
§ 28-2. Guiding principles.
This chapter provides a set of guiding principles setting forth various aesthetic and functional
provisions to guide nonresidential, commercial, office, industrial and public/quasi public
development in the Town. The guiding principles are listed below. Over time, the Town may, by
ordinance, amend this section, refine or expand these principles and add design concepts to reflect
the changing desires of the community. It is anticipated that the principles and concepts herein will
be incorporated into and supplemented by more detailed development standards and/or design
guidelines as the Town matures.
To encourage high-quality land/site planning, architecture and landscape design;
To encourage development in keeping with the desired character of the Town and/or specific
design attributes identified in plans adopted by the Town;
To ensure physical, visual, and functional compatibility between uses; and
To ensure proper attention is paid to site and architectural design, thereby protecting land
values.
The designated approving authority under this chapter shall have the authority to apply the guiding
principles flexibly to account for circumstances relating to the proposed site plan.
§ 28-3. Membership.
The DRB consists of seven members, including: two ex-officio members (Town Manager and Town
Planner or their respective designees), and five full citizen members to be appointed by the Town
Council for two-year terms. There shall also be two alternate members of the DRB, who shall be
citizens appointed by the Town Council for two-year terms. Because the DRB benefits from a
6/4/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=8894889,8895033,8895088,8895138,8895160,8895200,8895245,8895253,27043137,8895346,8895348,8… 2/44
A.
B.
C.
D.
membership whose backgrounds and expertise are in the fields of architecture, arboriculture, site
planning, landscape architecture, construction, historic preservation, professional engineering,
commercial real estate, and graphic design, preference should be given to appointment of citizen
members who are professionals in the above-mentioned or related fields.
§ 28-4. Review procedures.
DRB review is required of all nonresidential projects in the Town of East Hampton. “Project” is defined
as new construction or exterior alterations or modifications requiring a building permit. Interior changes,
ordinary maintenance and temporary emergency repairs shall not be considered projects. The Town
Planner shall consider each application requiring a building permit for technical review and determine
when referral to DRB review of the project is required. The DRB advisory opinion shall be rendered in
sufficient time to enable the P&Z and ZBA to act upon the site plan within the time prescribed by state
statute.
§ 28-5. Design review.
The Planning Department shall forward an applicant’s site plan drawings and any supporting materials
that have been provided (such as color swatches and sample materials) to the DRB. Such drawings
shall include a rendering of the overall design of the proposed project, including the elevation of the
facade and all other exterior elevations abutting a public way, showing all fenestration, signs, and other
architectural features, including the color and style of building materials and any architectural details or
peculiarities. The DRB shall meet as required to review the applicant’s submission prior to P&Z and/or
ZBA review. The DRB review shall be based upon the standards for review set forth in § 28-7 of this
chapter. The DRB may recommend changes in scope, design, and materials relating to a project. After
a majority vote, the DRB will then render its advisory opinion in writing in a method determined by the
Planning Department to the appropriate commissions and board and to the applicant.
§ 28-6. Impact of advisory opinions and Planning and Zoning
Commission and Zoning Board of Appeals decisions.
The P&Z and ZBA have the final authority to deny or approve all projects within their jurisdictions. The
P&Z and ZBA may urge that the applicant make modifications to the proposed project as it deems
necessary to conform to the DRB advisory opinion. The DRB advisory opinion shall not bind the P&Z
and ZBA, but shall provide guidance to the P&Z and ZBA in the performance of their duties.
§ 28-7. Standards of review.
The DRB shall base its evaluation for project review on the following:
The compatibility with the Plan of Conservation and Development of the Town of East Hampton
(the “POCD”) and existing zoning regulations as same may be amended from time to time (refer to
§§ 28.1.C through 28.1.G).
The compatibility of a proposed architectural design with the architectural designs of existing
adjacent buildings and the architectural character of the neighborhood as a whole.
The impact on the historical significance of the affected property/structure and other properties in
the immediate area.
The compatibility of the landscape and layout on the parcel with the landscaping and layout of
adjacent parcels.
6/4/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=8894889,8895033,8895088,8895138,8895160,8895200,8895245,8895253,27043137,8895346,8895348,8… 3/44
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
L.
[1]
A.
The landscape treatment should enhance architectural features, strengthen vistas, and provide
shade and other means of public comfort, and establish a desirable transition with the streetscape
and provide safe pedestrian movement and parking.
Mechanical equipment or other utility hardware on the roof, ground, or building, service yards,
refuse storage areas, dumpsters, and other places that tend to be unsightly should be screened
from public view by use of walls, fencing, plantings, or a combination of the above, and should be
equally effective in winter and summer.
Fencing, walls, paving, brick, stone, gravel and cobbles should be used where appropriate to
enhance the project.
Exterior lighting should enhance the architectural and landscape design, and the lighting fixtures
should be compatible with the design of the building and neighborhood.
Style and color of building materials should be in harmony with the design of the building and with
adjacent buildings.
Relationship of width to height of new structures should be consistent with the ratio of existing
adjacent buildings.
Landscaping of all open spaces and buffer zones, including the location, type, and size of all trees
and shrubbery.
The lighting, design, materials, colors, size and location, but not content of signs.
Chapter 66. Housing Partnership
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Selectmen of the Town of East Hampton 3-14-1989. Amendments
noted where applicable.]
§ 66-1. Findings of fact.
The Town Council, of the municipality of the Town of East Hampton hereby declares that a local housing
partnership be formed, in accordance with P.A. 88-305,[1] in order to develop ways to increase the
supply and availability of affordable housing in the Town of East Hampton.
Editor's Note: See C.G.S. § 8-336f et seq.
§ 66-2. Housing partnership created.
There is hereby created the Town of East Hampton Housing Partnership, appointed by the Town
Council of the Town of East Hampton. The Partnership shall consist of the following members:
Community representatives.
Organization Number of Members
Town Council 2
Social Services Advisory Committee 1
Ecumenical Council 1
East Hampton Lions Club 1
Senior Citizens Club 1
Agent for the Elderly 1
6/4/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=8894889,8895033,8895088,8895138,8895160,8895200,8895245,8895253,27043137,8895346,8895348,8… 4/44
B.
[1]
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
Organization Number of Members
Chamber of Commerce 1
Inland/Wetlands and Watercourses Agency 1
Planning and Zoning Commission 1
Housing Authority 1
Judge of Probate 1
East Hampton Rotary Club 1
Board of Finance 1
Ministerial Association 1
Concerned Citizens Group 1
Historic District Commission 1
Staff representatives.
Position Number of Members
Social Services Coordinator 1
Senior Center Coordinator 1
Youth Services Director 1
Midstate Regional Planning Agency 1
Greater Middletown Community Corp. 1
Planning Administrator 1
§ 66-3. Initial designation under Connecticut Housing Partnership
Program.
The responsibilities of the municipality of the Town of East Hampton, in order to receive initial
designation under the Connecticut Housing Partnership Program, shall include the following:
Submit evidence to the Commissioner of Housing that the Town of East Hampton Housing
Partnership has been formed in accordance with P.A. 88-305;[1] and
Editor's Note: See C.G.S. § 8-336f et seq.
Submit evidence to the Commissioner of Housing that sufficient local resources have been
committed to the Town of East Hampton Housing Partnership.
§ 66-4. Development designation under Connecticut Housing
Partnership Program.
The duties of the Town of East Hampton Housing Partnership, in order to receive development
designation under the Connecticut Housing Partnership Program, shall include the following:
To examine and identify housing needs and opportunities in the community;
To explore the availability of any state, municipal or other land that is suitable for the development
of affordable housing;
To review applicable zoning regulations to determine whether such regulations restrict the
development of affordable housing in the community;
6/4/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=8894889,8895033,8895088,8895138,8895160,8895200,8895245,8895253,27043137,8895346,8895348,8… 5/44
D.
E.
F.
G.
To identify any necessary changes to such regulations;
To establish priorities and develop a long-range plan to meet identified housing needs in the
community consistent with regional housing needs;
To establish procedures for the development of a written proposal to achieve such priorities in
accordance with said plan; and
To start an activity, development or project designed to create additional affordable housing in the
Town of East Hampton.
§ 66-5. Conflicting resolutions, orders, rules and regulations
suspended.
At all times when any orders, rules and regulations made and promulgated pursuant to this chapter
shall be in effect, they shall supersede all existing resolutions, orders, rules and regulations insofar as
the latter may be inconsistent therewith.
§ 66-6. No conflict with state or federal statutes.
This chapter shall not be construed so as to conflict with any state or federal statute, rule or regulation.
§ 66-7. Expenses and obligations.
No person shall have the right to expend any public funds of the municipality in carrying out any
Partnership activities authorized by this chapter without prior approval by the legislative body, nor shall
any person have any right to bind the municipality by contract, agreement, or otherwise without prior
and specific approval of the legislative body.
Chapter 79. Land Acquisition Fund
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town Council of the Town of East Hampton 10-26-1999 (Ord. No. 1.10).
Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 79-1. Establishment; purpose; term.
It is recognized that pursuant to C.G.S. § 7-131r there is hereby established the Open Space, Land
Acquisition and Preservation Fund (the "fund"), which shall be used solely for the purposes of the
preservation of open space and the acquisition of land (or any interest in land, including, but not limited
to, conservation easements and development rights) to be used for open space or recreational or
housing purposes. The fund shall not lapse at the close of the municipal year.
§ 79-2. Funding.
There shall be deposited into the fund such sums as (a) the Town may, from time to time, appropriate
for that purpose as part of its Capital Improvement Program, (b) funds acquired by the Town, whether
by gift, bequest, grant or otherwise, solely for the purposes to be served by the fund, and (c) all monies
appropriated to said fund. The total of all deposits into the fund in any one fiscal year (exclusive of gifts,
bequests and grants) shall not exceed that amount which would be generated by the imposition of a tax
of two mills against all of the property subject to tax in East Hampton as shown on the last complete
6/4/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=8894889,8895033,8895088,8895138,8895160,8895200,8895245,8895253,27043137,8895346,8895348,8… 6/44
A.
B.
C.
D.
Grand List. The Town shall also investigate on a continuing basis the availability of any state and federal
monies available for land acquisition and development rights.
§ 79-3. Types of land considered for acquisition.
The following types of land may be considered for acquisition:
Land that has recreational value; or
Land that has development value for Town parks or playgrounds, or recreational facilities; or
Land that has significant scenic, topographic, conservation or wilderness value based on the
characteristics of the land; or
Land that has significant historical, cultural or archaeological value.
§ 79-4. Recommendations to Town Meeting; appropriations.
The Town Council shall have the exclusive authority to identify those parcels of land, interests in land,
and/or development rights to be recommended to the Town Meeting for acquisition. All such
recommendations from the Town Council shall be consistent with the purpose for which the fund is
created. Appropriations from the fund shall be made only upon approval of the Town Meeting following
recommendation of the Town Council, and review by the Planning and Zoning Commission pursuant to
C.G.S. § B-24, and Board of Finance approval.
§ 79-5. Public hearings.
Any ordinance or resolution authorizing the purchase or sale of any interest in land, including but not
limited to easements and development rights, shall be acted upon by Town Meeting, after approval by
the Board of Finance. When the public hearing is to be held, the Town Council shall cause notice to be
published at least 10 days prior to said public hearing in a newspaper having substantial continuous
circulation in the Town.
§ 79-6. Existence and dissolution.
The fund shall continue in existence until such time as an ordinance amends or discontinues same.
Upon dissolution of the fund, any remaining balances shall be paid over into the general fund or such
other fund as the ordinance terminating said fund shall direct.
Chapter 104. Planning and Zoning Commission
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town of East Hampton as indicated in article histories. Amendments noted
where applicable.]
Article I. Establishment
[Adopted 2-24-1981 STM (Ord. No. 3.01)]
§ 104-1. Planning Commission to act as Planning and Zoning
Commission.
6/4/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=8894889,8895033,8895088,8895138,8895160,8895200,8895245,8895253,27043137,8895346,8895348,8… 7/44
A.
B.
The Planning Commission of the Town of East Hampton is hereby designated as the Planning and
Zoning Commission, which shall have all the powers and duties of both a Planning Commission and
Zoning Commission authorized under the laws of the State of Connecticut.
§ 104-2. Membership; appointment.
The Planning and Zoning Commission shall consist of seven members who shall be electors of the
Town of East Hampton holding no salaried municipal office. Members of the Commission shall be
appointed by the Town Council.
§ 104-3. Terms.
On the effective date of this article, all present members of the Planning Commission shall be
appointed to the Planning and Zoning Commission as follows: member with present term expiring
January 10, 1982, shall be appointed with term expiring December 31, 1981; member with present
term expiring January 10, 1983, shall be appointed with term expiring December 31, 1982; member
with present term expiring January 10, 1984, shall be appointed with term expiring December 31,
1983; member with present term expiring January 10, 1985, shall be appointed with term expiring
December 1984; member with present term expiring January 10, 1986, shall be appointed with
term expiring December 31, 1985. The Town Council shall appoint two additional members as
follows: one term expiring December 31, 1984, and one term expiring December 31, 1985.
Upon the expiration of the initial terms, subsequent appointments shall be for the term of five years,
commencing on the first day of January.
§ 104-4. Vacancies.
Vacancies shall be filled by the Town Council for the unexpired portion of the term.
§ 104-5. Dissolution of Zoning Commission; disposition of Zoning
Commission rules and regulations.
Upon the adoption of this article and the appointment of a Planning and Zoning Commission hereunder,
the present Zoning Commission shall cease to exist, and its books and records shall be turned over to
the Planning and Zoning Commission established hereunder, provided all regulations promulgated by
the present Zoning Commission shall continue in full force and effect until modified, repealed or
suspended in accordance with the provisions of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
§ 104-6. Officers; rules; records.
The Commission established hereunder shall elect a Chairman and Secretary from its members, shall
adopt rules for the transaction of its business, and shall keep a public record of its activities.
§ 104-7. Minority representation.
There shall be minority representation in accordance with Connecticut General Statutes, as amended,
on the Planning and Zoning Commission.
Article II. Alternate Members
6/4/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=8894889,8895033,8895088,8895138,8895160,8895200,8895245,8895253,27043137,8895346,8895348,8… 8/44
[Adopted 2-24-1981]
§ 104-8. Panel of alternates; terms.
There is hereby established a panel of alternates to the Planning and Zoning Commission consisting of
three electors of the Town of East Hampton who shall be appointed by the Town Council. At the time of
original appointment, one member shall be appointed to serve until December 31, 1981, one member
until December 31, 1982, one member until December 31,1983, and each successor shall be appointed
for a term of two years commencing on the first day of January.
§ 104-9. Powers and duties.
Any member of the panel of alternates shall, when designated to act for any member of the Planning
and Zoning Commission as provided in § 8-1b of the General Statutes of Connecticut, as amended,
have all the powers and duties of a member of the Planning and Zoning Commission.
§ 104-10. Vacancies.
The unexpired term of any alternate shall be filled by appointment of the Town Council.
§ 104-11. Minority representation.
There shall be minority representation per State statute requirements on the panel of alternates to the
Planning and Zoning Commission.
Chapter 113. Property, Disposition of
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Selectmen of the Town of East Hampton 11-26-1985 (Ord. No.
8.03). Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 113-1. Purpose.
Pursuant to § 50-9 of the Connecticut General Statutes, this chapter covers the provisions of §§ 50-10
through 50-14 of the Connecticut General Statutes with respect to lost, found and unclaimed property
and provides for the expedient disposition of said property within said Town of East Hampton.
§ 113-2. Duties of finder; penalties for offenses.
Any person who finds and takes possession of any article of the value of $1 or more shall report the
finding of such article to the East Hampton Police Department within 48 hours from the time of such
finding. The finder of such article shall, at the time of reporting, furnish to the East Hampton Police
Department the date, time and place of finding, his name and address and a description of the article
found and, within a period of one week from such finding, shall deliver such article to the East Hampton
Police Department. Any person who violates or fails to comply with the provisions of this section shall
be fined not more than $100 or imprisoned not more than 30 days, or both.
§ 113-3. Advertising; sale of perishable goods.
6/4/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=8894889,8895033,8895088,8895138,8895160,8895200,8895245,8895253,27043137,8895346,8895348,8… 9/44
[1]
[1]
The East Hampton Police Department shall, commencing within one week from the date of receipt of
any lost article, advertise a general description of such article once a week for at least two successive
weeks in a newspaper having a circulation in the Town of East Hampton and shall retain custody of
such article for six months from the date of receipt thereof, unless it is claimed by the rightful owner
within such six-month period. The requirement of advertising may be omitted when the value or
estimated value of the article is less than $2. Perishable or obnoxious property or articles of a
dangerous or harmful nature may be sold or otherwise disposed of as soon as practicable on the best
terms available.
§ 113-4. Restoration to owner if claimed.
If the owner of any such article claims it within six months from the date of receipt by the East Hampton
Police Department, the article or the proceeds thereof shall be restored to him upon payment or
deduction of all proper charges.
§ 113-5. Procedure if unclaimed.
If no owner claims such article within six months from the receipt thereof by the East Hampton Police
Department, the Police Department shall, within two weeks thereafter, notify the finder of such fact by
registered or certified mail sent to his last known address, and the article or the proceeds thereof shall
be turned over to the finder, upon demand by him within 30 days from the expiration of the six-month
period and upon payment or deduction of all proper charges; but if such finder fails to demand such
article or the proceeds thereof or refuses to pay such charges within 30 days from the expiration of the
six-month period, such article or proceeds shall belong to such municipality. The requirement of
notification may be omitted when the value or estimated value of the article is less than $5.
§ 113-6. Disposition after expiration of time for making claim.
The East Hampton Police Department shall sell at public auction any articles which it acquires as
provided herein after the expiration of the time for the owner or finder to demand the same and after the
time and place of such sale and a description of the articles to be sold have been advertised once a
week for two successive weeks in a newspaper having a circulation in such municipality. The net
proceeds from such sales and the unclaimed net proceeds from the sales of perishable or obnoxious
property or articles of a dangerous or harmful nature shall be paid to the Director of Finance of the Town
of East Hampton, who shall deposit them in the general fund.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
Chapter 120. Brownfields Redevelopment Agency
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town Council of the Town of East Hampton 3-10-2009.[1] Amendments
noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Code of Conduct — See Ch. D.
Code of Ethics — See Ch. E.
Economic Development Commission — See Ch. 33.
Planning and Zoning Commission — See Ch. 104.
Editor's Note: This ordinance also superseded former Ch. 120, Redevelopment Agency, adopted 4-10-
2007.
§ 120-1. Brownfields Redevelopment Agency created; powers
and duties.
6/4/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=8894889,8895033,8895088,8895138,8895160,8895200,8895245,8895253,27043137,8895346,8895348,… 10/44
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
There is hereby created a Brownfields Redevelopment Agency for the Town in accordance with
§ 8-126 of the Connecticut General Statutes, Revision of 1958, as amended, said agency to be
known as the "East Hampton Brownfields Redevelopment Agency." The Agency shall have any and
all rights, powers, duties and obligations now or hereafter provided for redevelopment agencies by
the Connecticut General Statutes.
The Brownfields Redevelopment Agency is also empowered to undertake environmental
assessments and remediation activities as funded or directed by the EPA, DEP or any other federal
or state agency or as otherwise directed by the Town Manager.
§ 120-2. Membership; term; removal of members.
The Agency shall be composed of seven electors resident in the Town, appointed by the Town
Manager as the chief executive officer of the Town and approved by the Town Council.
Of the members of the Agency first appointed, one member shall be designated to serve for one
year; one member shall be designated to serve for two years; one member shall be designated to
serve for three years; two members shall be designated to serve for four years; and two members
shall be designated to serve for five years; with each term terminating on June 30 of the respective
year. All subsequent appointments of members shall be for terms of five years, commencing on
July 1 of the respective year. Each member shall serve until such member's successor is appointed
and qualified. Any vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired term in the manner of original
appointment.
Any member of the Agency may be removed by the Town Manager for cause and, on request of
such member, after public hearing.
§ 120-3. Officers.
Annually at its first meeting on or after July 1, the Agency shall select from among its members a
Chairman, a Vice Chairman and such other officers it deems necessary.
§ 120-4. Meetings; rules of procedure; majority of Agency
members necessary to act.
The Agency shall hold meetings at a fixed and regular time and place, and all such meetings,
whether regular, adjourned or special, shall be held at an accessible place and shall be open to the
public.
The Agency shall adopt rules of procedure for the governance of its meetings, and shall have the
power to make rules and regulations for the transaction of its business.
Action by the Agency shall be taken only on a majority vote of all of the members of the Agency.
§ 120-5. Records; reports.
The Agency shall keep records of its meetings and other activities.
The Agency shall annually on or before July 1 prepare and transmit to the Town Council a report of
its activities for and an itemized account of all receipts and disbursements from the prior fiscal year,
and of its projected activities for the fiscal year then commencing. The Agency shall make such
special reports as the Town Council may request from time to time.
6/4/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=8894889,8895033,8895088,8895138,8895160,8895200,8895245,8895253,27043137,8895346,8895348,… 11/44
§ 120-6. Compensation.
The members of the Agency shall serve without compensation, but shall be reimbursed for their
necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their official duties.
§ 120-7. Coordination with other Town bodies.
The Agency shall coordinate its activities with the Planning and Zoning Commission, the Economic
Development Commission, and other interested officials and agencies of the Town, and the Agency
may invite to attend and participate in its meetings and deliberations, but without vote, any person not a
member of the Agency.
§ 120-8. Support staff.
The Agency shall be empowered to recommend to the Town Manager the appointment of Town
employees necessary or desirable for the discharge of the Agency's duties.
§ 120-9. Appropriations.
In the performance of its duties and in the exercise of its powers aforesaid, the Agency shall not incur
any expenses or obligate the Town to pay any expense in excess of the funds appropriated for such
purpose.
§ 120-10. When effective.
This chapter shall be effective 20 days after publication as provided by the Town Charter.
Chapter 143. Vacancies
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town Council of the Town of East Hampton 2-22-2005 (Ord. No. 12.12).
Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 143-1. Incumbent to hold office until position filled by Council.
Whenever a vacancy occurs on a Town board, commission or agency due to the expiration of the term
of office for that position, which position is designated to be filled by the Town Council, and the Town
Council fails to take action to fill such vacancy in a timely manner, then the incumbent may continue to
hold office for up to 90 days following the expiration of his/her term if he/she is ready, willing, and able to
do so, or until he/she has been reappointed or his/her successor has been duly appointed and qualified,
whichever occurs first. Any incumbent unwilling or unable to continue to hold office for said ninety-day
period shall give written notice to the Town Manager, upon receipt of which his/her office shall expire.
Chapter 152. Zoning Board of Appeals
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Special Town Meeting of the Town of East Hampton 11-6-1959 (Ord. No.
2.07). Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 152-1. Election; terms.
6/4/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=8894889,8895033,8895088,8895138,8895160,8895200,8895245,8895253,27043137,8895346,8895348,… 12/44
[1]
A.
B.
C.
D.
The regular members of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall continue to be elected at the regular biennial
elections for terms of five years. At the regular election of 1961 and biennially thereafter, there shall be
elected as many regular members as shall be necessary to fill the places of those whose terms shall
expire prior to the next succeeding biennial election.
§ 152-2. Alternate members.
At the regular biennial election in 1961 and quadrennially thereafter, three alternate members of the
Zoning Board of Appeals shall be elected for terms of four years from the dates of their election.
Pursuant to the authority contained in Section I of Public Act No. 146 of 1959,[1] the Town Council shall
appoint three alternate members for the period between the effective date of this chapter and the date
of the regular biennial election in 1961.
Editor's Note: See C.G.S. § 8-5.
Chapter 171. Blight and Nuisances
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town Council of the Town of East Hampton 11-13-2012. Amendments noted
where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building code — See Ch. 177.
Housing code — See Ch. 219.
§ 171-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to define, prohibit, and abate blight and nuisances and to protect,
preserve, and promote public health, safety, and welfare, and to preserve and protect property values.
§ 171-2. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply uniformly to the maintenance of all residential, nonresidential, and undeveloped
premises now in existence or hereafter constructed, maintained, or modified but shall exclude
agricultural lands as defined in § 22-3(b) of the Connecticut General Statutes, land dedicated as public
or semipublic open space or preserved in its natural state through conservation easements, or areas
designated as inland wetlands and watercourses.
§ 171-3. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this chapter.
BLIGHTED PREMISES
Any building, structure, or parcel of land, except exempt property as defined below, in which at
least one of the following conditions exists:
It is dilapidated as documented by the Building Official;
It is a fire hazard as determined by the Fire Marshal or as documented by the Fire Department;
It is determined by the Building Official or the Health Department that the condition of the
building, structure, or parcel of land poses a serious or immediate danger to the safety, health,
or general welfare of the community;
It is not being maintained in accordance to the State of Connecticut Building Code (2005);
6/4/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=8894889,8895033,8895088,8895138,8895160,8895200,8895245,8895253,27043137,8895346,8895348,… 13/44
E.
A.
B.
C.
A.
It is a factor creating a substantial interference with the reasonable and lawful use and
enjoyment of abutting premises or which blocks or interferes with the use of any public
sidewalk and/or private street or right-of-way or any road sign.
DEBRIS
Material which is incapable of immediately performing the function for which it was designed,
including, but not limited to abandoned, discarded, or unused objects; junk comprised of machinery
equipment or vehicles, automobiles, boats and recreational vehicles which are unregistered,
missing parts, not complete in appearance and/or in an obvious state of disrepair; parts of vehicles;
furniture, appliances, and tires which are in the public view.
DILAPIDATED
No longer adequate for the purpose or use for which it was intended or having fallen into partial or
total ruin or decay.
EXEMPT PROPERTY
Any building or structure undergoing legal demolition, construction, remodeling, restoration, repair,
or renovation permitted by the Town, provided that the blighted condition will be corrected within the
time established by the appropriate Town official and further provided that the building or structure
remains in compliance with required permits as issued by the Town of East Hampton.
§ 171-4. Nuisances prohibited.
No person, firm, corporation, or other legal entity shall cause, allow or maintain any blighted premises,
as defined in the preceding section, to be created or continued on any real property located within the
Town of East Hampton. Any exempt property, as defined in the preceding section, shall not be
considered a blighted premises, and therefore not subject to the provision hereof.
§ 171-5. Effect on other standards.
The provisions in this chapter shall not be construed to prevent the enforcement of other statutes,
codes, ordinances, or regulations which prescribe standards other than those provided in this
chapter.
In any case where a provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict with a provision of any
zoning, building, fire, safety, or health ordinance, regulation, or other code of the Town or state, the
provision which establishes the higher standard for the promotion and protection of the public
health and safety, and property values, shall prevail.
This chapter shall not affect violations of any other ordinances, codes, or regulations existing prior
to the effective date of this code, and any such violations may be governed and continue to be
punishable under the provisions of those ordinances, codes, or regulations in effect at the time the
violation was committed.
§ 171-6. Compliance required.
Any owner, lessee, or occupant of premises subject to this chapter may be jointly and severally
obligated to comply with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 171-7. Notice of violation.
Complaints may be submitted to the Building Official by members of the public. Such complaints
must be in writing and signed.
6/4/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=8894889,8895033,8895088,8895138,8895160,8895200,8895245,8895253,27043137,8895346,8895348,… 14/44
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
(1)
[1]
(2)
(3)
B.
C.
Whenever the Building Official determines that there have been violations of any provision of this
chapter, such official shall give notice of such violation to the person responsible therefor, as
hereinafter provided. Such notice shall:
Be in writing, with a copy of such notice sent to such owner, lessee or occupant, as the case
may require, by U.S. Certified Mail (or its equivalent) at each such party's last known address
as evidenced in the Town's records;
Set forth the violations of this chapter;
Specify a final date for the correction of any violation;
Be served upon the owner, lessee, or the occupant as the case may require, provided such
notice shall be deemed to be properly served upon such owner, lessee, or upon such occupant
if a copy thereof is posted in a conspicuous place in or about the dwelling affected by this
notice, or if such person is served with such notice by any other method authorized or required
under the laws of this state;
Contain an outline of remedial action which, if taken, will effect permanent compliance with the
provisions of this chapter; and
State that the penalties and enforcement provisions of this chapter will become effective on the
final date set for the correction of any violation.
§ 171-8. Penalties for offenses; enforcement.
Penalties.
Each violation of this chapter shall be considered a separate municipal offense.
Each day any violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
Each separate offense under this chapter may be punishable by a fine of $100, payable to the
Town of East Hampton.
Enforcement.
The Building Official in the Town of East Hampton is authorized to issue a citation or summons
for a violation of this chapter.
If a citation is issued, further proceedings shall be in accord with the provisions of the Town's
Citation Hearing Procedure Ordinance,[1] as may be revised from time to time.
Editor's Note: See Ch. 16, Citation Hearing Procedure.
In addition thereto, the Town of East Hampton is authorized to initiate legal proceedings in the
Superior Court for the immediate correction of the violation(s), collection of any penalties, and
the recovery of all costs, including costs of remedial action(s) authorized by the court and
reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by the Town of East Hampton to enforce this chapter and
should not preclude the Town's ability to recover or save from immediate damage.
All fines, court costs, costs of remedial action, and attorneys' fees, as ordered by the court, shall
constitute a lien on the subject premises, as provided by C.G.S. § 7-148aa.
Chapter 177. Building Code
6/4/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=8894889,8895033,8895088,8895138,8895160,8895200,8895245,8895253,27043137,8895346,8895348,… 15/44
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
C.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town of East Hampton 1976 (Ord. No. 10.01); amended in its entirety at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I). Subsequent amendments noted where
applicable.]
§ 177-1. State provisions adopted.
In accordance with C.G.S. § 29-253, the State Building Code of the State of Connecticut, including all
amendments thereto, is hereby adopted as the Building Code of the Town of East Hampton.
Chapter 181. Buildings, Numbering of
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town Council of the Town of East Hampton 12-12-1995 (Ord. No. 5.05).
Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building Code — See Ch. 177.
Hotels — See Ch. 215.
Housing Code — See Ch. 219.
§ 181-1. Purpose.
To promote the public safety, health and welfare, particularly to facilitate the delivery of fire protection,
police, ambulance, and postal services to its townspeople, the Town of East Hampton adopts the
following regulations to govern the posting of address identifying numbers on buildings within the Town.
§ 181-2. Applicability.
All residential, business, or other principal buildings erected or to be erected within the Town of East
Hampton shall display address identifying numbers, as assigned by the Town of East Hampton, in
conformance with the specifications provided herein.
§ 181-3. Numeral specifications.
Numbers shall be Arabic, block style.
Numbers shall be of a color that contrasts clearly with the background to which they are affixed,
and may be of a reflective material.
Numbers shall be a minimum of three inches in height.
§ 181-4. Location specifications.
Numbers shall be securely affixed to the front of the building or other fixed appurtenance in front of
the building, so as to be clearly visible from the street.
Numbers shall be affixed not less than five feet, nor more than 12 feet, above the surface directly
below them.
A building which is set back more than 100 feet from the center of the street on which it fronts, or if
numerals cannot be made legible from that location because of obstructions, shall have the
6/4/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=8894889,8895033,8895088,8895138,8895160,8895200,8895245,8895253,27043137,8895346,8895348,… 16/44
D.
E.
F.
A.
B.
C.
aforesaid numbers securely affixed to a post, sign, mailbox or other device which shall be located
within 10 feet of the driveway entrance to the premises.
Mailboxes. Where the building has a mailbox located at the edge of the street or roadway, numbers
shall be affixed to both sides of the mailbox. Where the mailboxes are grouped together, numbers
shall be affixed to the front of the mailboxes and any visible side.
Buildings containing more than two dwelling units which have entrances from interior passageways
shall have numbers affixed within five feet of every door by which the building may be entered.
Each individual unit shall have its identifying number or letter affixed to its door or immediately
adjacent to it.
Residential dwellings that consist of multiple units having different street numbers shall post the
range of unit numbers per building at a prominent location thereon, clearly visible at least 100 feet
by approaching emergency personnel. Each individual unit shall have its number affixed at its front
and rear entrances.
§ 181-5. Private drives, courts, roadways.
All such private roads shall be posted in a manner so that the names are clearly visible and identifiable.
§ 181-6. Date of compliance.
This chapter shall become effective 20 days after publication as prescribed by Town Charter.
All existing buildings requiring numbering are subject to this chapter on that date, following
ordinance adoption.
All buildings required to be numbered, after this date, shall have the prescribed numbering installed
before a certificate of occupancy is issued for the building.
§ 181-7. Effective date.
This chapter shall become effective July 1, 1996.
§ 181-8. Penalties for offenses.
Any building owner in violation of this chapter shall receive a warning notice of the violation(s), issued
by the official designated by the Town Council. The warning notice shall allow an initial 30 days for the
violation(s) to be corrected. It shall be the responsibility of the building owner to notify the Town official
when the violation(s) has been corrected. If, at the end of the initial thirty-day period, the correction(s)
has not been made, the owner shall be subject to a fine of $25, and a second warning notice of the
violation(s) shall be issued. The second warning notice shall allow an additional 10 days for the
violation(s) to be corrected. If, at the end of the additional ten-day period, the correction(s) has not been
made, the owner shall be subject to additional fines of $5 a day for each day thereafter that the
violation(s) is not corrected, to a maximum of $100, inclusive of the citation fine of $25.
Chapter 196. Fair Housing
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Selectmen of the Town of East Hampton 12-27-1979 (Ord. No.
10.04). Amendments noted where applicable.]
6/4/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=8894889,8895033,8895088,8895138,8895160,8895200,8895245,8895253,27043137,8895346,8895348,… 17/44
[1]
[1]
[2]
A.
GENERAL REFERENCES
Housing Code — See Ch. 219.
§ 196-1. Declaration of policy.
It is the policy of the Town of East Hampton to safeguard all individuals within the Town from
discrimination because of race, color, religious creed, sex, marital status, national origin, ancestry, age,
present or past history of mental disorder, mental retardation, sexual orientation, learning or physical
disability, political activity, union activity or exercise of rights protected by the United States Constitution
in connection with housing; thereby to protect their interest in personal dignity and freedom from
humiliation, to make available to the Town their full production capacities, to secure the Town against
strife and unrest which would menace its democratic institutions and to preserve the public safety and
general welfare.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 196-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
DISCRIMINATE
To cause any difference in treatment based on race, color, religious creed, sex, marital status,
national origin, ancestry, age, present or past history of mental disorder, mental retardation, sexual
orientation, learning or physical disability, political activity, union activity or exercise of rights
protected by the United States Constitution, and includes segregation based upon any of the
foregoing categories.[1]
FAIR HOUSING OFFICER
The person responsible for accepting and acting upon housing discrimination complaints. The Fair
Housing Officer shall be the Town Manager or a duly appointed representative of the Town
Manager.
FAIR HOUSING REVIEW COMMITTEE
A committee established to assist the Fair Housing Officer in the review of housing discrimination
complaints. "Review Committee" means the Fair Housing Review Committee.
HOUSING ACCOMMODATION
Any dwelling, housing unit, structure, or portion thereof, including mobile manufactured homes and
mobile manufactured home park lots, used or to be used for residential purposes.[2]
OWNER
Any person having or exercising the right to sell, rent, or lease any housing accommodation.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 196-3. Unlawful practices.
In connection with any of the transactions set forth in this section which affect any housing
accommodation on the open market, or in connection with any public sale, purchase, exchange, rental
or lease of any housing accommodation, it shall be a prohibited unlawful practice for a person, owner,
financial institution, real estate broker or real estate salesman, or any representative of the above, to:
Refuse to sell, purchase, exchange, rent or lease, or otherwise deny to or withhold any housing
accommodation or real estate from a person because of his race, color, religious creed, sex, marital
status, national origin, ancestry, age, present or past history of mental disorder, mental retardation,
6/4/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=8894889,8895033,8895088,8895138,8895160,8895200,8895245,8895253,27043137,8895346,8895348,… 18/44
[1]
B.
[2]
C.
[3]
D.
[4]
E.
F.
G.
A.
B.
C.
sexual orientation, learning or physical disability, political activity, union activity or exercise of rights
protected by the United States Constitution; or[1]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
To discriminate against a person in the terms, conditions or privileges of the sale, financing,
purchase, exchange, rental or lease of any housing accommodation or real estate, or in the
furnishing of facilities or services in connection therewith; or
To refuse to receive or transmit a bona fide offer to sell, purchase, exchange, rent or lease any
housing accommodation from or to a person because of his race, color, religious creed, sex, marital
status, national origin, ancestry, age, present or past history of mental disorder, mental retardation,
sexual orientation, learning or physical disability, political activity, union activity or exercise of rights
protected by the United States Constitution; or[2]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
To refuse to negotiate for the sale, purchase, exchange, rental, or lease of any housing
accommodation to a person because of his race, color, religious creed, sex, marital status, national
origin, ancestry, age, present or past history of mental disorder, mental retardation, sexual
orientation, learning or physical disability, political activity, union activity or exercise of rights
protected by the United States Constitution; or[3]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
To represent to a person that any housing accommodation is not available for inspection, sale,
purchase, exchange, rental or lease when it is known to such person, owner, financial institution,
real estate broker or real estate salesman, or representatives of any of them, that, in fact, it is so
available, or to refuse to permit a person to inspect any housing accommodation because of his
race, color, religious creed, sex, marital status, national origin, ancestry, age, present or past
history of mental disorder, mental retardation, sexual orientation, learning or physical disability,
political activity, union activity or exercise of rights protected by the United States Constitution; or[4]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
To discriminate against a person by failing or refusing to show housing accommodations which are
listed for sale or rental; or
To retaliate against a person because he has filed a complaint, testified, assisted, or participated in
any manner in an investigation, proceeding, hearing or conference under this chapter by adjusting
his rental, by failing to provide proper services, or by refusing to deal with such person.
§ 196-4. Exemptions.
The provisions of the chapter shall not apply:
To the rental or lease of any housing units in a housing accommodation for not more than two
families living independently of each other, if the owner or members of his family reside in one of
such housing accommodations; or
To the rental of a room or rooms in a housing accommodation, if such rental is by the occupant of
the housing accommodation, or by the owner of the housing accommodation and he or members of
his family reside in such housing accommodation; or
With respect to the prohibition of sex discrimination, shall not apply to rental of sleeping
accommodations provided on a temporary or permanent basis for the exclusive use of persons of
the same sex.
§ 196-5. Powers of Fair Housing Officer.
6/4/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=8894889,8895033,8895088,8895138,8895160,8895200,8895245,8895253,27043137,8895346,8895348,… 19/44
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
(1)
(2)
A.
B.
The administration and enforcement of this chapter shall be the responsibility of the Fair Housing
Officer, and he/she shall have full operating responsibility for carrying out the provisions of this chapter.
In addition to any powers or duties heretofore conferred on said officer, he/she shall have the power and
duty to:
Meet and exercise his/her powers at any place within the Town of East Hampton for the purpose of
implementing and administering this chapter.
Seek the advice and/or services of the Town Counsel, if deemed necessary; and appoint and
empower a Fair Housing Review Committee to assist in effecting the purposes and provisions of
this chapter.
Accept gifts, or bequests, grants or other payments, public or private, and duly recorded as such, to
help finance its activities.
Receive, initiate, investigate, seek to conciliate, hold hearings on and pass upon complaints
alleging violations of this chapter.
Hold hearings, administer oaths and take the testimony of any person under oath.
Issue remedial orders requiring cessation of violation of this chapter, or requiring such affirmative
action as in the judgment of the Fair Housing Officer and/or Review Committee will carry out the
purposes of this chapter, including, where appropriate, an order forbidding the sale, transfer or
leasing of any housing accommodation, or ordering the sale or leasing of a housing
accommodation to a person found to have been denied the rights protected by this chapter.
Apply to a court of competent jurisdiction for such temporary and/or permanent relief as it deems
necessary, and for judicially sanctioned enforcement of any order properly issued under Subsection
F.
With the approval of the Town Council, adopt, promulgate, amend and rescind rules and
regulations to effectuate the purposes of this chapter, including regulations requiring the posting of
notices prepared or approved by the Fair Housing Officer and/or Review Committee.
§ 196-6. Grievance procedure.
Initiating proceedings.
Any person or persons claiming to be aggrieved by an unlawful practice prohibited by this
chapter may file a written complaint in accordance with the rules and regulations of the Fair
Housing Officer. No complaint hereunder may be filed later than 30 days after the aggrieved
person becomes aware of the alleged unlawful practice, nor, in any event, more than 60 days
after the alleged unlawful practice occurred. Within the above time limitations, any member of
the Fair Housing Review Committee who has reason to believe an unlawful practice has
occurred may file a complaint, naming the Committee itself or the Fair Housing Officer as the
party complainant.
Anything in this chapter to the contrary notwithstanding, in the event that any proceeding is
instituted before the Connecticut Commission on Human Rights and Opportunities growing out
of substantially the same facts, no complaint shall be acted upon by the Fair Housing Officer
and/or Review Committee, and any action already undertaken upon a complaint shall be
suspended. In the event of the institution of such a proceeding, the action of the Connecticut
Commission on Human Rights and Opportunities shall be final.
Upon receipt of a complaint, the Fair Housing Officer shall serve the complaint and a written
statement setting forth the rights of the parties and the procedures to be followed by the Fair
Housing Officer and/or Review Committee in the investigation and adjudication of the complaint
6/4/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=8894889,8895033,8895088,8895138,8895160,8895200,8895245,8895253,27043137,8895346,8895348,… 20/44
C.
(1)
(2)
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
L.
M.
N.
upon the person or persons charged with a violation of this chapter (hereinafter referred to as the
"respondent").
Upon receipt of a complaint, the Fair Housing Officer and/or Review Committee shall conduct a
preliminary investigation of the complaint and shall prepare a written report within 21 days after
service of the complaint on the respondent.
The Fair Housing Officer and/or Review Committee shall, within 10 days after completion of the
report of the preliminary investigation, determine whether there is probable cause to believe that an
unlawful practice has been committed.
If the Fair Housing Officer and/or Review Committee determines that there is no such probable
cause, the complaint shall be dismissed.
If the Fair Housing Officer and/or Review Committee determines that there is such probable
cause, the Fair Housing Officer and/or Review Committee shall make an effort to eliminate the
unlawful practice by conference and conciliation, in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter.
Within 30 days after the Fair Housing Officer and/or Review Committee has determined that
probable cause exists, unless an order has been issued dismissing the complaint or stating the
terms of a conciliation agreement, a hearing shall be called and held by the Fair Housing Officer
and/or Review Committee.
In any proceedings under this section, the respondent may file a written answer to the complaint
and may appear at the hearing in person or otherwise, with or without counsel, and may submit
evidence and be heard. The Fair Housing Officer and/or Review Committee, in conducting any
hearing, may permit reasonable amendments to any complaint or answer, and any testimony taken
at the hearing shall be under oath and shall be fully transcribed, electronically or otherwise, as
determined by the Fair Housing Officer.
Any endeavors or negotiations for conciliation shall not be received in evidence, and shall be held
confidential by the Fair Housing Officer and/or Review Committee.
Upon the conclusion of the hearing, the decision of the Fair Housing Officer and/or Review
Committee shall be communicated to the complainant(s) and respondent.
Proceedings may be reopened upon petition of any aggrieved party, except that an application to
reopen must be filed within 10 days of service of the Fair Housing Officer's and/or Review
Committee's decision upon such aggrieved party; provided, however, that any order previously
entered by the Fair Housing Officer shall not be stayed by such petition except upon decision of the
Fair Housing Officer or vote of the Fair Housing Review Committee if such Committee has been
appointed.
All hearings held under and pursuant to this chapter shall be open to the public.
In computing time or periods of time under this chapter, Sundays and national and state holidays
shall be excluded.
All papers or pleadings required by this chapter shall be served personally, by abode service, or by
certified mail as directed by the Fair Housing Officer.
At any time after a complaint has been filed, the Fair Housing Officer and/or Review Committee
may file an action in any court of competent jurisdiction seeking appropriate temporary relief
against the respondent.
At any time after a complaint has been filed, the Fair Housing Officer and/or Review Committee
may file an action in a court of competent jurisdiction seeking such appropriate relief against any
6/4/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=8894889,8895033,8895088,8895138,8895160,8895200,8895245,8895253,27043137,8895346,8895348,… 21/44
O.
A.
B.
C.
person as it may deem necessary to prevent any change of position between the complainant(s)
and the respondent.
The Fair Housing Officer and/or Review Committee may file suit in a court of competent jurisdiction
seeking enforcement of any of its orders issued pursuant to this chapter.
§ 196-7. Appeals.
Any respondent or complainant aggrieved by a final order of the Fair Housing Officer and/or Review
Committee, or any complainant aggrieved by the dismissal of his complaint by the Fair Housing Officer
and/or Review Committee, may obtain a review of such order in a court of competent jurisdiction by
filing with the Clerk of said Court, within 30 days after service upon him of said order, a written petition
in duplicate praying that such order be modified or set aside, and by serving a duplicate copy of the
petition on the Fair Housing Officer. The Fair Housing Officer shall then cause to be filed in said court a
certified transcript of the record in the proceedings before it, including the pleadings, testimony and
order.
§ 196-8. Penalties for offenses.
If the Fair Housing Officer and/or Review Committee finds that any person has committed an
unlawful practice as defined in this chapter, it may subject such person to a fine not exceeding
$100 per offense, and each day of violation of this chapter shall be deemed a separate offense.
The Fair Housing Officer may, if such person refuses to pay the fine, file an action in a court of
competent jurisdiction for the collection thereof.
If a real estate broker, a real estate salesman or an employee thereof has failed to comply with any
order issued by the Fair Housing Officer and/or Review Committee, or has been found to have
committed an unlawful practice in violation of this chapter, the Fair Housing Officer may so notify in
writing the Real Estate Commission of the State of Connecticut.
Should the Fair Housing Officer and/or Review Committee determine at any time that a complaint
filed with it alleging a violation of this chapter was filed in bad faith, the Fair Housing Officer shall
forthwith issue an order requiring the complainant(s) to pay to the respondent the amount of the
reasonable expenses caused the respondent by the filing of said complaint, including reasonable
attorney's fees; and such order may be enforced in the same manner as any other order issued by
the Fair Housing Officer and/or Review Committee pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
Chapter 211. Historic Districts
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Selectmen of the Town of East Hampton 5-11-1977 (Ord. No.
14.00); amended in its entirety by the Town Council 2-23-2010. Subsequent amendments noted where
applicable.]
211a Historic District Map
§ 211-1. Purpose.
To promote the educational, cultural, economic, and general welfare and to preserve and protect the
distinctive characteristics of buildings and places associated with the history of the Town or indicative of
a period or style of architecture, there is hereby established an historic district in the Town, to be known
as "Middle Haddam Historic District," and the boundaries of the historic district are shown on a map
delineating the area involved, which map is incorporated herein by reference and entitled “Middle
Haddam Historic District Town of East Hampton Connecticut” dated August 2009 and prepared by
Applied Geographics, Inc.[1]
6/4/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=8894889,8895033,8895088,8895138,8895160,8895200,8895245,8895253,27043137,8895346,8895348,… 22/44
[1]
A.
B.
C.
Editor's Note: The Middle Haddam Historic District Map prepared by Applied Geographics, Inc., dated
August 2009, is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 211-2. Historic District Commission; membership and records.
This Historic District Commission established under the provisions of this chapter shall consist of
five regular and three alternate members, who shall be electors of the Town in which the district is
situated holding no salaried municipal office. At least three members and two alternates of the
Historic District Commission shall reside in the Historic District. Such alternate members shall,
when seated as provided in this section, have all powers and duties of a member of the
Commission. If a regular member of said Commission is absent or has a conflict of interest, the
Chairman of the Commission shall designate an alternate to so act, choosing alternates in rotation
so that they shall act as nearly equal a number of times as possible. If any alternate is not available
in accordance with such rotation, such fact shall be recorded in the minutes of the meeting.
The Board of Selectmen shall make appointments to the Commission as follows: one member to
be appointed for a term expiring January 1, 1982, one for a term expiring January 1, 1983, one for
a term expiring January 1, 1984, one for a term expiring January 1, 1985, and one for a term
expiring January 1, 1986; and one alternate member for a term expiring January 1, 1983, one
alternate member for a term expiring January 1, 1984, and one alternate member for a term
expiring January 1, 1985. All subsequent appointments shall be made by the Town Council and
shall be for a term of five years, except that an appointment to fill an unexpired term shall be for the
duration of said unexpired term only. The Commission shall elect annually a Chairman, a Vice
Chairman, and a Clerk from its own number. Each member and alternate shall continue in office
until his successor is duly appointed. All members and alternates shall serve without compensation.
Any member or alternate may be appointed for an additional term or terms.
The Historic District Commission shall keep a permanent record of its resolutions, transactions, and
determinations and of the vote of each member participating therein.
§ 211-3. Duties of Commission.
The Commission shall have such powers, shall perform such functions and shall be subject to such
limitations as shall from time to time be prescribed by the applicable General Statutes of Connecticut.
The Commission shall fix the time and place of its regular meetings and provide a method for calling
special meetings, in accordance with the Freedom of Information Act, § 1-210 et. seq. of the General
Statutes of Connecticut. It shall adopt rules of procedures not inconsistent with the provisions of § 7-
147a et. seq. of the General Statutes of Connecticut. The presence of four members or alternate
members shall constitute a quorum, and no resolution or vote except a vote to adjourn or to fix the time
and place of its next meeting shall be adopted by fewer than three affirmative votes. The Commission
may adopt regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of § 7-147a et. seq. of the General Statutes
of Connecticut to provide guidance to property owners as to factors to be considered in preparing an
application for a certificate of appropriateness.
§ 211-4. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ACT
The provisions of §§ 7-147a through 7-147k of the Connecticut General Statutes, as the same may
be amended from time to time.
ALTERED
Changed, modified, rebuilt, removed, demolished, restored, razed, moved, or reconstructed.
6/4/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=8894889,8895033,8895088,8895138,8895160,8895200,8895245,8895253,27043137,8895346,8895348,… 23/44
A.
B.
C.
APPROPRIATE
Not incongruous with those aspects of the historic district which the Historic District Commission
determines to be historically or architecturally significant.
BUILDING
A combination of materials forming a shelter for persons, animals, or property.
ERECTED
Constructed, built, installed or enlarged.
EXTERIOR ARCHITECTURAL FEATURES
Such portions of the exterior of a structure or buildings as are open to view from a public street,
way or place.
MUNICIPALITY
The Town of East Hampton.
STRUCTURE
Any combination of materials, other than a building, which is affixed to the land, and shall include,
but not be limited to, signs, fences, and walls.
§ 211-5. Certificate of appropriateness.
No building or structure shall be erected or altered within an historic district until after an application
for a certificate of appropriateness as to exterior architectural features has been submitted to the
Historic District Commission and approved by said Commission.
No building permit for erection of a building or structure or for alteration of an exterior architectural
feature within an historic district and no demolition permit for demolition or removal of a building or
structure within an historic district shall be issued by a municipality or any department, agency or
official thereof until a certificate of appropriateness has been issued. A certificate of
appropriateness shall be required whether or not a building permit is required.
The Historic District Commission may request such plans, elevations, specifications, material and
other information, including, in the case of demolition or removal, a statement of the proposed
condition and appearance of property after such demolition or removal, as may be reasonably
deemed necessary by the Commission to enable it to make a determination on the application. The
style, material, size and location of outdoor advertising signs and bill posters within an historic
district shall also be under the control of such Commission. The provisions of this section shall not
be construed to extend to the color of paint used on the exterior of any building or structure.
§ 211-6. Hearings.
The Commission shall hold a public hearing upon each application for a certificate of appropriateness
unless the Commission determines that such application involves items not subject to approval by the
Commission. The Commission shall fix a reasonable time and place for such hearing. Notice of the time
and place of such hearing shall be given by publication in the form of a legal advertisement appearing in
a newspaper having a substantial circulation in the Town of East Hampton not more than 15 days nor
less than five days before such hearing.
§ 211-7. Decision on application.
Within not more than 65 days after the filing of an application, the Commission shall pass upon such
application and shall give written notice of its decision to the applicant. When a certificate of
6/4/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=8894889,8895033,8895088,8895138,8895160,8895200,8895245,8895253,27043137,8895346,8895348,… 24/44
A.
B.
C.
appropriateness is denied, the Commission shall place upon its records and in the notice to the
applicant the reasons for its determination. In the notice to the applicant the Commission may make
recommendations relative to design, arrangement, texture, material, and similar features. The
Commission may issue a certificate of appropriateness with stipulations. Evidence of approval shall be
by certificate of appropriateness issued by the Commission. Failure of the Commission to act within said
65 days shall constitute approval, and no other evidence of approval shall be needed. The Commission
shall keep a record of all applications for certificates of appropriateness and of all its doings.
§ 211-8. Considerations in determining appropriateness.
If the Commission determines that the proposed erection, alteration or parking will be appropriate, it
shall issue a certificate of appropriateness. In passing on appropriateness as to exterior
architectural features, buildings or structures, the Commission shall consider, in addition to other
pertinent factors, the type and style of exterior windows, doors, light fixtures, signs, aboveground
utility structures, mechanical appurtenances and the type and texture of building materials. In
passing upon appropriateness as to exterior architectural features, the Commission shall also
consider, in addition to any other pertinent factors, the historical and architectural features involved
and the relationship thereof to the exterior architectural style and pertinent features of other
buildings and structures in the immediate neighborhood. In passing upon appropriateness as to
parking, the Commission shall take into consideration the size of such parking area, the visibility of
cars parked therein, the closeness of such area to adjacent buildings and other similar factors. No
application for a certificate of appropriateness for an exterior architectural feature, such as a solar
energy system, designed for the utilization of renewable resources shall be denied unless the
Commission finds that the feature cannot be installed without substantially impairing the historic
character and appearance of the district. A certificate of appropriateness for such a feature may
include stipulations requiring design modifications and limitations on the location of the feature
which do not significantly impair its effectiveness.
No area within an historic district shall be used for industrial, commercial, business, home industry,
or occupational parking, whether or not such area is zoned for such use, until after an application
for a certificate of appropriateness as to parking has been submitted to the Commission and
approved by said Commission. The provisions of this section shall apply to the enlargement or
alteration of any such parking area in existence on October 1, 1973.
In its deliberations, the Historic District Commission shall act only for the purpose of controlling the
erection or alteration of buildings, structures, or parking which is incongruous with the historic or
architectural aspects of the district. The Commission shall not consider interior arrangement or use.
However, the Commission may recommend adaptive reuse of any buildings or structures within the
district compatible with the historic architectural aspects of the district.
§ 211-9. Variances.
Where, by reason of topographical conditions, district borderline situations, or because of other unusual
circumstances solely with respect to a certain parcel of land and not affecting generally the district in
which it is situated, the strict application of any provisions of this chapter would result in exceptional
practical difficulty or undue hardship upon the owner of any specific property, the Commission, in
passing upon applications, shall have power to vary or modify strict adherence to this chapter or to
interpret the meaning of this chapter so as to relieve such difficulty or hardship; provided such variance,
modifications or interpretation shall remain in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this
chapter so that the general character of the district shall be conserved and substantial justice done. In
granting variances, the Commission may impose such reasonable and additional stipulations and
conditions as will, in its judgment, better fulfill the purpose of this chapter. In addition to the filing
required under the Act, the Commission shall, for each variance granted, place upon its records and in
the notice to the applicant the reasons for its determination.
6/4/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=8894889,8895033,8895088,8895138,8895160,8895200,8895245,8895253,27043137,8895346,8895348,… 25/44
§ 211-10. Judicial relief.
If any provision of this chapter or any action taken or ruling made by the provisions of this chapter or of
any regulation or ordinance adopted under this chapter has been violated, the Commission may, in
addition to other remedies, institute an action in the Superior Court for the judicial district wherein such
violation exists, which court shall have jurisdiction to restrain such violation and to issue orders directing
that the violation be corrected or removed. Such order may direct the removal of any building, structure,
or exterior architectural feature erected in violation of this chapter or any bylaw or ordinance adopted
under this chapter or the substantial restoration of any building, structure, or exterior architectural
feature altered or demolished in violation of this chapter or any regulation or ordinance adopted under
this chapter. Regulations and orders of the Commission issued pursuant to this chapter, or to any
regulation or ordinance adopted under this chapter, shall be enforced by the Building Inspector, who
may be authorized to inspect and examine any building, structure, place or premises and to require in
writing the remedying of any provision of the regulations or orders made under the authority of this
chapter or of any regulation or orders made under the authority of this chapter or of any regulation or
ordinance adopted under this chapter.
§ 211-11. Penalties for offenses.
The owner or agent of any building, structure, or place where a violation of any provision of this chapter
has been committed or exists, or the lessee or tenant of an entire building, entire structure, or place
where such violation has been committed or exists, or the owner, agent, lessee, or tenant of any part of
the building, structure, or place in which such violation has been committed or exists, or the agent,
architect, builder, contractor, or any other person who commits, takes part or assists in any such
violation shall be fined not less than $10 nor more than $100 for each day that such violation continues;
but if the offense is willful, the person convicted thereof shall be fined not less than $100 nor more than
$250 for each day that such violation continues. The Superior Court for the judicial district wherein such
violation continues or exists shall have jurisdiction of all such offenses, subject to appeal as in other
cases. Each day that a violation continues to exist shall constitute a separate offense. All costs, fees,
and expenses in connection with actions under this section may, in the discretion of the court, be
assessed as damages against the violator, which, together with reasonable attorney's fees, may be
awarded to the Historic District Commission which brought such action. Any funds collected as fines
pursuant to this section shall be used by the Commission to restore the affected buildings, structures, or
places to their condition prior to the violation wherever possible. Any excess shall be paid to the
municipality in which the district is situated.
§ 211-12. Appeals.
Any person or persons severally or jointly aggrieved by any decision of the Commission or of any officer
thereof may, within 15 days from the date when such decision was rendered, take an appeal to the
Court of Common Pleas for Middlesex County, which appeal shall be made returnable to such court in
the same manner as that prescribed for civil actions brought to such court. Notice of such appeal shall
be given by leaving a true and attested copy thereof in the hands of or at the usual place of abode of
the Chairman or Clerk of the Commission within 12 days before the return day to which such appeal
has been taken. Procedure upon such appeal would be the same as that defined in § 8-8 of the
Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
§ 211-13. Exempted acts.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the ordinary maintenance or repair of any exterior
architectural feature in the historic district which does not involve a change in the appearance or design
thereof; nor to prevent the erection or alteration of any such feature which the Building Inspector or a
6/4/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=8894889,8895033,8895088,8895138,8895160,8895200,8895245,8895253,27043137,8895346,8895348,… 26/44
similar agent certifies is required by the public safety because of a condition which is unsafe or
dangerous due to deterioration; nor to prevent the erection or alteration of any such feature under a
permit issued by a Building Inspector or similar agent prior to the effective date of establishment of such
district.
§ 211-14. Boundaries.
The boundaries of the Middle Haddam Historic District are shown on a map entitled "Middle Haddam
Historic District Town of East Hampton Connecticut," dated August 2009 and prepared by Applied
Geographics, Inc. The following properties, identified by Assessor's Map Block and Lot Numbers, form
the boundaries of Middle Haddam Historic District and are included within the District, as are all the
properties within said boundaries:
Northerly 01C/9/8A
01C/9/6
01C/10/3
01C/10/11
01C/10/13
01C/11/1
06/11/2A
06/11/1
06/12/8
Easterly 06/12/8A
06/12/7B
06/12/7A
02/C/12/7
02/C/12/5
02C/12/4
02C/12/2
02C/12/17
02C/12/18
02C/21/34-2
02C/21/34-3
02C/21/4A
07/21/7
07/21/7B
02/18/20A
02/18/20-2A
Southerly 02/18/21-1C
02/18/20-2B
Westerly 02/18/20-2A
02/18/19B
02C/18/16
02C/18/1
02C/19A/2A
02C/19A/7A
6/4/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=8894889,8895033,8895088,8895138,8895160,8895200,8895245,8895253,27043137,8895346,8895348,… 27/44
A.
02C/19A/6
02C/19A/4
02C/19A/1
02C/9/19
02C/9/18
02C/9/17
02C/9/12-5
02C/9/12-6
02C/9/12A
02C/9/12-7
02C/9/12-8
02C/9/12-9
02C/9/12-10
Chapter 219. Housing Code
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Special Town Meeting of the Town of East Hampton 10-14-1976 (Ord. No.
10.02). Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building code — See Ch. 177.
Solid waste — See Ch. 269.
§ 219-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "East Hampton Housing Code."
§ 219-2. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this chapter:
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE
A detached structure which is not used or not intended to be used for living or sleeping by
human occupants and which is located on the same premises.
APPROVED
Approved by the local or state authority having such administrative authority.
ASHES
The residue from the burning of combustible materials and the noncombustible portion of the
refuse charged into an incinerator.
BASEMENT
The portion of the building partly underground, but having less than half its clear height below
the average grade of the adjoining ground.
CELLAR
The portion of the building partly underground, having half or more than half of its clear height
below the average grade of the adjoining ground.
CENTRAL HEATING SYSTEM
6/4/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=8894889,8895033,8895088,8895138,8895160,8895200,8895245,8895253,27043137,8895346,8895348,… 28/44
(1)
A single system supplying heat to one or more dwelling unit(s) or more than one rooming
unit(s).
DWELLING
Any enclosed space which is wholly or partly used or intended to be used for living or sleeping
by human occupants, provided that seasonal and temporary housing as hereinafter defined
and fallout or emergency shelters shall not be regarded as a dwelling.
SEASONAL DWELLING
Seasonal dwelling units not being used for living or sleeping by human occupants for more
than a total of 17 weeks during any calendar year, nor during any parts of the year except
the period from April 1 to November 1 of any year.
DWELLING UNIT
Any room or group of rooms located within a dwelling and forming a single habitable unit with
facilities which are used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating.
EXTERMINATION
The control and elimination of insects, rodents, or other pests by eliminating their harborage
places, by removing or making inaccessible materials that may serve as their food, by
poisoning, spraying, fumigating, trapping, or by any other recognized and legal pest elimination
methods approved by the Housing Code Enforcement officer or his authorized representative.
FAMILY
One adult person plus one or more persons who are legally related to said person and residing
in the same dwelling unit with said person.
FLUSH WATER CLOSET
A toilet bowl flushed with water under pressure with a water sealed trap above the floor level.
GARBAGE
The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking, serving and
non-consumption and spoilage of food, exclusive of human or animal feces.
GROSS FLOOR AREA
The total area of all habitable space in a building or structure.
GUEST
Any person who shares a dwelling unit in a nonpermanent status for not more than 30 days.
HABITABLE ROOM
A room or enclosed floor space used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking, or
eating purposes, excluding bathrooms, water closet compartments, laundries, furnace rooms,
pantries, kitchenettes and utility rooms of less than 50 square feet, foyers, or communicating
corridors, stairways, closets, storage spaces, and workshops, hobby and recreation areas in
unsealed or uninsulated parts of structure below ground level or in attics, and fallout or
emergency shelters.
HEATED WATER
Water heated to a temperature of not less than 120° F.
HOUSEHOLD
A family and one or more unrelated persons, including servants and not more than two
boarders, who share the same dwelling and use some or all of its cooking and eating facilities.
HOUSING CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER
The Director of Health or his authorized representative who shall be the official charged with
the administration of this chapter.
6/4/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=8894889,8895033,8895088,8895138,8895160,8895200,8895245,8895253,27043137,8895346,8895348,… 29/44
(1)
(2)
HOUSING OFFICIAL
The official charged with the administration and enforcement of this chapter; namely, the
Housing Code Enforcement officer or his authorized representative.
INFESTATION
The presence within or around a dwelling of any insects, rodents, or other pests.
KITCHEN
Any room containing any or all of the following equipment, or area of a room within three feet
of such equipment: sink and/or device for dishwashing, stove or other device for cooking,
refrigerator or other device for cool storage of food.
KITCHEN SINK
A sink of a size and design adequate for the purpose of washing eating, and drinking utensils,
located in a kitchen, properly connected with a cold and hot water line.
LAVATORY
A handwashing basin which is properly connected with both a hot and cold water line and
which is separate and distinct from a kitchen sink.
LEAD PAINT
Any pigmented, liquid substance applied to surfaces by brush, roller, or spray in which the total
nonvolatile ingredient contains more than 1% of lead, by weight, calculated as metallic lead.
MODERATE COOKING FACILITIES
Portable electric "plug-in" or small gas appliances, and a refrigerator.
MULTIPLE DWELLING
Any dwelling containing more than two dwelling units.
OCCUPANT
Any person, over one year of age, living, sleeping, cooking, or eating in, or actually having
possession of, a dwelling unit or a rooming unit, except that in dwelling units a guest will not be
considered an occupant.
OPERATOR
Any person who has charge, care or control of a building, or part thereof, in which dwelling
units or rooming units are let.
ORDINARY SUMMER CONDITIONS
A temperature 10° F. below the highest recorded out-of-doors temperature in the locality for the
prior ten-year period.
ORDINARY WINTER CONDITIONS
An outdoors temperature of 5° F.
OWNER
Any person, who, alone or jointly or severally with others:
Shall have legal title to any dwelling or dwelling unit or rooming house with or without
accompanying actual possession thereof; or
Shall have charge, care, or control of any dwelling or dwelling unit or rooming house as
owner or agent of the owner, or an executor, administrator, trustee or guardian of the
estate of the owner. Any such person thus representing the actual owner shall be bound to
comply with the provisions of this chapter and of the rules and regulations adopted
pursuant thereto, to the same extent as if he were the owner.
6/4/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=8894889,8895033,8895088,8895138,8895160,8895200,8895245,8895253,27043137,8895346,8895348,… 30/44
(1)
(2)
PERMISSIBLE OCCUPANCY
The maximum number of persons permitted as a family or household to reside in a dwelling
unit or rooming unit based on the square foot per person in habitable rooms.
PERSON
Includes any individual, firm, corporation, association, or partnership.
PLUMBING
Includes all of the following supplied facilities and equipment: gas pipes, gas-burning
equipment, water pipes, garbage disposal units, waste pipes, water closets, sinks, installed
dishwashers, lavatories, bathtubs, shower baths, installed clothes washing machines, catch
basins, drains, vents, and any other similar supplies fixtures, together with all connections to
water, sewer, septic tank or gas lines.
POTENTIAL HAZARDOUS MATERIAL
Any material, including building material, containing lead and/or other toxic heavy metal
compound in concentrations dangerous to the public health as deemed by the State
Department of Health.
PREMISES
A plotted lot or part thereof or unplotted lot or parcel of land or plot of land, either occupied or
unoccupied by any dwelling or non-dwelling structure, and includes any such building,
accessory structure or other structure thereon.
PRIVACY
The ability of a person or persons to carry out an activity commenced without interruption or
interference, either by sight or sound, by unwanted persons.
RATPROOFING
A form of construction which will prevent the ingress or egress of rats to or from a given space
or building, or their gaining access to food, water, or harborage. It consists of the closing and
keeping closed of every opening in foundations, basements, cellars, and exterior and interior
walls.
REFUSE
All putrescible and nonputrescible solids (except body wastes), including garbage, rubbish,
ashes and dead animals.
ROOMING HOUSE
Any dwelling or that part of any dwelling containing one or more rooming units, in which space
is let or offered by the owner or operator to three or more persons who are not members of a
single family.
ROOMING UNIT
Any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit used or intended to be used for
living and sleeping, but not for cooking or eating purposes; provided, however, that in the case
of a rooming unit containing not more than one room and occupied by not more than two
persons, moderate cooking facilities may be permitted.
RUBBISH
Nonputrescible solid wastes (excluding ashes) consisting of both:
Combustible wastes such as wastepaper, cardboard, plastic containers, waste lumber,
dead trees, tree stumps; and
Noncombustible wastes such as tin cans, bottles and crockery, abandoned automobiles,
machinery, and other waste materials.
6/4/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=8894889,8895033,8895088,8895138,8895160,8895200,8895245,8895253,27043137,8895346,8895348,… 31/44
B.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
SAFETY
The condition of being free from danger and hazards which may cause accidents or disease.
SEPTIC TANK
An impermeable receptacle, usually underground, to which sewage is drained and retained to
effect disintegration of the organic matter by bacteria.
SPACE HEATER
A self-contained, vented, fuel-burning appliance.
SUPPLIED
Paid for, furnished, provided by, or under the control of the owner or operator.
TEMPORARY HOUSING
Any tent, trailer, mobile home or any other structure used for human shelter which is designed
to be transportable and is not attached to the ground, to another structure, or to any utility
system on the same premises for more than 30 consecutive days.
TOILET
A water closet, with a bowl and trap made in one piece, which is of such shape and form and
which holds a sufficient quantity of water under pressure so that no fecal matter will collect on
the surface of the bowl and which is equipped with flushing rims which permit the bowl to be
properly flushed and scoured when water is discharged through the flushing rims.
VENTILATION
The process of supplying and removing air by natural or mechanical means to or from any
space.
Meaning of certain words. Whenever the words "dwelling," "dwelling unit," "rooming house,"
"rooming unit," "premises," or "structure" are used in this chapter, they shall be construed as though
they were followed by the words "or any part thereof." Words used in the singular include the plural,
and the plural the singular; the masculine gender includes the feminine and the feminine the
masculine.
§ 219-3. Responsibilities of owners and occupants.
No owner or other person shall occupy or let to another person any vacant dwelling or dwelling unit
unless it and the premises are clean, sanitary, fit for human occupancy, and comply with all
applicable legal requirements of the State of Connecticut and the Town of East Hampton.
Every owner of a dwelling containing three or more dwelling units shall maintain in a clean and
sanitary condition the shared or public areas of the dwelling and premises thereof.
Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall maintain in a clean and sanitary condition that
part or those parts of the dwelling, dwelling unit and premises thereof that the occupies and
controls.
Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall dispose of all his rubbish in a clean, sanitary and
safe manner.
Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall dispose of all his garbage and any other organic
waste which might provide food for rodents and other vermin in a clean, sanitary and safe manner,
and if a container is used for storage pending collection, it shall be rodentproof, insectproof, and
watertight.
Every owner of a dwelling containing three or more dwelling units shall supply adequate facilities or
containers for the sanitary and safe storage and disposal of rubbish and garbage. In the case of
6/4/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=8894889,8895033,8895088,8895138,8895160,8895200,8895245,8895253,27043137,8895346,8895348,… 32/44
G.
H.
I.
J.
(1)
(2)
A.
B.
single- or two-family dwellings, it shall be the responsibility of the occupant to furnish such facilities.
Every occupant of a dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit shall give the owner thereof, or his
agent or employee, access to any part of such dwelling, dwelling unit, or its premises, at all
reasonable times, for the purpose of making such repairs or alterations as are necessary to effect
compliance with the provisions of this chapter or with any lawful rule or regulation adopted or any
lawful order issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
The owner of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall be responsible for providing and fitting all screens on
windows and doors leading directly to the outdoors whenever the same are required under the
provisions of this chapter or any rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto [see § 219-7B(1)],
except where an agreement between the owner and occupant has been arranged in writing. In the
absence of such an agreement, maintenance and replacement of screens, once installed by the
owner, become the responsibility of the occupant.
Every occupant of a dwelling containing a single dwelling unit shall be responsible for the
extermination of any insects, rodents, or other pests therein or on the premises; and every
occupant of a dwelling unit in a dwelling containing more than one dwelling unit shall be
responsible for such extermination whenever his dwelling unit is the only one infested.
Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this subsection, whenever infestation is caused by
failure of the owner to maintain a dwelling in a ratproof or reasonably insectproof condition,
extermination shall be the responsibility of the owner. Whenever infestation exists in two or more of
the dwelling units in any dwelling, or in the shared or public parts of any dwelling containing two or
more dwelling units, extermination therefor shall be the responsibility of the owner.
Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall keep all plumbing fixtures therein in a clean and sanitary
condition and shall be responsible for the exercise of reasonable care in the proper use and
operation thereof.
§ 219-4. Minimum standards for basic equipment and facilities.
No person shall occupy as owner or occupant or let to another for occupancy any dwelling or dwelling
unit, for the purposes of living, sleeping, cooking or eating therein, which does not comply with the
following requirements:
Every dwelling unit shall have a room or portion of a room in which food may be prepared and/or
cooked and which shall be equipped with the following:
A kitchen sink in good working condition and properly connected to a water supply system
which is approved by the appropriate authority and which is capable of providing at all times an
adequate amount of heated and unheated running water under pressure and to a public or
private sewer system which is approved by the Housing Code Enforcement Officer.
A stove, or similar device, for cooking food and a refrigerator, or similar device, for the safe
storage of food at all times at temperatures less than 50° F., but more than 32° F., which are
properly installed with all necessary connections for safe, sanitary and efficient operation;
provided that such stove, refrigerator, and/or similar devices need not be installed when a
dwelling unit is not occupied or when the occupant is expected to provide same on occupancy,
and that sufficient space for the safe and efficient installation and operation of said stove,
refrigerator and/or similar devices is provided. Any agreement between owner and occupant
shall be in writing.
Within every dwelling unit there shall be a room which affords privacy to a person within said room
and which is equipped with a flush water closet in good working condition. Said flush water closet
shall be connected to a water system that at all times provides an adequate amount of running
water under pressure as to cause the toilet to be operated properly and shall be connected to a
public or private sewer system which is approved by the Housing Code Enforcement Officer.
6/4/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=8894889,8895033,8895088,8895138,8895160,8895200,8895245,8895253,27043137,8895346,8895348,… 33/44
C.
D.
E.
A.
B.
C.
(1)
D.
Within every dwelling unit there shall be a room, which affords privacy to a person, which is
equipped with a lavatory sink. Said lavatory sink may be in the same room as the flush water closet
or in another room. The lavatory sink shall be in good working condition and properly connected to
a water supply system which is approved by the appropriate authority and which is capable of
providing at all times an adequate amount of heated and unheated running water under pressure,
and to a public or private sewer system which is approved by the Housing Code Enforcement
Officer.
Within every dwelling unit there shall be a room which affords privacy to a person within said room
and which is equipped with a bathtub or shower in good working condition. Said bathtub or shower
may be in the same room as the flush water closet or in another room and shall be properly
connected to a water supply system which is approved by the appropriate authority and which is
capable of providing at all times an adequate amount of heated and unheated water under
pressure, and to a public or private sewer system which is approved by the Housing Code
Enforcement Officer.
Every dwelling unit shall have one or more approved means of egress leading to safe and open
space at ground level, as required by the laws of this state and this Town.
§ 219-5. Minimum standards for light, ventilation and electric
service.
No person shall occupy as owner, occupant or let to another for occupancy any dwelling or dwelling
unit, for the purpose of living therein, which does not comply with the following requirements:
Every habitable room shall have at least one window or skylight facing directly outdoors. The
minimum total window area, measured between stops, for every habitable room shall be 10% of the
floor area of such room. Whenever walls or other portions of structures face a window of any such
room and such light-obstruction structures are located less than three feet from the window and
extend to a level above that of the ceiling of the room, such window shall not be deemed to face
directly to the outdoors and shall not be included as contributing to the required minimum total
window area. Whenever the only window in a room is a skylight-type window, the total window area
of such skylight shall be equal at least 15% of the total floor area of such room.
Every habitable room shall have at least one window or skylight which can easily be opened, or
such other device as will adequately ventilate the room. The total of openable window area in every
habitable room shall be equal to at least 45% of the minimum window area size or minimum
skylight-type window size, as required in Subsection A of this section, except where there is
supplied some other device affording adequate ventilation and approved by the Housing Code
Enforcement Officer.
Every bathroom and water closet compartment shall comply with the light and ventilation
requirement for habitable rooms contained in Subsections A and B, except that no window or
skylight shall be required in adequately ventilated bathrooms and water closet compartments
equipped with a ventilation system which is approved by the Housing Code Enforcement Officer.
Where there is no electric service available from power lines which are not more than 300 feet
away from a dwelling, every dwelling unit and all public and common areas shall be supplied with
electric service outlets and fixtures which shall be properly installed, shall be maintained in good
and safe working condition, and shall be connected to the source of electric power in a manner
prescribed by the ordinances, rules and regulations of the Town. The capacity of such services and
the number of outlets and fixtures shall be as follows:
Every habitable room shall have an electric service and outlets and/or fixtures capable of
providing at least three watts per square foot of floor area.
6/4/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=8894889,8895033,8895088,8895138,8895160,8895200,8895245,8895253,27043137,8895346,8895348,… 34/44
(2)
(3)
(4)
E.
A.
B.
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
Every habitable room shall have at least one floor- or wall-type electric convenience outlet for
each 60 feet or fraction thereof of floor area, and in no case fewer than two such outlets per
room.
Every water closet compartment, bathroom, laundry room, furnace room, and public hall shall
contain at least one supplied ceiling or wall-type electric light fixture.
Convenience switches for turning on one light in each room or passageway shall be located so
as to permit the area ahead to be lighted.
Every public hall and stairway in every multiple dwelling shall be adequately lighted at all times so
as to provide at least six footcandles of light at the tread or floor level. All such lights shall be
maintained by the owner and on circuits supplied through a meter independent of meters used by
any family unit and operated by a suitable time switch. Every public hall and stairway in structures
containing not more than two dwelling units shall be supplied with conveniently located light
switches, controlling an adequate lighting system which may be turned on when needed, instead of
full-time lighting; the maintenance of such lights in structures containing not more than two dwelling
units shall be guided by whatever rental agreement exists between owner and tenant.
§ 219-6. Minimum thermal standards.
No person shall occupy as owner, occupant or let to another for occupancy any dwelling or dwelling
unit, for the purpose of living therein, which does not comply with the following requirements:
Every dwelling shall have heating facilities supplied by the owner or occupant which are properly
installed, and are maintained in safe and working condition, and are capable of safely and
adequately heating all habitable rooms, bathrooms and water closet compartments in every
dwelling unit located therein at a distance of 18 inches above floor level under ordinary winter
conditions to a temperature of at least 68° F.
Unvented flame space heaters are prohibited.
§ 219-7. General maintenance requirements.
No person shall occupy as owner, occupant or let to another for occupancy any dwelling or dwelling
unit, for the purpose of living therein, which does not comply with the following requirements:
Every foundation, floor, roof, ceiling, exterior and interior wall shall be reasonably weathertight,
watertight, and damp-free, shall be kept in sound condition and good repair, and shall be capable of
affording privacy for the occupants.
Every window, exterior door, rain gutter, rain leader, and basement hatchway or similar devices
shall be kept rodentproof and watertight and weathertight, and shall be kept in sound working
condition and good repair.
During that portion of the year when there is need for protection against mosquitoes, flies and
other flying insects, every door opening directly from a dwelling unit to outside space shall
have supplied properly fitting screens having at least 16 mesh and self-closing devices, and
every window or other device with openings to outdoor space, used or intended to be used for
ventilation, shall likewise be supplied with screens.
Every window located at or near ground level used or intended to be used for ventilation, and
every other opening located at or near ground level which might provide an entry for rodents,
shall be supplied with adequate gauge screen or such other devices as will effectively prevent
their entrance.
6/4/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=8894889,8895033,8895088,8895138,8895160,8895200,8895245,8895253,27043137,8895346,8895348,… 35/44
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
A.
B.
C.
D.
Every dwelling, other building or accessory structure shall be rodentproof and maintained so as to
prevent rodent harborage.
Every foundation, roof, floor, exterior and interior wall, ceiling, inside and outside stair, every porch,
and every appurtenance thereto, shall be safe to use and capable of supporting the loads that
normal use may cause to be placed thereon, and shall be kept in sound condition and good repair.
Every inside and outside stair or step shall have uniform risers and treads, and stairways shall have
handrails structurally sound of reasonable height and, where needed, balustrades adequately
spaced.
Every plumbing fixture and water and waste pipe shall be properly installed and maintained in good
sanitary working condition.
Every water closet compartment, bathroom and kitchen floor surface shall be constructed and
maintained so as to be impervious to water so as to permit such floor to be easily kept in a clean
and sanitary condition.
Every plumbing fixture and pipe, every chimney, flue and smoke pipe, and every other facility, piece
of equipment, or utility, which is present in a dwelling or dwelling unit, or which is required under
this chapter, shall be constructed and installed in conformance with the applicable local and state
codes and shall be maintained in satisfactory working condition.
No owner, operator, or occupant shall cause any supplied service, facility, equipment or utility which
is required under this chapter to be removed from or shut off from or discontinued for any occupied
dwelling or dwelling unit let or occupied by him, except for such temporary interruption as may be
necessary while actual repairs or alterations are in process, or during temporary emergencies when
discontinuance of service is approved by the appropriate authority.
All construction and materials and ways and means of egress and installation and use of
equipment shall conform to applicable state and local laws dealing with fire protection.
Every yard shall be properly graded and drained by the owner. The premises upon which a dwelling
is located shall be kept clean by the owner in the case of rooming houses and multiple dwellings,
and by the tenant in other types of dwellings.
§ 219-8. Minimum space, use and location requirements.
No person shall occupy or let to be occupied any dwelling or dwelling unit, for purpose of living therein,
which does not comply with the following requirements:
Every dwelling unit shall contain at least 150 square feet of floor space for the first occupant thereof
and at least 100 square feet of floor space for every additional occupant thereof, the floor space to
be calculated on the basis of total habitable room space.
In every dwelling unit of two or more rooms, and in every habitable room in a rooming house, every
room occupied for sleeping purposes by one occupant shall contain at least 70 square feet of floor
space and every room occupied for sleeping purposes by more than one occupant shall contain at
least 50 square feet of floor space for each occupant thereof.
At least one half of the floor area of every habitable room shall have a ceiling height of at least six
feet, six inches and the floor area of that part of any room where the ceiling height is less than five
feet shall not be considered as part of the floor area in computing the total floor area of the room for
the purpose of determining the maximum permissible occupancy thereof.
No space located partially or totally below grade shall be used as a habitable room or dwelling unit
unless:
6/4/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=8894889,8895033,8895088,8895138,8895160,8895200,8895245,8895253,27043137,8895346,8895348,… 36/44
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
[1]
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
The floor and those portions of the walls below grade are of waterproof and damp-proof
construction;
The minimum window area required in [cmz] subsection 5.01 is located entirely above the
grade of the ground adjoining such window area, or, if windows are located below grade, there
be constructed a properly drained window well whose ground area shall be equal to or greater
than the area of the window opening, the bottom of the window well shall be below the top of
the impervious masonry construction under this window, the minimum horizontal projections of
the bottom of the window well shall be equal to or greater than the vertical dimension of this
window opening, and no part of the window well opposite this window shall protrude above a
line projected at a forty-five-degree angle from the bottom of the window opening at right
angles to the outer wall.
The total openable window area in each room is equal to at least the minimum as required
under § 219-5B of this chapter, except where there is supplied some other device affording
adequate ventilation and approved by the appropriate authority.
There are no pipes, ducts, or other obstructions less than six feet, eight inches above the floor
level which interfere with the normal use of the room or area.
§ 219-9. Rooming houses.
No person shall operate a rooming house or shall occupy or let to another for occupancy any rooming
unit in any rooming house, except in compliance with the provisions of every section of this chapter
other than the provisions of §§ 219-3 and 219-4. No owner or other person shall occupy or let to
another person any vacant rooming unit unless it is clean, sanitary and fit for human occupancy as
determined by the Housing Code Enforcement Officer and complies with all applicable requirements of
the Town of East Hampton.
No person shall operate a rooming house unless he holds a valid rooming house license issued by
the Housing Code Enforcement Officer, Fire Marshal and Building Inspector. The operator shall
apply to the Housing Code Enforcement Officer after the rooming house has been determined to be
in compliance by the operator with the applicable provisions of this chapter and of the fire
prevention and building codes. This license shall be displayed in a conspicuous place within the
rooming house at all times. No such license shall be transferable. Every person holding such a
license shall give notice in writing to the Housing Code Enforcement Officer within 24 hours after
having sold, transferred, given away, or otherwise disposed of ownership of, interest in, or control
of any rooming house. Such notice shall include the name and address of the person succeeding to
the ownership or control of such rooming house. Every rooming house license shall expire at the
end of one year following its date of issue, unless sooner suspended or revoked as hereinafter
provided. The fee for such and for its renewal shall be in an amount as set from time to time by the
Town Council.[1]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
At least one flush water closet, lavatory basin and bathtub or shower, properly connected to a water
and public or private sewer system approved by the Housing Code Enforcement Officer and in
good working condition, shall be supplied for each eight persons or fraction thereof residing within a
rooming house, including members of the operator's family wherever they share the use of said
facilities, provided that:
In a rooming house where rooms are let only to males, flush urinals may be substituted for not
more than one-half the required number of water closets.
All such facilities shall be so located within the dwelling as to be reasonably accessible from a
common hall or passageway to all persons sharing such facilities; at least one bathroom unit
must be provided on each floor on which guests' sleeping rooms are located.
6/4/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=8894889,8895033,8895088,8895138,8895160,8895200,8895245,8895253,27043137,8895346,8895348,… 37/44
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
C.
D.
E.
F.
A.
B.
Every lavatory basin and bathtub or shower shall be supplied with heated and unheated water
at all times.
No such facilities shall be located in a basement, except by written approval of the Housing
Code Enforcement Officer.
Cooking in a rooming unit shall be prohibited, except as provided in the definition of "rooming
unit" in § 219-2.
Communal cooking and dining facilities in a rooming house shall be prohibited, except as
approved by the Housing Code Enforcement Officer in writing.
Rooming unit doors shall have operating locks to ensure privacy.
The operator of every rooming house shall change supplied bed linen and towels therein at least
once each week, and prior to the letting of any room to any occupant. The operator shall be
responsible for the maintenance of all supplied bedding in a clean and sanitary manner.
Every room occupied for sleeping purposes by one person shall contain at least 70 square feet of
floor space, and every room occupied for sleeping purposes by more than one person shall contain
at least 50 square feet of floor space for each occupant thereof.
Every rooming unit shall have one or more safe, unobstructed means of egress leading to safe and
open space at ground level, as required by the law of this state and this Town.
Every provision of this chapter which applies to rooming houses shall also apply to hotels and
motels, except to the extent that any such provision may be found in conflict with the laws of this
state or this Town.
§ 219-10. Inspection of dwellings, dwelling units, seasonal units,
rooming units and premises.
The Housing Code Enforcement Officer is hereby authorized and directed to make periodic
inspections to determine the condition of the dwellings, dwelling units, seasonal units, rooming
units and premises within this Town of East Hampton for the purpose of determining compliance
with the provisions of this chapter. For the purpose of making such inspections, the Housing Code
Enforcement officer is hereby authorized to enter, examine and survey between the hours of 8:30
a.m. and 4:30 p.m. all dwellings, dwelling units, seasonal units, rooming units and premises, or at
such other time mutually satisfactory to and agreed upon by the Housing Code Enforcement Officer
and the owner or occupant or person in charge of a dwelling, dwelling unit, seasonal unit, or
rooming unit. Such inspection, examination or survey shall not have for its purpose the undue
harassment of said owner or occupant; and such inspection, examination or survey shall be made
so as to cause the least amount of inconvenience to said owner or occupant consistent with an
efficient performance of the duties of the Housing Code Enforcement Officer. The Housing Code
Enforcement Officer is also authorized and directed to inspect seasonal housing to determine
whether or not it qualifies as seasonal housing.
The provisions of the foregoing subsection shall not authorize entry by force to make such
inspections, and in the event the owner or occupant of a dwelling, dwelling unit, seasonal unit or
rooming unit, or the person in charge thereof, shall refuse to permit entry for such an inspection,
entry for such purpose shall be allowed only through a properly issued warrant in accordance with
law. Each occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit or seasonal unit shall give the owner thereof, or
his agent or employee, access to any part of such dwelling or dwelling unit, seasonal unit, or its
premises, at all reasonable times for the purpose of making such repairs and/or alterations as are
necessary to effect compliance with the provisions of this chapter or any lawful order issued
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
6/4/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=8894889,8895033,8895088,8895138,8895160,8895200,8895245,8895253,27043137,8895346,8895348,… 38/44
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
D.
§ 219-11. Enforcement.
Whenever the Housing Code Enforcement Officer determines that conditions exist which cause any
dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit or premises to fail to meet the minimum standards provided for
in this chapter or regulations pursuant thereto, he shall issue a notice setting forth the alleged
failure or failures and requiring that such failures be corrected. The notices shall:
Be put in writing.
Set forth the alleged violation or violations of this chapter, or of the rules and regulations
pursuant thereto, and describe the dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit or premises where the
violation is alleged to exist or to have been committed.
Provide a reasonable time, but not to exceed 60 days, for the correction of any violation
alleged.
Be served upon the owner, occupant or person in charge of the dwelling, dwelling unit,
rooming unit or premises by personal service as provided for in the rules of the courts of this
state; or by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, delivered to addresses only. If
one or more persons to whom such notice is addressed cannot be found after diligent effort to
do so, service may be made upon such person or persons by posting a notice in a
conspicuous place in or about the dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit or premises described
in the notice.
After the passage of the period of time allowed for the correction of any violation alleged, the
Housing Code Enforcement Officer shall reinspect the dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit or
premises described in the notice following the procedure detailed in this section.
§ 219-12. Hearings and appeals.
There is hereby created a Housing Code Appeals Committee which shall consist of five electors of
the Town who shall be appointed by resolution of the Town Council for terms of two years.
Any person aggrieved by a notice of violation addressed to such person by the Housing Code
Enforcement Officer and issued in connection with any inspection, examination, or survey pursuant
to this chapter shall be granted a hearing on such notice of violation before the Housing Code
Appeals Committee, provided that such person shall file in the office of the Housing Code Appeals
Committee a written petition bearing the petitioner's name and present address; requesting a
hearing, and setting forth the grounds therefor within 20 days after the notice of the Housing Code
Enforcement Officer was served upon such person. Within 10 days of the receipt of such petition,
the Housing Code Appeals Committee shall set a time and place for such hearing and shall give
the petitioner written notice thereof. Such notice of hearing shall be by registered or certified mail,
return receipt requested. At the hearing, the petitioner shall have the opportunity to present such
facts as shall support petitioner's contention that the notice should be modified or withdrawn. Such
a hearing shall take place within a reasonable time after the receipt of the petition by the Housing
Code Appeals Committee.
After the conclusion of the hearing a majority of the Housing Code Appeals Committee shall be
empowered to sustain, modify, or withdraw the notice of violation. Variances from the provisions of
this chapter may be granted where circumstances warrant, if in the judgment of the Housing Code
Appeals Committee no harm to the public health, welfare, and safety will result from such variance.
The Housing Code Appeals Committee is hereby authorized to administer oaths and affirmations to
witnesses at such hearings and to take the testimony of witnesses and receive exhibits presented
in such hearings.
6/4/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=8894889,8895033,8895088,8895138,8895160,8895200,8895245,8895253,27043137,8895346,8895348,… 39/44
E.
F.
G.
A.
B.
All proceedings at such hearings, including the findings of fact and decision, shall be reduced to
writing, and said findings and decision shall be certified and filed in the office of the Housing Code
Enforcement Officer.
Any person aggrieved by the final decision of the Housing Code Appeals Committee may appeal to
any court of competent jurisdiction, as provided by the laws of this state.
Whenever, in the judgment of the Housing Code Enforcement Officer, an emergency exists which
requires immediate action to protect the public health, welfare, or safety, the Housing Code Officer
may, forthwith and without notice or hearing, cause to be issued and served an order describing the
violation and reciting the existence of the emergency. The Housing Code Enforcement Officer may
then take such action under the law as such Housing Code Enforcement Officer deems necessary
to eliminate and cure the violation. Any aggrieved person who is served with such a notice of
violation and order shall comply with its directions at once. Said aggrieved person shall, upon
request, be given a hearing by the Housing Code Appeals Committee within 24 hours of any
request for such hearing, however.
§ 219-13. Suspension of permits for rooming houses.
The Housing Code Enforcement Officer is hereby authorized to enter, inspect, examine, and survey
all rooming houses between the hours of 8:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m. Whenever, upon inspection of
any rooming house, the Housing Code Enforcement Officer finds that conditions or practices exist
which are in violation of any provision of this chapter or of any applicable rule or regulation adopted
pursuant thereto, the Housing Code Enforcement Officer shall give notice in writing to the operator
of such rooming house that unless such conditions are corrected within a reasonable time the
operator's permit shall be suspended. At the end of such period of time, the Housing Code
Enforcement Officer shall reinspect such rooming house, and if he determines that such conditions
have not been corrected, he shall issue an order suspending the operator's permit.
Any person whose permit to operate a rooming house has been suspended by order of the
Housing Code Enforcement Officer may petition for and be granted a hearing on the matter in the
manner prescribed by § 219-12 on hearings. If no such petition for hearings is forthcoming within
10 days following the day on which a permit is suspended, said permit shall be deemed revoked,
except that at any time within 10 days following such suspension any person whose permit has
been suspended shall have the opportunity to demonstrate to the Housing Code Enforcement
Officer that his rooming house is now in compliance with this chapter and with all regulations
pursuant thereto. Where such compliance is demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Housing Code
Enforcement Officer, the suspension of the rooming house permit shall be terminated.
§ 219-14. Rules and regulations.
The Town Council is hereby authorized to make, adopt, revise and amend such rules and regulations as
it deems necessary for the carrying out of the provisions of this chapter in accordance with the
procedures established by state statutes and Town Charter.
§ 219-15. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who shall refuse or fail to obey an order of the Housing Code Enforcement Officer or the
Housing Code Appeals Committee to meet the minimum standards of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be fined not less than $50 nor more than $100. Each day's failure to comply shall constitute
a separate violation.
§ 219-16. Designation of unfit dwellings; condemnation.
6/4/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=8894889,8895033,8895088,8895138,8895160,8895200,8895245,8895253,27043137,8895346,8895348,… 40/44
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
The designation of dwellings or dwelling units as unfit for human habitation and the procedure for the
condemnation and placarding of such unfit dwellings or dwelling units shall be carried out in compliance
with the following requirements:
Any dwelling or dwelling unit which shall be found to have any of the following defects shall be
condemned as unfit for human habitation and shall be so designated and placarded by the Housing
Code Enforcement Officer:
One which is so damaged, decayed, dilapidated, unsanitary, unsafe, or vermin-infested that it
creates a serious hazard to the health or safety of the occupants or of the public.
One which lacks illumination, ventilation, or sanitation facilities adequate to protect the health
or safety of the occupants or of the public.
One which because of its general condition or location is unsanitary, or otherwise dangerous to
the health or safety of the occupants or of the public.
Any unit condemned as unfit for human habitation and so designated and placarded by the
Housing Code Enforcement Officer shall be vacated within a reasonable time as ordered by the
Housing Code Enforcement Officer.
No dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit that has been condemned and placarded as unfit for
human habitation shall again be used for human habitation until written approval is secured from
and such placard is removed by permission of the Housing Code Enforcement Officer. The Housing
Code Enforcement Officer shall permit removal of such placard by the owner, occupant, or person
in charge of the dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit whenever the defect or defects upon which
the placarding action was based have been eliminated.
No person shall deface or remove the placard from any dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit
which has been condemned as unfit for human habitation and placarded as such, except when
such action has been authorized by the Housing Code Enforcement Officer as provided for in
Subsection C above. Whoever violates this provision shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of
not less than $25 nor more than $50.
Any person aggrieved by any order involving the placarding of a dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming
unit may request and be granted a hearing under the conditions specified in § 219-12 above.
When no corrective action is taken by the owner, occupant, or person in charge of a dwelling,
dwelling unit or rooming unit designated as unfit for human habitation for six months and when no
hearing is pending, the Housing Code Enforcement Officer shall order the structure in violation to
be demolished within a reasonable time as ordered by the Housing Code Enforcement Officer.
Nothing herein contained shall be interpreted as precluding any private right of action of any person
against an owner, occupant or person in charge of the placarded structure.
Whenever an unoccupied building, whether of the residential, commercial or industrial type,
becomes so damaged, decayed, dilapidated, unsanitary, unsafe, rat or vermin infested as to be
considered a source of danger to the life or health of persons who live in the vicinity, it shall be
declared a public nuisance by the Housing Code Enforcement officer. Said officer shall issue an
order to the owner, in writing, for the physical rehabilitation of the structure before it is reoccupied.
Whenever any such building remains unoccupied for a period of six months and is allowed to
deteriorate to the extent mentioned above, the Housing Code Enforcement officer shall issue an
order to the owner to have the structure razed within one month of said order. The failure of any
person to comply with such order shall be dealt with according to the procedure in Section 16.6
§ 219-17. Conflict of ordinances; severability; liability of
enforcement officer.
6/4/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=8894889,8895033,8895088,8895138,8895160,8895200,8895245,8895253,27043137,8895346,8895348,… 41/44
A.
B.
C.
In any case where a provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict with any existing code,
ordinance or regulation of this Town existing on the effective date of this chapter, the provision
which establishes the higher standard for the promotion and protection of the health and safety of
the people shall prevail.
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this chapter should be
declared invalid for any reason whatsoever, such decision shall not affect the remaining portions of
this chapter, which shall remain in full force and effect, and to this end the provisions of this chapter
are hereby declared to be severable.
The Housing Code Enforcement Officer and his assistants shall be free from personal liability for
acts done in good faith in the performance of official duties.
Chapter 273. Streets and Sidewalks
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town of East Hampton as indicated in article histories. Amendments noted
where applicable.]
Article I. Street Naming
[Adopted by the Board of Selectmen 10-16-1989 (Ord. No. 5.02)]
§ 273-1. Authority to name; notice of meeting required.
The Town Council shall have the authority to name streets in the Town of East Hampton, provided any
proposed naming of any streets shall not be considered at any meeting of the Town Council unless
notice thereof and of the time and place of such meeting has been published in a newspaper having a
substantial circulation in the Town of East Hampton.
Article II. Use of Town Property and Rights-of-Way
[Adopted by the Board of Selectmen 12-13-1980 (Ord. No. 5.03)]
§ 273-2. Authority; purpose.
The Town Council enact this article pursuant to the authority of § 7-148 of the Connecticut General
Statutes and toward the advancement of the public health, safety and welfare, expressly for the purpose
of guaranteeing the safety of travelers, and the free and unfettered use of Town property where the
Town has determined the same to be permissible.
§ 273-3. Approval required.
No person, association, corporation, or other entity shall be permitted to erect, construct, repair, place,
replace, plant, keep or maintain any structure, fence, stand, barricade, sign, or other object except
mailboxes, whether temporary or permanent in nature, upon any Town right-of-way and/or within six feet
of the edge of the traveled portion of any Town road, or upon any Town property, without first obtaining
written approval from the Town Manager.
§ 273-4. Obstructions prohibited.
6/4/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=8894889,8895033,8895088,8895138,8895160,8895200,8895245,8895253,27043137,8895346,8895348,… 42/44
[1]
[Added 8-22-1989]
No person, association, corporation, or other entity shall be permitted to obstruct any public sidewalk,
public walkway or public passageway by placement of any object thereon or permit any plant or tree to
obstruct same. The Superintendent of Public Works shall direct any entity deemed in violation of this
section to remove said object or planting within five days of receipt of written notification. Failure to act
upon notification shall permit the Superintendent of Public Works to remove the offending object or
planting and bill the offending entity and/or lien said property for the costs of removal, in addition to the
penalties described in § 273-5.
§ 273-5. Penalties for offenses.
A violation of this article shall subject the violator or violators to a fine of $100 as provided by § 7-148(c)
(6)(C)(v) of the Connecticut General Statutes. Each day of willful noncompliance with this article shall
be considered a separate violation hereof.
Article III. Snow and Ice on Streets
[Adopted by the Town Council 3-8-1994 (Ord. No. 5.04)]
§ 273-6. Deposit of snow and ice on streets prohibited.
No person shall plow, throw, put or cause to be thrown or put any snow or ice from any private property
or from any area in the rear of said private property or in the area between a private dwelling house or
structure and the legally laid-out sidewalk, into any public highway in the Town.[1]
Editor's Note: Former § 2, providing for the adoption of this article as an emergency measure to
terminate 61 days after adoption, was deleted 12-12-2006.
§ 273-7. Penalties for offenses; enforcement.
The penalty for violation of this article shall be an infraction and shall be enforced by the East Hampton
Police Department. Any violation of this article shall be subject to a maximum penalty of $90 for each
violation.
Article IV. Snow and Ice on Sidewalks
[Adopted by the Town Council 4-13-2010]
§ 273-8. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
SIDEWALK
Any gravel, brick, cement, asphalt, or other material constructed or paved as a path or walkway for
the use, convenience and safety of the general public and which adjoins public streets.
§ 273-9. Standards adopted.
The provisions of C.G.S. § 7-163a are hereby adopted effective May 6, 2010.
6/4/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=8894889,8895033,8895088,8895138,8895160,8895200,8895245,8895253,27043137,8895346,8895348,… 43/44
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
L.
M.
N.
O.
P.
Q.
R.
S.
T.
U.
§ 273-10. Liability of Town.
Notwithstanding the provisions of C.G.S. § 13a-149 or any other general statute or special act, the Town
of East Hampton shall not be liable for personal injury or property damage caused by the presence of
ice or snow on a public sidewalk unless the Town of East Hampton is the owner or person in possession
and control of land abutting such sidewalk. Nothing in this section shall insulate the Town of East
Hampton from liability for its affirmative acts with respect to public sidewalks.
§ 273-11. Certain sidewalks maintained by Town.
List of sidewalks which the Town will maintain:
North Maple Street, beginning at West High Street (Route 66) and ending at High School;
Hills Avenue, beginning at North Maple Street and ending at North Main Street;
North Main Street, beginning at 11 North Main Street (Theater Square) and ending at Hills Avenue;
North Main Street, beginning at East High Street (Route 66) and ending at Lake Drive;
Lake Drive, beginning at North Main Street and ending at Mott Hill Road;
East High Street, beginning at North Main Street and ending at Carrier Road;
East High Street, beginning at Main Street and ending at Lake View Street (Route 196);
Lake View Street (Route 196), beginning at East High Street (Route 66) and ending at Summit
Street (Route 196);
Summit Street (Route 196), beginning at Lake View Street (Route 196) and ending at sign post in
walk at 25 Summit Street;
Summit Street (Route 196), beginning at 23 Summit Street (Route 196) and ending at Main Street;
Bevin Boulevard, beginning at Summit Street (Route 196) and ending at rear school entrance;
Summit Street (Route 196), beginning at 4 Summit Street (Route 196) and ending at Main Street;
Walnut Avenue, beginning at Main Street and ending at 25 Walnut Avenue;
South Main Street, beginning 27 South Main Street and ending at Colchester Avenue (Route 16);
Main Street, beginning at Colchester Avenue (Route 16) and ending at 56 Main Street;
Main Street, beginning at 105 Main Street (Senior Center/Library) and ending at 97 Main Street;
Main Street, beginning at 93 Main Street and ending at East High Street (Route 66);
Barton Hill Road, beginning at Main Street and ending at west property line of 26 Barton Hill Road;
Barton Hill Road, beginning at east property line of 42 Barton Hill Road and ending at Maple Street;
Maple Street, beginning at Barton Hill Road and ending at West High Street;
West High Street, beginning at Maple Street and ending at Main Street;
6/4/2019 Town of East Hampton, CT
https://ecode360.com/print/EA2236?guid=8894889,8895033,8895088,8895138,8895160,8895200,8895245,8895253,27043137,8895346,8895348,… 44/44
V.
W.
X.
Y.
Z.
AA.
BB.
A.
B.
Governor Bill O'Neill Drive, beginning at West High Street (Route 66) and ending at driveway loop;
Edgerton Street, beginning at Main Street and ending at Smith Street;
Chatham Fields Road, beginning at Edgerton Street and ending at cul-de-sac;
Smith Street, beginning at Edgerton Street and ending at Walnut Avenue;
Viola Drive, beginning at Smith Street and ending at Viola Drive (loop);
Valli Drive, beginning at Viola Drive and ending at cul-de-sac; and
Skinner Street (Route 196), beginning at 25 Skinner Street (Route 196) and ending at Main Street.
§ 273-12. Duty and liabilities of adjacent property owners.
The owner or person in possession and control of land abutting a public sidewalk shall have the same
duty of care with respect to the presence of ice or snow on such sidewalk toward the portion of the
sidewalk abutting his property as the municipality had prior to the effective date of this article adopted
pursuant to the provisions of C.G.S. § 7-163a and shall be liable for personal injury or property damage
caused by a breach of said duty.
§ 273-13. Limitation on actions.
No action to recover damages for injury to the person or to property caused by the presence of ice or
snow on a public sidewalk against a person who owns or is in possession and control of land abutting a
public sidewalk shall be brought but within two years from the date when the injury is first sustained.
Article V. Snow Removal from Sidewalks
[Adopted by the Town Council 4-13-2010]
§ 273-14. Removal of snow from sidewalks required.
All owners, entities, or persons in possession and control of property that adjoins any public
sidewalk shall remove the snow and ice accumulated on it within 24 hours after the cessation of a
snow or ice storm. Ice that has formed on a public sidewalk due to refreezing of standing water or
moisture shall be removed or the slippery condition abated within 24 hours of such refreezing of
water or moisture.
The Public Works Department shall ensure that snow and ice is removed from all sidewalks
abutting Town-owned property, except for such sidewalks as are the responsibility of the Board of
Education of the Town of East Hampton. Where the property owner, entity, or person in control of
property abutting a public sidewalk has failed to remove snow and/or ice within 24 hours after the
cessation of a snow or ice storm, the Director of Public Works may cause to have such snow and/or
ice removed from said sidewalks, with the cost of such removal being charged to the property
owner, person, or entity in possession and control of property abutting said public sidewalk. The
cost of such removal to be charged to the property owner, person, or entity in possession and
control may include the cost of Department manpower and equipment and/or the cost of private
contractors hired by the Town to facilitate the removal of snow and ice as aforesaid.

TOWN OF EAST HAMPTON
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Subdivision Regulations
Effective
May 1949
Amended: December 1,1986
Amended: February 1, 1987
Amended: December 9, 1987
Amended: July 1, 1992
Amended: July 1, 1996
Amended: December 1, 1998
Amended: August 1, 1998
Amended: February 2, 2000
Amended: August 17, 2000
Amended: December 6, 2003 (effective date 12/8/03)
TABLE OF CONTENTS
SECTION PAGE
I. AUTHORITY …………………………………………………… 1
II. APPLICATION PROCEDURE …………………………………… 2
III. DEFINITIONS ……………………………………………………… 3
IV. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS ……………………………………… 8
V. SUBDIVISION MAP REQUIREMENTS/APPROVAL BLOCK…… 10
VI. OPEN SPACE AND RECREATIONAL AREA……………………… 15
VII. ENERGY CONSERVATION ………………………………………… 20
VIII. STORMWATER RUNOFF CONTROL ……………………………… 22
IX. EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL …………………… 24
X. BONDING FOR PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS PROPOSED FOR
TOWN ACCEPTANCE ……………………………………………… 27
XI. APPROVAL …………………………………………………………… 29
XII. ROAD STANDARDS ………………………………………………… 31
XIII. GENERAL …………………………………………………………… 35
APPENDIX A – RECORDS RETENTION ………………………………….. 37
APPENDIX B – FEE SCHEDULE …………………………………………… 41
APPENDIX C – STREET DESIGNS ………………………………………… 42
1
I AUTHORITY
Under the authority vested in the Town of East Hampton Planning and Zoning Commission by Title 8, Chapter 126 of the Statutes of the State of Connecticut governing Municipal Planning Commissions, as amended, said Commission hereby adopts these Regulations governing the subdivision of land.
These regulations supersede regulations previously in effect and adopted November 14, 1984
2
II. APPLICATION PROCEDURE
The following shall constitute a completed application:
1. Check made out to "Town of East Hampton" in the following amount: (effective as of 12/6/03)
A. Fees to be in accordance with fee schedule as may be amended (see appendix B) B. When public improvements are required, an additional amount representing three percent (3%) of the estimated cost of the public improvements, as determined by the Town Engineer and approved by the Commission, shall be submitted prior to final approval and maps being signed. This amount to be utilized for engineering services to insure that improvements are designed and installed in accordance with these regulations. Improvements shall include, but not be limited to, improvements to existing roads and drainage systems, new roads and drainage systems, sewer systems, water systems, and erosion and sedimentation controls.
2. Ten (10) copies of the subdivision plans complying with Section V of these regulations, as amended.
3. A sewage disposal plan must be submitted and approved by the Water Pollution Control Authority before an application is considered to be complete. A copy of Memorandum of Understanding from the Water Pollution Control Authority and Town Sanitarian will be filed with the Commission clearly specifying standards and requirements with regard to public sewer and/or on-site septic systems for the proposed lots.
4. Ten (10) copies of Erosion and Sedimentation Control Plan complying with Section IX of these regulations, as amended.
5. Five (5) copies of Stormwater Runoff Projections complying with Section VIII of these regulations, as amended.
6. Preliminary Layout.
A. Consideration of Preliminary Layout – The Commission strongly recommends that the applicant submit a Preliminary Layout for preliminary discussion. The Preliminary Layout will be considered at a regular public meeting of the Commission art which it is on the agenda. The Commission may permit persons to be heard and written communications received.
B. Effect of Consideration of Preliminary Layout. The Purpose of the consideration of the Preliminary Layout is purely to provide preliminary guidance to the applicant, and to identify areas of concern or further study, so as to minimize delay, expense and inconvenience to the public, the applicant, and the Commission upon the future receipt, if any, of a formal application for subdivision. Neither the applicant nor the Commission shall be in any way bound by any statement made during such Preliminary Layout consideration, nor shall the statement of any Commission member be deemed to be an indication of prejudgment or prejudice, it being acknowledged by the applicant that the Commissions responses, like the request itself, are preliminary and subject to further change and refinement. There shall be no vote or other formal action on request for Preliminary Layout consideration, other than referrals to other municipal, State or Federal agencies for review and comment if deemed advisable.
3
III DEFINITIONS
Abutting Owner - The owner of property as indexed at the time of application with a contiguous boundary with the property being subdivided and/or with coextensive frontage on the other side of a Town or private road.
Applicant - Any person, firm, corporation, partnership, association or appointed agent having an interest in a parcel of land and who applies to the Commission for approval of a subdivision of such land. Consent shall be required from the owner of record of the premises.
Application - The application for the approval of a proposed subdivision or resubdivision of the land.
Buildable Area – A contiguous area consisting of 30,000sq ft, which shall contain a proposed location of a house, well and septic system, contain a minimum square of 100ft x 100ft, which shall not include wetlands or water courses, land show as floodway Zone A or Zone B on map entitled “Flood Insurance Rate Map, Town of East Hampton CT-effective October 16, 1979”. (effective Dec 6, 2003)
Certification - A signed, written approval by the Planning and Zoning Commission, its designated agent, or the Middlesex County Soil and Water Conservation District, that the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Plan complies with the applicable requirements of these Regulations.
Commission - The East Hampton Planning and Zoning Commission.
County Soil and Water Conservation District - The Middlesex County Soil and
Water Conservation District, established under Subsection (a) of Section 22a-315 of the General Statutes of Connecticut, as amended.
Developer - Synonymous with "applicant" as defined above.
Development - Any construction or grading activities to improved or unimproved real estate.
Dead-End Street - The portion of any road which only has one intersection with another road.
Disturbed Area - An area where the ground cover is destroyed or removed leaving the land subject to accelerated erosion.
Easement - A right, established in deed or other legal means, of one party to use a designated portion of a second party's land for a specific and limited purpose.
Erosion - The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by water, wind, ice or gravity.
Final Subdivision Plan - The final subdivision layout, plans, and all required supporting data that is presented to the Commission for approval.
Grading - Any excavating, grubbing, filling (including hydraulic fill), or stockpiling or earth materials or any combination thereof, including land in its excavated or filled condition.
Improvement - Any change to the existing conditions of the subdivision site for the purpose of complying with these regulations or rendering the site more suitable for development and/or habitation. As used in these regulations, improvements include, but are not limited to: construction and installation of roadways,
4
paved streets, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, utilities, street signs, monuments, shade trees, drainage facilities, erosion and sedimentation control measures, fire ponds, sewer and water systems, buildings, earth filling or removal, seeding, and grading.
Inspection - Means periodic review of sediment and erosion control measures shown on the certified soil erosion control measures shown on the certified soil erosion/ sediment control plan.
Landscaping - Changing, rearranging or adding to the original vegetation or scenery of a piece of land to produce an aesthetic affect appropriate to the use to which the land is put. It may include reshaping the land by removing the earth, as well as preserving the original vegetation or adding vegetation.
Lot - The unit or units into which land is divided with the intention of offering such units for sale, lease, conveyance or transfer; either as undeveloped or developed sites; regardless of how they are conveyed. Lot shall also mean parcel, site, or any similar term.
Lot, Building - A lot in compliance with East Hampton Zoning Regulations, capable of supporting a building, and on which all utilities required for habitation, such as water supply and sewage disposal, are available to the lot or on-site.
Maintenance Bond - A bond furnished to the Town by a developer that guarantees all subdivision improvements against the defective workmanship or materials for the period of one year.
Open Space - Property within a subdivision, designated to be deeded to the Town or other approved agency by the developer, or to be maintained by the developer and/or owner in an undeveloped state in a manner approved by the Commission, to be used for passive or active recreation; sediment, erosion
or stormwater control; or for preservation of natural features.
Owner - The property owner of record.
Performance Bond - A bond, furnished to the Town by the developer, to be used to complete subdivision if the developer does not complete the improvement as promised, as required, and/or indicated on the application.
Plan of Development - The Plan of Development is a master plan for the most desirable use of land for residential, recreational, commercial, industrial and other purposes; and contains the Commission's recommendations for population density, streets and other public ways, municipal development, public utilities, public housing and redevelopment; pursuant to Chapter 26 of the General Statutes of Connecticut, as amended.
Private Road - A road constructed and maintained for public travel which is not a Town road as defined above. Not including driveways serving one or two parcels. Right of Way -
A. That portion of land which is made available for the construction of roadways, ditches, drainage structures, and utility lines, and is to be conveyed to the Town in the case of a proposed Town road or conveyed to an association charged with maintenance of such right of way in the case of a private road. The form and content of the instrument of conveyance shall be subject to the approval of the Town Attorney at the option of the Commission.
5
B. The parcel of land between street property lines, which are defined as the limits of land dedicated, secured or reserved for public transportation uses. C. A narrow strip of land used to gain access to a parcel of land that does not have access to a street right of way. Right of way is usually owned in fee by the party having the right to use it.
Sediment - Solid material, either mineral or organic, that is in suspension, is transported or has been moved from its site of origin by erosion.
Soil - Any unconsolidated mineral or organic material of any origin.
Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Plan - A Scheme that minimizes soil erosion and sedimentation resulting from development and includes, but is not limited to, a map and a narrative.
Soil Types - The classification of soils in a development as defined and explained in the Soil Survey of Middlesex County, Connecticut, Soil Conservation Service, as amended.
Soils Map - The officially adopted soils classification of the Town of East Hampton, Connecticut, prepared by the Middlesex County Soils Conservation District and the Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service.
Special Flood Hazard Area - The land in the flood plain subject to one percent (1%) or greater chance of flooding in a given year. The Special Flood Hazard Area contains all zones "A" and "A1"-"A30" as designated in Flood Insurance Maps dated October 16, 1979 and as revised; and contains all land within the Flood Plain Zone as designated on the official Town of East Hampton Zoning Map.
Solar Access - The south wall of a structure being shade free seventy-five percent (75%) of the time from 9 A.M. to 3 P.M. on December 21st of each year.
Stabilization - Structural or vegetative treatment applied to an area in order to prevent soil erosion.
Street, Cul-de-sac – A Street with a single common ingress and egress and with a turnaround at the end. A local street having one end open to vehicular traffic and the other end permanently closed with a vehicular turnaround not to exceed 1,500ft in length (see appendix C). (effective 12/6/03)
Street, Cul-de-loop – A street that turns into and reconnects with its main axis with the center or island used for parking, open space purposes or additional development and not to exceed 1,500ft in length measured from the existing road, along the centerline of the road , equal distance to the furthest point of the Cul-de-loop (see appendix C). (effective 12/6/03)
Street, loop – A short independent street that usually terminates along the same collector street of is origin (see appendix C). (effective 12/6/03)
Street, stub – A non permanent dead end street intended to be extended in conjunction with the subdivision and development of the adjacent unplotted land. Access from the stub street shall be remitted only along the frontage of such street to the lots in the subdivision containing the stub street. A portion of a street or cross access drive used as an extension to an abutting property that may be developed in the future. (effective 12/6/03)
Subdivider - The owner of record at the time of filing of an approved subdivision plan. Not necessarily the owner of record at the time of application or approval.
6
Subdivision, Resubdivision - The definitions of "Subdivision" and "Resubdivision" shall be as defined in Section 8-18 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended. "Subdivision" means the division of a tract or parcel of land into three (3) or more parts or lots made subsequent to the adoption of Subdivision Regulations by the Commission, for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale or building development expressly excluding development for municipal, conservation, or agricultural purposes, and includes resubdivision. "Resubdivision" means a change in a map of an approved or recorded subdivision or resubdivision if such change (a) affects any street layout shown on such map, (b) affects any area reserved thereon for public use or (c) diminishes the size of any lot shown thereon and creates an additional building lot, if any of the lots shown thereon have been conveyed after the approval or recording of such map.
The following clarifications are offered to the above definition:
A. Subdivision Regulations first adopted May 1, 1949.
B. "Parcel or "tract" means as on record on May 1, 1949.
C. Division, when a subdivision or resubdivision, as defined above, runs with the land and not with any individual owner.
D. Placement of deed restrictions on property necessary to prove "conservation" use.
E. "Agricultural use" must be permitted by zoning and approved by the Assessor in accordance with Section 12-107c of the Connecticut General Statues, as amended, in order to be exempt from Subdivision Regulations.
F. Please note that Section "C" under the definition of "resubdivision" requires that an additional building lot be created in order to constitute a "resubdivision". Transfers of land between and among property owners can be made without Planning and Zoning Commission approval providing that the following conditions are met:
i. Street layout not affected
ii. Area reserved for public use not affected
iii. Remaining land meets applicable Zoning Regulations
iv. Remaining land contains sufficient buildable area to contain house, well and septic system (if applicable)
v. Correcting map filed in Town Clerk's office, which makes reference to original map
Town - The Town of East Hampton, Connecticut
Town Council - The East Hampton Town Council as outlined in Chapter II of the East Hampton Town Charter, effective November 6, 1973, amended November 6, 1987.
Town Manager - The chief executive officer of the Town as outlined in Chapter III of the East Hampton Town Charter, as amended.
7
Town Road –
A. Any road listed on the map entitled "Town Roads, Town of East Hampton, Connecticut", prepared by the Connecticut Department of Transportation, as may be amended from time to time.
B. Any historic road which the Town Council determines is a Town Road.
C. A road accepted as a Town Road by Town Council action.
Town Roads, Categories - A. Impassable - A road determined to be a Town Road under 40B or 40C above which is not passable to ordinary passenger vehicles at certain times of the year.
B. Unimproved - A road shown on the above map or a road determined to be a Town Road under 40B or 40C above which is passable at all times but lacks paved surface as specified in Town of East Hampton Road Standards, as amended.
C. Semi-Improved - A road shown on the above map or a road determined to be a Town Road under 40B or 40C above which is passable at all times, has a wearing surface somewhat in compliance with Town of East Hampton Road Standards, as amended, but does not substantially conform to the requirements of these regulations for new improved roads.
D. Improved Road - A road shown on the above map or a road determined to be a Town Road under 40B or 40C above which substantially complies with the requirements of these regulations for new improved roads.
E. New Improved Road - A road installed for a subdivider in conformance with these regulations.
Use - The purpose or activity for which a piece of land or its buildings is designed, arranged, or intended.
Zoning Enforcement Officer (ZEO) - The Commission's Zoning Enforcement Officer.
8
IV GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR THE SUBDIVISION OF LAND
1. No subdivision of land shall be made until a plan for such subdivision has received final approval from the Commission, and filed with the Town Clerk. 2. No street or utility construction shall be started until a plan for such construction has received either conditional or final approval from the Commission, and filed with the Town Clerk.
3. No plan for a subdivision with lots having the required frontage on an impassable, unimproved, or semi-improved Town Road shall be approved unless the applicant agrees to improve such Town road at all points along the road which provide the required frontage to lots in the subdivision to the
nearest intersection with an improved Town Road, in accordance with Section XII of these regulations, as amended, and the Town of East Hampton Road Standards, as amended.
4. The dimensions of each lot in a proposed subdivision shall conform to the requirements found in the Zoning Regulations.
5. Boundaries of inland wetlands and water courses shall be determined in the field by a certified soil scientist and approved by the Inland Wetlands and Water Courses Agency.
6. Each lot in a subdivision shall have a contiguous buildable area of 30,000 sq ft, which shall contain a proposed location of a house, well and septic system, contain a minimum square of 100ft x 100ft, which shall not include wetlands or watercourses, land shown as floodway Zone A or Zone B on map entitled “Flood Insurance Rate Map, Town of East Hampton, CT-effective October 16, 1979”. This section shall not apply to sewered lots in the R1 Zone only. (effective 12/6/03)
7. No subdivision lot will be approved where the proposed method of sewage disposal is an on-site system without a statement from the Town Sanitarian stating that the lot can support a septic system. Lots shall be tested in the area of the proposed leaching system and reserve area. Dates for such testing shall be as determined by the East Hampton Health Department.
8. New subdivision streets shall have underground utilities unless a waiver in writing is obtained from the utility company.
9. A public hearing will be required for all subdivisions.
10. The applicant must notify all abutting property owners by certified mail on a form provided by the Commission at least fifteen (15) days prior to the public hearing.
11. The Commission shall schedule all public hearings related to approval of subdivision applications. The commission will set a date for a public hearing on a subdivision application not more than sixty-five (65) days after the first regular meeting of the Commission at which the application was received. The applicant shall have submitted all required plans and documents for review no later than fourteen (14) days prior to the scheduled meeting at which the application is accepted.
12. If a proposed lot meets the requirements of Subsections 4 and 6 above, as amended, but does not meet the requirements of Subsection 7 above, as amended, the Commission shall require increased area and/or width and/or depth for such lot, in order to bring the lot into conformance with Section 7 above.
9
13. The applicant for subdivision approval has the option available to bring his/her proposal before a regularly scheduled meeting of the Planning and Zoning Commission for a preliminary discussion. The applicant must be included on the Commission's agenda no later than fourteen (14) days before its scheduled meeting date. The applicant and/or his/her representing agent is only required to appear at the meeting for which his/her proposal is to be discussed and present the basic concept of the proposal to the Commission. There is no requirement for the applicant to submit plans to the Commission before a preliminary discussion. The Commission will hear the applicant's proposal, question the applicant and discuss the proposal as it deems necessary. No decision of approval, approval with modifications or conditions or disapproval of the proposal shall be rendered by the Commission at a preliminary discussion.
14. The latest edition of State of Connecticut Department of Transportation Standards for Roads, Bridges and Incidental Construction, as amended, is incorporated into these Regulations.
15. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall approve, approve with modifications, approve with conditions or disapprove of a proposal for subdivision. If the Commission denies, disapproves or rejects an applicant for subdivision of land, it shall not be required to consider the proposal for six (6) months after the date of such denial.
16. The Zoning Regulations shall be made a part of these regulations as they may at times be amended.
17. Historical and archeological sites and natural diversity data base shall be made a part of the plan.
18. All requests for waivers shall be made a part of the plan.
19. The applicant shall show that all other required permits from other agencies, state or local have be applied for NYPDES, DOT, DOH, STP, etc. where applicable
20. The Commission highly recommends a preliminary discussion for all subdivisions over 5 lots.
21. The Commission may also require that an applicant provided plans for both a standard subdivision and an open space subdivision for preliminary review, where the Commission deems it would be beneficial to the Town.
22. The Commission may require the applicant to prepare an Impact Statement evaluating the effect on the environment and estimated traffic on the site, waste disposal, surface drainage, water supply and other issues if the Commission feels the community has a significant interest.
23. If the Site Development Plan involves an activity that may have a significant impact on public health, safety, or welfare, including but not limited to pollution, environmental impacts or traffic, the applicant will be required to submit additional information addressing that impact. If the Commission deems that a peer review of that information is warranted, or if the Commission deems that independent testing is warranted, the applicant will be required to pay the cost of that peer review or independent testing.
10
V SUBDIVISION MAP REQUIREMENTS
1. Subdivision maps shall meet the requirements of Section 7-31 of the General Statues of Connecticut, as amended, as to size and materials used.
2. Subdivision maps shall be prepared and certified by a Registered Land Surveyor and/or Civil Engineer under seal and licensed in the State of Connecticut.
3. Subdivision maps shall meet or exceed standards for a "Class A-2 Transit Survey" as defined by the Connecticut Technical Council, Inc.
4. The following minimum map scales are required:
A. For location map showing location of site in relation to existing town roads, streets and intersections, within two thousand feet (2,000') of the subdivision: scale of 1" = 1000'.
B. For cover sheet showing location of all lots (when required in the case of large parcels proposed for subdivision): scale of 1" = 100'.
C. For detail sheet or sheets: 1" = 40'.
D. For road details;
i. Horizontal: 1" = 40'
ii. Vertical: 1" = 4'
5. A record map shall be submitted containing the following information:
A. Boundary lines of the parcel being subdivided, showing any lots previously subdivided.
B. Proposed lot lines, areas, frontages, lot numbers, yard dimensions, percentage of lot coverage, building heights and distances from water courses.
C. Location of existing buildings within two hundred feet (200') of the subdivision.
D. Existing and proposed easements as well as an accurate outline of each property offered for public use.
E. The Title of the Subdivision; which shall not duplicate any title of any previous subdivision in East Hampton.
F. The name and address of the owner of the land to be subdivided, name and address if applicant is different from the owner.
G. Existing and proposed water bodies, water courses, right-of-ways including those for utilities, sewers, on or off-site drainage, open space, and existing wetland water bodies, water courses and wetlands to be shown as delineated by a qualified soil scientist, whose signature shall be included on the record map as approved by the Town of East Hampton Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Agency.
H. Names and addresses of all abutting property owners in their correct locations.
11
I. Approval block as follows: (same for subdivision site map as provided for in subsection 6.V).
J. A temporary note of required improvements to be removed from the Town Assessor's files when these requirements have been met.
6. The subdivision site map shall contain the following information:
A. Boundary lines of the parcel being subdivided, showing any lots previously subdivided.
B. Proposed lot lines, areas, frontage including all dimensions..
C. Site location map.
D. Contour lines. Requirements for topographic details are as follows:
i. Two foot (2') contours for the entire piece when such information is available in the office of the Commission.
ii. For proposed roads: Two-foot (2') contours taken in the field.
iii. For areas required by the Commission for health, welfare and safety reasons; two foot (2') contours taken in the field.
iv. For existing and proposed drainage ways, until clearly below proposed homes, leaching fields, and reserve areas; Two foot (2')contours to be taken in the field.
v. All other areas may be plotted using ten (10') foot contour as shown on the applicable quadrangle maps prepared by the United States Geological Survey at a scale of 1:24,000.
E. Wetlands and water courses as set in the field by a certified Soil Scientist and approved by the Inland Wetlands and Water Courses Agency.
F. Land shown as floodway, Zone "A", of Zone "B" on a map entitled "Flood Insurance Rate Map - town of East Hampton, Connecticut –Effective October 16, 1979", as amended.
G. Base flood elevation data.
H. Location of existing buildings on or within two hundred feet (200') feet of the subdivision.
I. Accurate location of proposed roads with right-of-ways, pavement widths and street lines on both sides of street right-of-ways indicating traveled way.
J. Existing and proposed drainage structures, indicating direction of flow.
K. Location of pins and monuments to be installed.
L. Existing and proposed easements described precisely with respect to location and limits on all easements and rights of way.
12
M. Location of proposed open space and table of requirements ratio.
N. Names of streets which shall not duplicate the names of any Previous street names in the Town. O. Existing and proposed utilities. P. Proposed driveways, leaching and reserve areas, and buildings. This requirement is not intended to "lock in" the builder to a particular area of the lot, but merely to demonstrate that the lot can be built upon. The Commission shall approve the location of driveways within cul-de-sacs.
Q. Zoning Classification and map, block and lot.
R. The name of the subdivision shall not resemble any other subdivision name in the Town too closely.
S. North Arrow, with reference to true, grid or magnetic North. If magnetic North, the date of the magnetic reading shall be noted.
T. Scale.
U. Date.
V. Approval block as follows:
Approved by the East Hampton Planning & Zoning Commission
Final approval ________________________________________
Chairman
Date: ___________________________
Expiration Date: ___________________
W. Name and address of record owner.
X. Name and address of subdivider.
Y. Name and address of designer, engineer, surveyor.
Z. Names and addresses of abutting property owners.
AA. Street intersections and driveways on both sides within two hundred feet (200') of subdivision boundaries.
BB. The following statement: Per Section 8-26c of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended, approval automatically expires_________________ if all physical improvements required by this plan are not completed by that date.
13
CC. The following statement: The Subdivision Regulations of the East Hampton Planning and Zoning Commission are a part of this plan. Approval of this plan is contingent on completion of the requirements of said regulations, excepting any variances or modifications made by the Commission. Any such variances or modifications are on file in the office of the Commission.
DD. Any work required on existing streets to substantially meet the standards of these Regulations, including proposed drainage improvements.
EE. Road layout and details of proposed new roads, meeting the standards of these Regulations, including methods of drainage.
FF. Area to be dedicated to open space.
GG. Location and data for all deep test pits and perc tests.
HH. Any information relating to the subdivision, construction features, terrain elements and/or uses to which the property of the subdivision is to be put that might be required by the Commission.
II. Location of wells and septic systems with their appropriate and respective arcs of influence on the terrain.
JJ. Existing and proposed natural and manmade features including any ledge outcrops and existing stone walls and fences within the subdivision.
KK. Location of buffer strips and screens where these are necessary, showing the type and size, species of shrubs, trees, and other plantings.
LL. A description of required improvements as in 5.J. above, to be a part of the permanent record on the Town's subdivision files.
MM. Narrative description and/or graphic illustration of any proposed energy conservation measures to be realized through solar site design techniques to include house orientation, street and lot layout, vegetation, natural and man- made topographical features and protection of solar access within the subdivision.
NN. Soil types for the entire parcel based on field investigations and/or the Soil Survey of Middlesex County, Connecticut, as amended.
OO. Any locations and plans for fire protection, dry hydrants, water tanks etc.
PP. Incomplete applications will not be reviewed by the staff, nor will they be placed on the Commission meeting agenda for action other than to be denied without prejudice.
The Commission may require the applicant to prepare an Impact Statement evaluating the effect on the environment and estimated traffic on the site, waste disposal, surface drainage, water supply and other issues if the Commission feels the community has a significant interest.
14
If the Site Development Plan involves an activity that may have a significant impact on public health, safety, or welfare, including but not limited to pollution, environmental impacts or traffic, the applicant will be required to submit additional information addressing that impact. If the Commission deems that a peer review of that information is warranted, or if the Commission deems that independent testing is warranted, the applicant will be required to pay the cost of that peer review or independent testing
15
VI OPEN SPACE AND RECREATIONAL AREAS
1. Definitions
For the purpose of this Section VI, the following terms shall be defined as follows:
a) Open Space: "Open Space" includes, but shall not be limited to: Land left in its natural, undisturbed stated; agricultural land for which development rights have been assigned or otherwise alienated in perpetuity; land areas and facilities for noncommercial, non-profit recreation; and similar land areas for wildlife habit, passive and active recreation, groundwater recharge, scenic preservation, and the like.
b) Improvement or Public Improvement: Any change or alteration to the existing conditions of the subdivision site: (i) for the purpose of complying with these Regulations, or any approval granted hereunder, or (ii) depicted on any Final Subdivision Plan approved hereunder, or (iii)rendering the site more suitable for development and/or habitation. As used in these Regulations, improvements include but are not limited to: Construction and installation of roadways, paved streets, curbs, gutters, utilities, street signs, monuments, shade trees and drainage facilities; erosion and sedimentation control measures; buildings, earth filling or removal, seeding and grading; the establishment or construction of park, playgrounds, recreational buildings, equipment, structures, fields, and similar facilities; and facilities designed to detain, redirect, store, or treat stormwater discharge.
c) Land: Real property, including improvements thereof and thereof, and all estates, interests, and rights therein of any kind or description, including, but not limited to, easements, rights-of-way and water and riparian rights, provided that these interests run in perpetuity with the subject real property.
d) Inland Wetland: Those areas designated and defined as inland wetlands by the Connecticut General Statues, as the same may be amended form time to time.
e) Watercourse: Those areas designed and defined as watercourses by the Connecticut General Statutes, as the same may be amended from time to time.
f) Commission: As used in this section, commission means the East Hampton Planning and Zoning Commission.
2. Disposition Factors
For any subdivision of land resulting in 5 or more lots, the Commission may require of the subdivider the disposition and official dedication of appropriately located and sized Open Space areas. In determining the appropriateness of an Open Space area disposition, the Commission shall consider the Plan of Conservation and Development objectives and map designations, the East Hampton Open Space Inventory, and the subject site's characteristics with respect to the following objectives: (I) Land described in the Plan of Conservation and Development as desirable open space; (ii) The conservation and protection of wildlife and natural or scenic resources including lakes, ponds, rivers, streams, streambelts, greenbelts, inland wetlands, aquifers, scenic views, hiking trails, significant woodlands, stands of unique or scenic trees, particular trees of special size or unusual type, ridges, ravines, stone fences and walls, ledge outcroppings and other unusual physical features; the protection of historic and archaeological sites; (iii) the expansion of
16
existing Open Space areas; and (iv) the meeting of neighborhood and/or community-wide recreational needs. In determining the location of Open Space, the Commission may consider potential for combination with existing or proposed Open Space on adjoining properties owned by any public or private institution.
3. Size and Location
Where Open Space disposition is deemed appropriate, the location and size of the required areas shall be determined by the Commission based on the site's value and importance in meeting the objectives cited in Section VI.2 and the scope of the subdivision proposal. Required Open Space shall be at the rate of 1 acre per 5 lots, and shall not be less than 15 percent of the total area of the subdivision, although a greater percentage may be accepted by the Commission. The Commission may waive the open space requirement entirely or adjust the amount required for that application by a 3/4 vote provided:
a) The resulting land would be too small to be practical as Open Space or has none of the characteristics set forth in Section VI.2, and
b) the parcel is not adjacent to other existing or planned Open Space or adjacent to other land that could be suitable as Open Space.
In determining the location of land to be reserved as Open Space or recreation land, the Commission may consider not only the tract or tracts of land to be immediately subdivided, but also any other adjacent tract or tracts owned, controlled or under agreement to buy or option to buy by the subdivider. Areas to be reserved as Open Space land shall be shown on the subdivision map. Roads, drainage and utility easements, and land set aside for drainage structures shall not be counted as part of the area calculation for open space.
4. Sites of Archaeological Significance
When subdivisions are located in areas of high Archaeological Sensitivity as indicated by the State Archeologist and/or in the East Hampton Open Space Inventory, applicants shall make written inquiry of the State Archaeologist to determine if there is evidence of sites of archaeological significance within the subdivision. Any significant sites shall, where possible, be left undisturbed and may be considered in meeting the minimum Open Space requirements of the Chapter.
5. Method and Procedure of Disposition
a. Method of Preservation, Entity having Title. The Commission shall determined the most appropriate method of disposition after considering, among other things, the relationship of the subject areas(s) and its specific characteristics to the Plan of Conservation and Development and the objectives cited in Section VI.2; the desirability and suitability of public access and use and the scope of the subdivision proposal. The following disposition options may be utilized by the Commission:
1) Conveyance in fee simple to the Town.
2) Conveyance in fee simple to the State of Connecticut.
3) Conveyance in fee simple to a land trust (with the concurrence of the subdivider).
4) Conveyance in fee simple to a homeowner's association.
5) Conveyance of conservation easements withor without public access
or
Conveyance of conservation or preservation restrictions, as defined in the Connecticut General Statutes §47-422, with or without pubic access, to the Town, the State, or a private, non-profit preservation entity.
17
6) Conveyance of a recreation easement to the Town, the State, or a
private, non-profit recreational entity.
7) Conveyance of an agricultural easement to the Town, the State or a
private, non-profit farm preservation entity.
8) Private ownership with appropriate severance and conveyance of development rights.
9.) Any combination of the above or any suitable alternative approved by
the Commission.
The applicant shall designate in its application which of the foregoing entities is proposed to own the Open Space, but, as part of the approval of such application, the Commission may modify such designation to require ownership by one of the public entities set forth above, provided, however, that the Commission may not require ownership by a entity described in Subsection (3), nor any conveyance to a private entity, which shall be approved only when consented to by the applicant. Furthermore, the Commission may modify any application so as to designate Open Space in locations other than those proposed. In determining whether the proposed entity is appropriate to own the proposed Open Space, or whether to require Open Space in locations different from those proposed, the Commission shall consider the following factors: (i) The ownership of any existing Open Space on adjacent properties, or the proximity to non-adjacent Open Space which might reasonably interconnect with the proposed Open Space in the future; (ii) the proposed use of Open Space for active or passive uses, and the extent to maintenance, supervision, or management required; (iii) the potential benefits which the Open Space might provide to residents of the Town or the State, if it were accessible to them; (iv) the size, shape, topography and character of the Open Space; (v) the recomemndations of the East Hampton Plan of Conservation and Development; and (vi) the reports or recommendations of any State or Town agencies, including, but not limited to, the Town Council, the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Agency, the Park and Recreation Commission, the Conservation Commision, the Midstate Regional Planning Agency, and the Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection.
b. Alteration of Open Space. Any excavation, filling, regrading or other alteration of Open Space; any construction or expansion of any building, structure or other improvements thereon; or any paving or surfacing of Open Space subsequent to the date of approval of the Subdivision, other than work required by the plans as approved, shall require and amendment to the Subdivision approval granted in accordance with the applicable Sections of these Regulations.
c. Evidence of Acceptance. The application whall contain written evidence, satisfactory to the Commission, from the entity proposed to own the Open Space, stating that it is willing to accept ownership of and resposibility for the preservation an maintenance of the Open Space.
d. Required Provisions. Regardless of the manner of ownership of the Open Space, the instrument of conveyance must include provisions satisfactory in form and substance to the Commission to insure that the Open Space is dedicated to its intended purpose in perpetuity.
e. Recording. At the time the approved Subdivision Plan is filed, all the provisions for Open Space must be on the filing.
f. Boundary Lines. Prior to any land clearing of the approved subdivision or approved building lot, the conservation easement shall be marked with oak stakes labeled "Conservation Easement" with waterproof ink and tied with red flags. These stakes are to be located at each change of boundary direction and at every 100-foot interval on straight-aways. All conservation easement corners shall be permanently marked with iron pins. In addition, sequentially numbered signs with the lettering "East Hampton Conservation Easement" shall be nailed to trees closest to the boundary line, at approximately 100 foot intervals. These signs shall be made of durable metal no less than 5 inches across. The sign shall be installed about 7 feet
18
above grade, using two 3-inch or greater aluminum nails, with the nails left protruding from tree trunks about 1-1/2 inches. Where no trees are suitable, 7-foot high metal posts with easement or conservation area signs attached will be used. The maintenance of these markings shall be the responsibility of the property owner. The Town of East Hampton will not allow any construction activities to begin without first verifying full compliance with this permanent marking and post requirement. Compliance with this requirement shall again be confirmed prior to issuing a "Certificate of Occupancy" for each property upon which a conservation easement exists.
6. Conditions of Open Spaces and/or Recreation Land
Open space shall have access suitable for its intended purpose. For open space that will be deeded in fee simple, or in common ownership, a right of way at least 25 feet wide shall be provided with adequate drainage and slope characteristics, prepared in a manner suitable for its intended purpose. Access can be from existing abutting Open Space land, if appropriate. The Commission may waive any of these requirements where access is less critical, such as in passive wildlife preserves or fragile ecosystems. The access way area shall not be counted as part of the calculation for open space.
Any subdivision that results in 20 lots or more shall provide land suitable for active recreation, which may consist of an open area suitable for organized sports or a hiking or walking trail with public access, at the discretion of the Commission.
Land to be provided as Open Space for the purpose of conservation and protection of wildlife and natural or scenic resources shall typically be left in a natural state by the subdivider. Except for improvement or maintenance as may be expressly permitted or required by the Commission. Open Space areas shall not be graded, cleared, or used as a repository for brush, stumps, earth, building materials or debris. The Commission may require that all or a part of the open space be prepared by the applicant in a manner suitable for its intended purpose. This may include clearing, grading, and seeding. The ratio of the area of proposed Open Space classified as inland wetlands to the total area of the Open Space set aside shall not exceed the ratio of all inland wetlands in the subdivision to the total area of the subdivision, unless it considers such areas to have special habitat or other environmental value.
When site improvements are required, they shall be clearly shown on the final subdivision maps or alternately on a separate site improvements plan and they shall be approved by the Commission prior to the filing of the subdivision plan.
7. Referrals
The Commission may refer for review and comment any subdivision plan and proposal for the provision of Open Space land to the Conservation Commission, Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Agency, Park and Recreation Commission, Middlesex County Soil and Water Conservation District, the Department of Environmental Protection, Midstate Regional Planning Agency, or any other appropriate agency.
Any Open Space suitable for active recreation shall be referred to the Parks and Recreation Commission for review and comment.
8. Performance Bonding
To ensure proper construction of any required improvements, the Commission shall require the subdivider to post a performance bond, letter of credit, or other suitable security an amount and with terms acceptable to the Commission. Unless modified by the Commission in accordance with these Regulations, all required
19
improvements of Open Space land shall be completed prior to the occupancy of fifty (50%) percent of the lots within the subdivision.
9. Property Owners’ Association
The Commission may, upon the request of the subdivider, permit the ownership and maintenance of the Open Space to be transferred to an association of property owners. Such transfer shall be in accordance with standards established by the Commission to include, but not limited to the following.
a) Creation of the association or corporation prior to the sale of any lot.
b) Mandatory membership in the association by all original lot owners and any subsequent owner; Non-amendable bylaws or other restrictions which require the association to maintain the land reserved for Open Space, park and playground purposes, with power to assess all members for all necessary costs.
c) Provisions/restrictions which will be perpetual and binding on all future property owners, and will not be affected by any change in land use.
10. Legal Transfer
Properly executed legal documents, including warranty deeds for any title transfers, shall be prepared in accordance with the provisions of this Section. Warranty deeds for open space shall be executed before the first lot is offered for sale or development is started. All warranty deeds shall be accompanied by a certificate of title, prepared by an attorney admitted to the bar of the State of Connecticut, certifying that such conveyance passes good title to the described property or property interest, and that it is free and clear of any defect or encumbrances, or that any such encumbrance has been subordinated to the conveyance. All documents must be acceptable to the Commission and its attorney, and shall refer to the subdivision maps by title. All warranty deeds for dedication of land to the Town shall be held in escrow by the Commission to be recorded on the Town Land Records upon acceptance by the Town Council. In the event that acceptance is rejected by the Town Council, the deed shall be returned and the subdivider shall return to the Commission for determination of an alternative means of preserving the Open Space. In no case, shall the acceptance of any deed by the Commission or an employee of the Town be deemed as acceptance of the Open Space by the Town. All Open Space preserved by means of easements or restrictions shall comply with the requirements of Connecticut General Statues §47-42(a) through §47-42(c).
10. Land Trade for Open Space Protection
If the applicant has adjoining property or property in another location, which the applicant would propose to be used as dedicated open space or Conservation Area, and which have been identified as being of significant environmental importance to the Town of East Hampton as described in Sec 23.2.5.e or has been identified as a sensitive or priority area under the Towns Plan of Development. (Recommended for conventional subdivision) the Commission may consider such a land trade as a credit toward any Open Space disposition requirements, but may not require such dedication. (effective 12/6/03)
20
VII ENERGY CONSERVATION
1. Any person submitting a plan for subdivision to the Commission shall include on the plan a statement demonstrating to the Commission that he/she has considered, in developing the plans using passive solar energy techniques as defined below:
A. Passive solar energy techniques mean site design techniques which maximize solar heat gain, minimize heat loss, and provide thermal storage within the building during the heating season and minimize heat gain and provide for natural ventilation during the cooling season.
B. Site design techniques shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
i. House orientation
ii. Street and lot layout
iii. Vegetation
iv. Natural and man made topographical features
v. Protection of solar access within the development.
C. The statement demonstrating the subdivider's/developer's consideration of using passive solar energy techniques, shall address each item in VII.1.B.i.-v. as these apply to the subdivision to be considered by the Commission and shall be included with those required materials for subdivision review by the Commission. The criteria for review of these items are outlined in VII 2.-7.
2. House orientation - Where topographic conditions, soil conditions, and lot layout allow, the long axis off all new dwelling units in subdivisions approved subsequent to the date of these regulations shall be oriented so that their longest axis faces within twenty (20) degrees of true south.
Where soil conditions allow, septic systems shall be located to the south of new dwelling units in subdivisions approved subsequent to the date of these regulations when no increase in costs is involved over locating the septic system in another area of the lot.
3. Street Layout - Where topographic conditions, soil conditions, and existing street networks permit, new streets shall be oriented within thirty (30) degrees of an east-west orientation.
4. Lot Layout - Where street layouts, topographic conditions and soil conditions permit, side lot lines shall be oriented within twenty (20) degrees of a north-south orientation.
5. Vegetation - No vegetation shall be planted on a lot in a subdivision made subsequent to the adoption of these Regulations which (a) blocks solar access to an existing solar collector on a building not located within the subdivision and/or (b) blocks solar access to the south wall of a dwelling located within the subdivision and/or (c) blocks sunlight twenty-five percent (25%) or more of the time on any day in the year from the south facing roof of a dwelling.
21
6. Natural and Man Made Topographical Features -
A. The use of earth berms on the north side of dwellings is encouraged.
B. Whenever possible, development shall be encouraged on south facing slopes and discouraged on north facing slopes.
7. Protection of Solar Access Within the Development - Where the above passive solar site design techniques are not practical due to topographic or other conditions, the developer shall explore the use of solar easements within the subdivision.
No building or structure shall be sited or constructed to interrupt the solar access of another building. Solar easements may prove necessary in order to effectively carry out and maintain the above solar consideration.
8. The Commission may waive any of the above requirements when the developer can demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Commission that strict application of this section will result in significant increases in the cost of housing to the buyer, after tax credits, subsidies and exemptions are
considered.
22
VIII STORMWATER RUNOFF CONTROL
1. The subdivider shall furnish projections of the increase of stormwater runoff created by the proposed development from the 2-year, 10-year, and 100-year frequency, 24-hour duration type III distribution storms, as computed in accordance with Technical Release #55, Urban Hydrology,
Engineering Division, Soils Conservation Service, USDA, January, 1975, as amended or by use of other methods conforming to sound engineering practice. Rational method shall not be used in computing drainage flows in drainage basin areas in excess of one thousand (1,000) acres.
2. Information to Be Submitted By Developer
A. All storm drainage calculation must be designed and certified by a registered Professional Engineer. The following date shall be submitted for review by the Public Works Department or its designated agent:
1. Topographic Contour Maps(s) showing drainage area(s).
2. Written description and computation including at least the following:
a. Method used to calculate storm water runoff.
b. Runoff characteristics of the property before and after development.
c. Drainage calculations.
d. Maximum velocity and quantity at point or points of discharge from the system.
e. Design calculations for all drainage piping and structures.
f. For detention structures:
(1) Inflow and outflow hydrographs for detention area.
(2) Maximum storage volume.
(3) Design of spillway or other measures for the release of excess flows beyond that of the design capacity of the structure.
(4) Flood routing of all runoff greater than the design capacity of the detention facility.
(5) Time which is required for the facility to drain completely.
(6) Materials used in construction of the facility.
(7) Methods employed to avoid clogging the discharge mechanism.
(8) Safety measures.
(9) Proposed landscaping and vegetative measures used to stabilize slopes and bottom surfaces.
3. No increase in peak flow from those storms referred to in 1. above shall be allowed unless downstream increases are compatible with an overall flood plain management system. The following items should be considered in determining whether increased peak flows are compatible with an overall flood plain management system:
A. The timing of peak flows from sub-watersheds
B. The increased duration of high flow rates
23
C. The stability of the downstream channels
D. The distance downstream that the peak discharges are increased.
4. When stormwater detention structures are required, they shall be designed so that the peak runoff after development shall not exceed nor be substantially less than the peak runoff prior to development for each of the above flood events. The subdivider shall be responsible for maintenance of the structure. The structures shall be designed and constructed in accordance
with good engineering practice. Basin(s) shall be designed for easy access for maintenance purposes and be provided with safety measures as needed.
24
IX SOIL EROSION/SEDIMENT CONTROL
All subdivision plans proposing the disturbance of soil or vegetation in an area shall include a plan of measures to be taken to minimize soil erosion and sedimentation of water courses and drainage systems.
1. Activities requiring a certified erosion and sediment control plan.
A soil erosion and sediment control plan shall be submitted with an application for subdivision when the disturbed area of such development is cumulatively more than one-half (1/2) acre.
2. Exemptions
A single-family dwelling that is not part of a subdivision of land shall be exempt from these soil erosion and sediment control regulations.
3. Erosion and Sediment Control Plan
A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan shall contain proper provisions to adequately control accelerated erosion and sedimentation and reduce the danger from stormwater runoff on the proposed site based on the best available technology in order to be eligible for certification.
Alternative principles, methods and practice may be used with prior approval of the Commission. Said plan shall contain but not be limited to:
A. Narrative describing:
i. The project;
ii. The schedule of grading and construction activities on the land including start-up and completion dates, sequence of grading and construction activities, removal and stockpiling of topsoil; the sequence for installation and/or application if soil erosion and sediment control measures and the sequence for final stabilization
of the project site;
iii. The design criteria for proposed soil erosion and sediment control measures and stormwater management facilities;
iv. The construction details for proposed soil erosion and sediment control measures and stormwater control facilities;
v. The installation and/or application procedures for proposed soil erosion and sediment control measures and stormwater management facilities, and person responsible for maintenance of these measures during construction;
vi. The operations and maintenance program for proposed soil erosion and sediment control measures and stormwater control facilities, as well as person and/or organization responsible for maintenance or permanent measures when project is completed.
B. A site plan map, at a minimum scale of 1" = 40' or at a scale acceptable to the Commission, showing:
25
i. The location of the proposed project and adjacent properties;
ii. The existing and proposed topography, including soil types, wetlands, water courses and water bodies;
iii. Any existing structures on the project site;
iv. Proposed area alterations, including cleared, excavated, filled or graded areas and proposed structures, utilities, roads and new property lines;
v. Location and design details for all proposed soil erosion and sediment control measures and stormwater management facilities;
vi. The sequence of grading and construction activities;
vii. The sequence for installation and/or application of soil erosion and sediment control measures;
viii. The sequence for final stabilization of the development site.
C. Any other information deemed necessary and appropriate by the applicant or requested by the Commission or its designated agent.
4. Minimum acceptable Standards
A. Plans for soil erosion and sediment control shall be developed in accordance with these Regulations using principles as outlined in the Connecticut Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control (2002), as amended. Soil erosion and sediment control plans shall result in a development that minimizes erosion and sedimentation during construction; is stabilized and protected from erosion when completed; and does not cause off-site erosion and/or sedimentation.
B. The minimum standards for individual measures are those in the Connecticut Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control (2002), as amended. The Commission may grant exceptions when requested by the applicant if they are based on technically sound reasons and accompanied by technically adequate alternatives.
C. The appropriate method from Chapter 9 of the Connecticut Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control (2002), as amended, shall be used in determining peak flow rates and volumes of runoff unless an alternative method is approved by the Commission.
5. Issuance of Denial of Certification
A. The Planning and Zoning Commission, or its agent(s) shall either certify that the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Plan, as filed complies with the requirements and objectives of this regulation or deny certification when the development proposal does not comply with these Regulations.
26
B. Nothing in these regulations shall be construed as extending the time limits for approval of any application under Chapters 124, 124A, or 126 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
C. Prior to certification, any plan submitted to the Town may be reviewed by the County Soil and Water Conservation District which may make recommendation concerning such plan, provided such review shall be completed within the thirty (30) days of the receipt of such plan.
D. The Commission may forward a copy of the development proposal to the Inland Wetlands and Water Courses Agency of the Town of East Hampton or consultant for review and comment.
6. Conditions Relating to Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control
A. The estimated costs of measures to control soil erosion and sedimentation, as specified in the certified plan, may be covered in a performance bond or other assurance acceptable to the Commission in accordance with the provisions specified under Section X of the
Regulations.
B. Site development shall not begin unless the soil erosion and sediment control plan is certified and those control measures and facilities in the plan scheduled for installation prior to site development are installed and functional.
C. Planned soil erosion and sediment control measures and facilities shall be installed as scheduled according to the certified plan.
D. All control measures and facilities shall be maintained in effective condition to ensure compliance with the certified plan.
7. Inspections shall be made by the Commission or its designated agent during development to ensure compliance with the certified plan and that control measures and facilities are properly performed or installed and maintained. The Commission may require the permittee to verify through progress reports that soil erosion and sediment control measures have been performed or
installed according to the certified plan and are being operated and maintained.
8. Enforcement
Enforcement of the soil erosion and sediment control regulations shall be the responsibility of the Planning and Zoning Commission or its designated agent. Failure to properly install and/or maintain any erosion and sediment control measures may result in the issuance of a "stop work order" until the problem is satisfactorily corrected.
27
X BONDING FOR PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS PROPOSED FOR TOWN ACCEPTANCE
1. The following methods of bonding for public improvements proposed for Town
acceptance are acceptable:
A. Cash
B. Surety company bond
C. Saving passbook endorsed to the Town, accompanied by a withdrawal slip made payable to the Town.
D. Certified, cashier's or bank check
E. With the approval of the Town Council, an assessment on each lot in the subdivision served by the proposed road, including, but not limited to the following stipulations:
i. Assessment on each lot in proportion to estimated cost of road as approved by Commission.
ii. Assessment to be collected if lot is sold, and placed in escrow.
2. In lieu of the above requirements, the subdivider may apply for conditional approval of a subdivision. In the case of conditional approval, the following statement must be added above the approval block:
"CONDITIONAL APPROVAL ONLY"
"This subdivision has received conditional approval per Section 8-25 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended. No lot shown can be sold or offered for sale until final approval has been received from the Planning & Zoning Commission, and a revised plan indicating said final approval
has been filed with the Town Clerk."
Either of the following is required prior to issuing final approval to a subdivision which has received conditional approval:
A. Cash, surety company bond, savings passbook, certified check, or assessment on each lot in the subdivision, as detailed above.
B. The actual construction, maintenance, and installation of any improvements or utilities required by the Planning and Zoning Commission, and acceptance of said improvements of utilities by the Town.
3. A maintenance bond, equal to not less than ten percent (10%) of the cost of improvements accepted by the Town, will be held for one year after said acceptance following the release of a performance bond (or portion thereof) or Town acceptance of improvements. The purpose of the maintenance bond is to protect the Town against defective workmanship, materials or design of
improvements.
28
A. The developer shall repair all defects in construction or operation during the period covered by the maintenance bond. The developer's failure to perform needed repairs within a reasonable time when so requested by the Town Council may result in the Town's undertaking the repairs and billing the developer for the cost of the repairs.
B. No performance bond shall be released until such time as said maintenance bond has been accepted by the Commission and posted with the Town of East Hampton.
C. No maintenance bond shall be approved by the Commission unless said bond is in a form acceptable to the Commission. The Commission reserves the right to add conditions to the bond which, in the opinion of the Commission, are deemed necessary to indemnify against defective workmanship, materials or design of the improvements.
D. No maintenance bond shall be released by the Commission until it has been in effect for a minimum of one year duration. The Commission shall release said bond only upon receipt of a favorable written report from the Superintendent of Public Works, Town Engineer, or another qualified source retained by the Town to inspect all approved and required public
improvements, indicating that all improvements are free of defective workmanship, materials, or design, or that any defects have been corrected to their satisfaction. This inspection is not intended to relieve the developer of liability for any cause of action arising from a covert or overt defect.
4. The amount of any bond shall be set by the Commission. Such bond shall include an amount to cover the escalation of construction and other costs for a two (2) year period. Every two (2) years the cost of the remaining work shall be reviewed and the bond amount adjusted to reflect current and projected construction and other costs.
5. As-Built plans are required with wither of the provisions for 1 and 2. above showing the location of all public improvements to include: monuments, utility lines, catch basins, drainage systems and structures, public sewage disposal systems and lines and all water lines which will serve the
subdivision. The As-Built plans must be substantially complete, correct, comprehensive and exact and submitted within sixty (60) days after completion of all public site improvements. All maps shall be of a scale of 1" = 40'.
6. A cash performance bond shall be posted for all erosion and sediment control measures, not covered as part of the maintenance bond in an amount approved by the Town Engineer for the subdivision requirements.
7. No more than 3 Bond reductions shall be allowed prior to Road acceptance with the approval of the Town Engineer. One before the first course of pavement, and two after the first course of pavement. No waivers of this section shall be allowed. (effective 12/06/03)
29
XI. APPROVAL
The following information is required prior to final approval of a subdivision, or conditional approval as outlined in Section X of these Regulations:
1. Statement from Town Engineer that proposed new roads conform to these Regulations.
2. Statement from Town Engineer that proposed improvements to existing Town Roads substantially conform to these regulations or that no improvements are necessary.
3. Statement from Water Pollution Control Authority approving design of public sewers or that a developer's agreement has been signed.
4. Estimated cost of proposed improvements, broken down as follows:
A. Estimated cost of public sewers.
B. Estimated cost of proposed roads and drainage.
C. Estimated cost of proposed improvements to existing roads and drainage.
D. Estimated cost of erosion and sedimentation controls.
5. Cash bond in the amount of 4D above.
6. Cash or Surety Company
7. Bonding method as outlined in Section X of these Regulations in the amount of 4B above.
8. Statement from Water Pollution Control Authority stating that developer has provided bonding for 4A above.
9. Proof of notification of abutting property owners as required in Section IV.10.
10. A warranty deed from the record owner to the Town covering land to be used for Town streets, open space or other public purposes, with transfer of title to such interest to be effective on date of Town acceptance. Such deed shall be free and clear of all encumbrances which would affect public use of the land.
11. Easements and rights-of-way over property to remain in private ownership.
12. Rights to drain into or across private property.
13. Documentation detailing method of maintenance of proposed private roads, dedicated open space, and other required improvements.
14. The subdivider shall give the Town a covenant running with the land which obligates the owner of the premises on which any runoff control facilities are located or are to be located, as required by Section VIII of these regulation as amended, to maintain said facilities, providing that if the owner fails to maintain such facilities as required by the Town, within two (2) weeks after
30
notification by certified mail of the need for such maintenance, that the Town shall have the right to enter on the premises, perform the necessary work, and place a lien on the property.
15. The subdivider shall give the Town the right to call the cash bond required for erosion and sedimentation control within one (1) week after notification by certified mail of the need for such erosion and sedimentation control. The subdivider shall give the Town the right to enter onto the property to perform the necessary work.
16. A certified Erosion and Sedimentation Control Plan, as required by Section IX of these Regulations, as amended.
17. Per Section 16-262M of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended, no subdivision will be approved which requires the expansion or creation of a community water company with fifteen (15) or more connections unless a certificate has been issued by the Department of Public Utility Control and the Department of Health Services to that company. The subdivider shall give the Commission, at the time of application, a signed statement that the provisions of Section 16-262M of the Connecticut General Statues and any amendments subsequent thereto which are effective before final approval of the subdivision plans, have no application to the water supply for the proposed subdivision. The Commission shall have the option of requiring a reaffirmation of said signed statement at the time final approval is to be granted. The subdivider is deemed to have agreed to hold the Town of East Hampton harmless with respect to any loss to the Town resulting from any misstatement concerning the application of said statute, whether made
negligently or otherwise.
18. "As-Built" plans for all physical improvements with a scale of 1" = 40' shall be submitted within sixty (60) days of completion of improvements as required by Section X.5 of these regulations, as amended.
19. A fire protection agreement with the Town of East Hampton Fire Department, its agents, representatives and officials, shall be signed by the developers and/or owners and filed with the Planning and Zoning Commission guaranteeing, the provision of those structures, devices, services and measures deemed necessary by the officials of the Town of East Hampton Fire Department for the protection of the subdivision and the safety of its inhabitants, abutting neighbors and adjacent Town property from the dangers of fire to health, safety and property.
31
XII ROAD STANDARDS
Work on existing or proposed roads shall be done by the subdivider, at the subdivider's own cost and expense, in accordance with the following standards and as provided for in the Town of East Hampton Road Standards, as amended:
1. General
A. No work shall proceed on any road improvements, either public or private, unless conditional or final approval has been received from the Commission, and a map filed with the Town Clerk.
B. No building permit will be issued for any building on a lot requiring public improvements unless the following conditions are met:
i. Lot served by proposed new Town road: Road accepted by Town Council and deed recorded.
ii. Lot served by proposed private road: Improvements accepted by Town Engineer and Town Manager.
iii. Improvements to existing Town Roads: Improvements accepted by Town Engineer and Town Manager.
C. Monuments shall be placed at points of curvature and tangency and angle points for all roads. Monuments shall be of stone or reinforced concrete four (4") inches square and four (4') feet long, with a brass or copper plug, drill hole, or cross marking the center of the square.
Monuments shall be set flush with finished grades, located by a registered surveyor, and installed by the subdivider.
D. Design speeds shall be in accord with Town of East Hampton Road Standards.
E. Upon suspension or completion of any portion of the work, all temporary structures, tools, equipment, and rubbish shall be removed. All ditches shall be filled. All sewers, drains, catchbasins and manholes cleaned and flushed, streets, walks, curbs and other structures cleaned and repaired, and the whole work left in a neat, clean and safe condition.
F. Street alignment and grades shall be in harmony with existing and proposed streets and the Plan of Development, as well as meeting the criteria of the Town of East Hampton Road Standards, as amended.
G. Street signs conforming to Town specification shall be provided and installed by the subdivider.
H. Street construction shall be sufficient to carry potential future traffic.
I. No plan for a subdivision with lots on a permanent dead-end street shall be approved if the total number of existing and proposed lots on said street exceeds twenty (20). The
32
Commission may waive this requirement when fifty percent (50%) of the existing and proposed lots on said street provide good solar access.
J. When sanitary or building storm sewers are constructed prior to house construction, the sanitary or storm sewer shall be installed to a point not less than six feet (6') within the lot. This provision shall also apply to underground utilities.
K. Right-of-ways and sidewalks for pedestrian travel may be required by the Commission between subdivisions or between a subdivision and public property.
L. Proposed cul-de-sacs streets or multiples thereof are intended to provide residential areas with adequate vehicular access while maintaining privacy and minimizing traffic flow. Therefore cul-de-sac streets shall not exceed 1,500 feet or service greater than 20 lots. Cul-de-sacs shall have a turn-around eighty feet (80’) in diameter, with a one hundred-foot (100’) diameter right of way. Cul de-sacs shall be measured from the nearest existing road intersection or a proposed road connection as shown on subdivision plans approved by the Commission The Commission may grant a waiver of these requirements by a three-quarter, (3/4) vote of its entire membership (effective 12/06/03).
1. The subject site exhibits adverse topographical conditions that require an extension of the maximum length to reasonably access and utilize the property.
2. Where the potential for future street extension is proposed and provided for in the application and such extension is deemed appropriate by the Commission.
3. Where such proposed extension is demonstrated to protect or preserve significant natural features present or proposed on the site.
4. Where in the opinion of the Commission, a waiver of these requirements will result in a demonstrable benefit to the Town.
In all cases where a request for a waiver is requested, a referral to the Chief of Police and the Fire Marshal shall be made and resulting commentary by these officials shall be considered by the Commission.
In all cases the Commission shall clearly and specifically state the reason/s for their decision to waive the provisions of these requirements.
M. The Commission reserves the right to require stricter road standards than those set forth when special or unusual project or site features make normal standards unworkable in whole or in part.
N. All new roads shall comply with Town of East Hampton Road Standards, as amended.
2. New Roads Proposed for Private Use
New roads proposed for private use shall meet the standards as new roads proposed for Town acceptance with the following exceptions:
33
A. Wearing surface. Not required, other than processed gravel or broken stone per Town of East Hampton Road Standards, as amended.
B. Sidewalks, wearing surface. Two (2") inches of bituminous concrete per Town of East Hampton Road Standards, as amended.
3. Subdivisions on Existing "Impassable" or "Unimproved" Town Roads.
A. Subdivisions on one side:
i. Subdivisions on one side of an existing "Impassable" or "Unimproved" Town Road as defined in Town of East Hampton Road Standards, as amended, shall improve said road to substantially conform to the standards for new roads proposed for Town acceptance to the nearest intersection with an improved Town Road with the following exception:
a. Wearing surface: On the prepared and approved base course there shall be spread one and one-half inches (1 1/2") of fine, finished gravel rolled with a ten (10) ton roller. Three (3) applications of bituminous surface material conforming to Town of East Hampton Road Standards, as amended, shall be applied.
ii. Subdivisions on the side opposite an unimproved or impassable Town Road as improved above shall require application of three inches (3") of bituminous concrete pavement, constructed in two courses per Town of East Hampton Road Standards, as amended, to the nearest intersection with an improved Town Road, as well as installation of required curbing.
iii. Subdivisions on both sides of an unimproved or impassable Town Road shall improve said road to substantially conform to the standards for new roads proposed for Town acceptance to the nearest intersection as defined in Section 14.212 of the General Statutes of Connecticut, as amended, with an improved
Town Road
4. Subdivisions on Existing "Semi-Improved" Town Roads
Subdivisions on existing "Semi-Improved" Town Roads shall make provisions to improve said Town Road to substantially conform to the standards for new roads proposed for Town acceptance to the nearest intersection with an improved Town Road.
5. Large Subdivisions on Unimproved, Impassable, or Semi-Improved Town Roads
Subdivisions on unimproved, impassable, or semi-improved Town Roads with twenty (20) or more lots, including proposed lots, shall be required to make improvements to the existing Town Road as listed in 3 and 4 above to more than one existing improved road, except in the case of subdivisions on roads intersecting with State highways.
6. Subdivisions on Existing Private Roads
No subdivision will be approved on an existing private road unless it meets either of the following requirements:
34
A. Road improved to substantially conform to standards for new private roads and association is set up to maintain said road.
B. Road improved to standards for new Town Road and accepted by Town.
35
XIII GENERAL
1. Waivers
Where the Commission finds that extraordinary hardships or practical difficulties may result from strict compliance with these Regulations, or the purpose of these Regulations may be served to a so that substantial justice may be done and public interest secured, if such waiver does not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of these Regulations. The Commission shall not grant a waiver unless it finds, based upon the evidence presented to it in each specific case, that:
a) The granting of the waiver will not have an adverse effect on adjacent property or on the public health or safety;
b) The conditions upon which the request for a waiver is based are unique to the property for which the waiver is sought and are not generally applicable to other land in the area;
c) Because of the particular physical surroundings, shape or topographical conditions of the specific property involved, a particular hardship to the applicant would result, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience, if the strict letter of these Regulations is carried out; and
d) The waiver will not in any manner vary the provisions of the Zoning Regulations or the intent of the Plan of Conservation and Development.
A request for any waiver shall be submitted in writing by the applicant at the time of application acceptance by the Commission. The request shall state fully the grounds for the request and all of the facts relied upon by the applicant.
A waiver must be approved by a vote of three-fourths of all the members of the Commission. The Commission shall state upon its records the reasons for which a waiver is granted in each case. In approving a waiver, the Commission may require such conditions that will, in its judgment, substantially conform to the objectives of the standards or requirements of these Regulations.
2. Repeal
A. Nothing herein is intended to modify the requirements of law with reference to the acceptance of streets by the Town of East Hampton. Nothing herein is intended to modify or control the construction, reconstruction, or extension of roads by the Town of East Hampton.
B. Any regulations pertaining to subdivider's roads or subdivisions which are inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed.
3. Validity
If any section, subsection, or phrase of these subdivision regulations is found for any reason to be invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portion of these Regulations.
4. Enforcement
These regulations shall be enforced by the Commission or its duly authorized representative.
5. Penalties
36
Any person, firm or corporation, making any subdivision of land without the approval of the Commission, shall be fined not more than the maximum fine allowed, pursuant to the General Statutes, for each lot sold, offered for sale or subdivided.
179
APPENDIX A - RECORDS RETENTION
A-1 ZONING
ITEM NUMBER
RECORD SERIES TITLE
MINIMUM RETENTION REQUIRED
DISPOSITON
Application, including supportive materials
for site plan (surveys, site layout)
M10-170
a.Approved
10 years after issuance of decision
destroy*
M10-175
b.Denied
2 years after denial decision
destroy*
M10-185
Certificate of Zoning Compliance
10 years after issuance of decision
destroy*
M10-195
Decision letter
10 years after issuance of decision
destroy*
M10-205
Legal notice - pre hearing/decision
1 year after decision
destroy*
(M1-255)
Tapes, audio - zoning matters
1 year after minutes are approved unless pending
destroy*
appeal, then retain 1 year after appeal decision
Zone changes
M10-215
a.Application
2 Years after issuance of decision
destroy*
M10-220
b.Maps
Permanent
maintain in municipality
(M1-215)
c.minutes of public meetings
Permanent
maintain in municipality
(including hearings)
M10-255
d.Supportive materials
2 years after issuance of decision
destroy*
M10-235
Zoning regulations ( as amended)
Permanent
maintain in municipality
ZONING REGULATIONS
* Municipalities may destroy records only after receiving the signed approval form (RC-075, rev. 2/2005) from the Office of the Public Records Administrator. Retention periods established on this schedule are minimum retention requirements. Records may be retained for longer periods of time.
180
A-2 SITE PLAN REVIEW
ITEM NUMBER
RECORD SERIES TITLE
MINIMUM RETENTION REQUIRED
DISPOSTION
Application, including supportive materials
for site plan ( survey, sites layouts)
M10-245
a. Approved
10 years after issuance of decision
destroy*
M10-250
b. Denied
2 years after denial of decision
destroy*
M10-260
Decision letter (includes site plan and survey
10 years after issuance of decision
destroy*
M10-270
Legal notices
1 year after appeal period
destroy*
(M1-215)
Minutes of public meetings (including hearings)
permanent
maintain in municipality
Performance bond for developer
M10-280
a. Copy
2 years after released
destroy*
M10-285
b. Original
return to developer after release
return
Site plan
M10-295
a. Built
Life of use
maintain in municipality
M10-300
b. Not executed
5 years from issuance of decision of approving
authority CGS 8-3 (i), (j)
M10-305
c. Revised site plans
Life of use
maintain in municipality
(M1-255)
Tapes, audio - zoning matters
1 year after minutes are approved unless pending
destroy*
appeal, then retain 1 year after appeal decision
ZONING REGULATIONS
* Municipalities may destroy records only after receiving the signed approval form (RC-075, rev. 2/2005) from the Office of the Public Records Administrator. Retention periods established on this schedule are minimum retention requirements. Records may be retained for longer periods of time.

TOWN OF EAST HAMPTON
INLAND WETLANDS
& WATERCOURSES AGENCY
REGULATIONS
Approved: 11/23/87 Effective: 12/31/87 Revised: 11/22/88 Revised: 10/15/90 Revised: 01/15/94 Revised: 06/15/97 Revised: 06/01/99 Revised: 05/15/02 Revised: 03/01/03 Revised: 08/04/03 Revised: 04/14/04 Revised: 02/15/05 Revised: 02/22/06 Revised: 08/28/09 Revised: 07/23/12
Revised: 09/01/17
Revised: 02/01/18
1
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Section Page
1. Title and Authority ............................................................................................. 1
2. Definitions ........................................................................................................ 2
3. Inventory of Regulated Areas ........................................................................... 6
4. Permitted and Nonregulated Uses .................................................................... 7
5. Activities Regulated by the State ...................................................................... 9
6. Regulated Activities to be Licensed .................................................................. 10
7. Application Requirements ................................................................................ 11
8. Application Procedures .................................................................................... 15
9. Public Hearings ................................................................................................ 16
10. Consideration for Decision ............................................................................... 17
11. Decision Process and Permit ............................................................................ 20
12. Action by Duly Authorized Agent & Fines ......................................................... 22
13. Bond and Insurance ........................................................................................ 23
14. Enforcement ..................................................................................................... 24
15. Amendments ..................................................................................................... 25
16. Appeals .............................................................................................................. 27
17. Conflict and Severance ..................................................................................... 28
18. Other Permits .................................................................................................... 29
19. Application Fees ................................................................................................ 30
20. Records Retention and Disposition ................................................................... 32
21. Effective Date of Regulations ............................................................................ 33
22. Property Revaluation ......................................................................................... 34
Appendix A: Site Plan and Environmental Information ........................................ 35
1
REGULATIONS TOWN OF EAST HAMPTON
INLAND WETLANDS AND WATERCOURSES AGENCY
SECTION 1 TITLE AND AUTHORITY
1.1 The inland wetlands and watercourses of the State of Connecticut are an indispensable and irreplaceable but fragile natural resource with which the citizens of the state have been endowed. The wetlands and watercourses are an interrelated web of nature essential to an adequate supply of surface and underground water; to hydrological stability and control of flooding and erosion; to the recharging and purification of groundwater; and to the existence of many forms of animal, aquatic and plant life. Many inland wetlands and watercourses have been destroyed or are in danger of destruction because of unregulated use by reason of the deposition, filling or removal of material, the diversion or obstruction of water flow, the erection of structures and other uses, all of which have despoiled, polluted and eliminated wetlands and watercourses. Such unregulated activity has had, and will continue to have, a significant, adverse impact on the environment and ecology of the state of Connecticut and has and will continue to imperil the quality of the environment thus adversely affecting the ecological, scenic, historic and recreational values and benefits of the state for its citizens now and forever more. The preservation and protection of the wetlands and watercourses from random, unnecessary, undesirable and unregulated uses, disturbance or destruction is in the public interest and is essential to the health, welfare and safety of the citizens of the state. It is, therefore, the purpose of these regulations to protect the citizens of the state by making provisions for the protection, preservation, maintenance and use of the inland wetlands and watercourses by minimizing their disturbance and pollution; maintaining and improving water quality in accordance with the highest standards set by federal, state or local authority; preventing damage from erosion, turbidity or siltation; preventing loss of fish and other beneficial aquatic organisms, wildlife and vegetation and the destruction of the natural habitats thereof; deterring and inhibiting the danger of flood and pollution; protecting the quality of wetlands and watercourses for their conservation, economic, aesthetic, recreational and other public and private uses and values; and protecting the state’s potable fresh water supplies from the dangers of drought, overdraft, pollution misuse and mismanagement by providing an orderly process to balance the need for the economic growth of the state and the use of its land with the need to protect its environment and ecology in order to forever guarantee to the people of the state, the safety of such natural resources for their benefit and enjoyment and for the benefit and enjoyment of generations yet unborn.
1.2 These regulations shall be known as the “Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations of the Town of East Hampton.
1.3 The Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Agency of the Town of East Hampton was established in accordance with an ordinance adopted May 8, 1974 and shall implement the purposes and provisions of these regulations and the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Act (Sections 22a-36 through 22a-45a inclusive of the Connecticut General Statutes as amended) herein after referred to as the Act in the Town of East Hampton.
1.4 These regulations have been adopted and may be amended, from time to time, in accordance with the provisions of the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Act and theses regulations.
1.5 The Agency shall enforce the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Act and shall issue, issue with terms, conditions, limitations or modifications, or deny permits for all regulated activities in the Town of East Hampton pursuant to sections 22a-36 to 22a-45s, inclusive, of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
2
SECTION 2 DEFINITIONS
2.1 As used in these Regulations:
Act means the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Act, sections 22a-36 through 22a-45a, inclusive, of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
Agency means the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Agency of the Town of East Hampton, and includes its authorized agents.
Bogs are areas distinguished by evergreen trees and shrubs underlain by peat deposits, poor drainage, and highly acidic conditions.
Buffer means a zone whose length is identical to the wetlands and watercourses boundary and whose width is one hundred feet (100’). (see also Regulated Activity)
Clear-cutting means the harvest of timber in a fashion which removes all trees down to a two inch diameter at breast height.
Commission Member means a member of the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Agency of the Town of East Hampton.
Commissioner of Environmental Protection means the commissioner of the State of Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection.
Conservation Easement means a document recorded in the land records in which an owner of land voluntarily agrees with the town permanently to refrain from doing certain things in an environmentally sensitive area that the owner might have been able to do were it not for the agreement.
Continual Flow means a flow of water which persists for an extended period of time; this flow may be interrupted during periods of drought or during the low flow period of the annual hydrological cycle, June through September, but it recurs in prolonged succession.
Deposit includes, but shall not be limited to fill, grade, dump, place, discharge or emit.
Designated agent means an individual(s) designated by the Agency to carry out its functions and purposes.
Discharge means emission of any water, substance, or material into wetlands or watercourses whether or not such substance causes pollution.
Disturb the natural and indigenous character of the wetland or watercourse means to alter the inland wetlands and watercourses by reason of removal or deposition of material, clearing the land, alternating or obstructing water flow, or pollution.
Essential to the farming operation means that the proposed activity is necessary and indispensable to sustain farming activities on an existing farm.
Farming means use of land for growing crops, raising livestock or other agricultural use.
Feasible means able to be constructed or implemented consistent with sound engineering principles.
General Statutes means the General Statutes of Connecticut.
3
Grazing means using any tract of land to feed or supply farm animals with grass or pasture; to tend farm animals; feeding or growing silage and herbage.
Intermittent Watercourses shall be delineated by a defined permanent channel and bank and the occurrence of two or more of the following characteristics: (a) evidence of scour or deposits of recent alluvium or detritus, (b) the presence of standing or flowing water for a duration longer than a particular storm incident, and (c) the presence of hydrophytic vegetation.
License means the whole or any part of any permit, certificate or approval or similar form of permission which may be required of any person by the provisions of these Regulations.
Made Land means an area where the surface soil and subsoil has been stripped away and where earth or trash is used as filler materials. It may also include areas where the soil profiles have been disturbed through leveling or other means.
Management Practice means a practice, procedure, activity, structure or facility designed to prevent or minimize pollution or other environmental damage or to maintain or enhance existing environmental quality. Such management practices include, but are not limited to: erosion and sedimentation controls; restrictions on land use or development; construction setbacks from wetlands and watercourses; proper disposal of waste materials; procedures for equipment maintenance to prevent fuel spillage; construction methods to prevent flooding or disturbance of wetlands and watercourses; procedures for maintaining continuous stream flows; confining construction that must take place in watercourses to times when water flows are low and fish and wildlife will not be adversely affected.
Marshes are areas with soils that exhibit aquic moisture regimes that are distinguished by the absence of trees and shrubs and the dominance of soft-stemmed herbaceous plants. The water tables in marshes is at or above the surface throughout the year and areas of open water six inches or more in depth are common, but seasonal water table fluctuations are encountered.
Material means any substance, solid or liquid, organic or inorganic, including, but not limited to: soil, sediment, aggregate, land, gravel, clay, bog, mud, debris, sand, refuse or waste.
Municipality means the Town of East Hampton, Middlesex County in the State of Connecticut.
Nurseries means land used for propagating trees, shrubs or other plants for transplanting, sale, or for use as stock for grafting.
Permit means the whole or any part of any license, certificate or approval or similar form of permission which may be required of any person by the provisions of these Regulations and the Act or other municipal, state and federal laws.
Permittee means the person to whom such permit has been issued.
Person means any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, organization or legal entity of any kind, including municipal corporations, governmental agencies or subdivisions thereof.
Pollution means harmful thermal effect or the contamination or rendering unclean or impure of any waters of the state by reason of any waste or other materials discharged or deposited therein by any public or private sewer or otherwise so as directly or indirectly to come in contact with any waters. This includes, but is not limited to, erosion and sedimentation resulting from any filling, land clearing or excavation activity.
Prudent means economically and otherwise reasonable in light of the social benefits to be derived from the proposed regulated activity provided cost may be considered in deciding what is
4
prudent and further provided a mere showing of expense will not necessarily mean an alternative is imprudent.
Regulated Activity means any operation within or use of a wetland or watercourse involving removal or deposition of material, or any obstruction, construction, alteration or pollution, of such wetlands or watercourses, or any operation within or of any land which may disturb the natural and indigenous character of a wetland or watercourse, but shall not include the specified activities in Section 4 of these regulations or Section 22a-40 of the Connecticut General Statutes.
Furthermore, any clearing, grubbing filling, grading, paving, excavating, construction, depositing or removing of material and discharging of storm water within the following upland review areas is a regulated activity: (1) within 100 feet measured horizontally from the boundary of any wetland or watercourse, (2) within 150 feet horizontally from the boundary of the Salmon River, (3) within 150 feet horizontally from the boundary of the Connecticut River, and (4) within 200 feet measured horizontally from the boundary of any wetland or watercourse within the Lake Pocotopaug Watershed Area. The Agency may rule that any other activity located within such upland review area or in any other non-wetland or non watercourse area is likely to impact or affect wetlands or watercourses and is a regulated activity.
Regulated Area means any wetland or watercourse as defined herein.
Remove includes, but shall not be limited to, drain, excavate, mine, dig, dredge, suck, grub or clear-cut timber, bulldoze, dragline or blast.
Rendering Unclean or Impure means any alteration of the physical, chemical or biological properties of any waters of the state, including, but not limited to, change in odor, color, turbidity or taste.
Significant impact (activity) means any activity, including but not limited to, the following activities which may have a major effect or significant impact.
1. Any activity involving a deposition or removal of material which will or may have a major effect or significant impact on the regulated area or on another part of the inland wetland or watercourse system.
2. Any activity which substantially diminishes the natural channel or may inhibit the natural dynamics of a watercourse system.
3. Any activity which substantially diminishes the natural capacity of an inland wetland or watercourse to: support desirable fisheries, wildlife, or other biological life; or to prevent flooding; supply water; assimilate waste; facilitate drainage, provide recreation or open space; or to perform other functions.
4. Any activity which is likely to cause or has the potential to cause substantial turbidity, siltation or sedimentation in a wetland or watercourse.
5. Any activity which causes a substantial diminution of flow of a natural watercourse or groundwater levels of the regulated area.
6. Any activity which is likely to cause or has the potential to cause pollution of a wetland or watercourse.
7. Any activity which damages or destroys unique wetland or watercourse areas or such areas having demonstrable scientific or educational value.
8. A significant decrease in the minimum low flow of a watercourse dur ing a period of drought.
9. An actual or potential pollution of a watercourse.
10. A reduction of natural capacity of an inland wetland or watercourse to support desirable biological life and/or function effectively as a part of the total wetland or watercourse ecosystem including loss of productivity of an economic resource.
11. A loss of unique area and/or undisturbed area as valuable for scientific or educational purposes in wetlands or watercourses.
12. Recreation which may result in destruction of wildlife habitat, scenic values or historic features.
13. A conflict with the community Plan of Development or Open Space Plan, which may result from incompatible uses, loss of amenities as applicable.
5
14. The creation of conditions which may adversely affect the health, welfare and safety of individual or the community, which may be incurred when unsuitable development occurs
6
in swamps, marshes, along watercourses, in areas subject to flooding or in any other wetlands.
Soil Scientist means an individual duly qualified in accordance with standards set by the Federal Office of Personnel Management.
Swamps are areas with soils that exhibit aquic moisture regimes and are distinguished by the dominance of wetland trees and shrubs.
Submerged Lands means those lands which are inundated by water on a seasonal or more frequent basis.
Town means the Town of East Hampton, Middlesex County in the State of Connecticut.
Upland Review Area (Wetbelt) for the purpose of these regulations: that area which is located 100’ from the edge of a wetland or watercourse as designated by a certified soil scientist.
Upland Review Area Disturbance construction activities within 100’ of a wetland or watercourse which shall include but not be limited to deposition and erosion of material, pollution of or alteration of the quality of any wetland or watercourse rendering it impure – in the Salmon River Protection Area, construction activities within 150’ of a wetland or watercourse shall constitute an upland review area.
Waste means sewage or any substance, liquid, gaseous, solid or radioactive, which may pollute or tend to pollute any of the wetlands or watercourses of the Town.
Watercourses means rivers, streams, brooks, waterways, lakes, ponds, marshes, swamps, bogs and all other bodies of water, natural or artificial, vernal or intermittent, public or private, which are contained within, flow through, or border upon the Town or any portion thereof not regulated pursuant to Section 22a-28 through 22a-35 inclusive. Intermittent watercourses shall be delineated by a defined permanent channel and bank and the occurrence of two or more of the following characteristics: A(A) Evidence of scour or deposits of recent alluvium of detritus. (B) the presence of standing or flowing water for a duration longer than a particular storm incident, and
(C) the presence of hydrophytic vegetation.
Wetlands means land, including submerged land as defined in this section not regulated pursuant to Sections 22a-28 through 22a-35 inclusive, of the Connecticut General Statutes, which consists of any of the soil types designated as poorly drained, very poorly drained, alluvial and flood plain by the National Cooperative Soils Survey, as it may be amended from time to time, of the Soil Conservation Service of the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA). Such areas may include filled, graded, or excavated sites which possess an aquic (saturated) soil moisture regime as defined by the USDA cooperative Soil Survey.
Wetlands Enforcement Officer (WEO) means the person so designated by the Town Manager, and the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Agency.
7
SECTION 3
INVENTORY OF REGULATED AREAS
3.1 The map of regulated areas entitled “Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Map, Town of East Hampton, Connecticut” delineates the general location of boundaries of inland wetlands and the general location of watercourses. Copies of this map are available for inspection in the office of the Town Clerk or the Inland Wetlands Agency. In all cases, the precise location of regulated areas shall be determined by the actual character of the land, the distribution of wetland soil types, and location of watercourses. Such determinations shall be made by field inspection and testing conducted by a certified soil scientist where soil classifications are required by any other qualified individual(s).
3.2 Any property owner who disputes the designation of any of his or her land as a regulated area on the Inland Wetland and Watercourses Map, may petition the Agency to change the designation in accordance with Section 15 of these Regulations. All petitions for a map change shall be submitted in writing and shall include all relevant facts and circumstances which support the change. The petitioner shall provide proof that the designation is inapplicable. The Agency may require such property owner to provide an accurate delineation of regulated areas in accordance with Section 15 of these Regulations.
3.3 To prove himself/herself exempt from these Regulations, the Agency may require the applicant to present documentation by a soil scientist that the land in question, or a portion of it, does not have a soil survey type classified by the National Cooperative Soils Survey as poorly drained, very poorly drained, alluvial or flood plain. Further, the Agency may require the applicant to present documentation by a botanist that the land in question, or a portion of it, does not contain vegetation associated with swamps, bogs or marshes as listed in the U.S. EPA New England Wetlands Plant Identification and Protection Laws, as amended.
3.4 Documentation, by a certified soil scientist, and satisfactory to the Agency, includes a map of the land in question, or that portion of it on which the designation of regulated soils is disputed, on a A-2 transit survey level of accuracy, on which the flag location defining the boundaries of the regulated soil types are depicted, along with their appropriate numerical designations, to which the certified soil scientist’s signature and licensed surveyor’s signature and seal are affixed.
3.5 The Agency and/or its designated agent(s) shall monitor and maintain general surveillance of all regulated areas to ensure that no unauthorized regulated activities occur.
3.6 The Agency and/or its designated agent(s) shall inventory and maintain current records of all regulated areas to ensure that no unauthorized regulated activities occur.
3.7 The Agency or its designated agent(s) shall inventory and maintain current records of all regulated areas within the Town. The Agency may amend the map from time to time as information becomes available relative to more accurate delineation of wetlands and watercourses within the Town. Such map amendments are subject to the public hearing process outlined in Section 15 of these Regulations. Any person may petition for an amendment to the map. Petitioners shall bear the burden of proof for all requested map amendments. Such proof may include, but not be limited to, aerial photography, remote sensing imagery, resource mapping or other available information. Such map amendments are subject to the public hearing process outlined in Section 15 of these Regulations.
8
SECTION 4 PERMITTED USES
4.1 The following operations and uses shall be permitted in inland wetlands and watercourses, as of right:
a. Grazing, farming, nurseries, gardening and harvesting of crops and farm ponds of three acres or less essential to the farming operation, and activities conducted by or under the authority of, the Department of Environmental Protection for the purposes of wetland or watercourse restoration or enhancement or mosquito control. The provisions of this subdivision shall not be construed to include:
i. Road construction or the erection of buildings not directly related to farming operation; or
ii. Relocation of watercourses with continual flow; or
iii. Filling or reclamation of wetlands or watercourses with continual flow; or
iv. Clear-cutting of timber except for the expansion of agricultural cropland; or
v. Mining of top soil, peat, sand, gravel or similar material from wetlands or watercourses for purposes of sale.
b. a residential home (i) for which a building permit has been issued or (ii) on a subdivision lot, provided the permit has been issued or the subdivision has been approved by the planning and zoning commission as of the effective date of promulgation of the municipal regulations pursuant to subsection (b) of Section 22a-42a, or as of July 1, 1974, which ever is earlier, and further provided no residential home shall be permitted as of right pursuant to this subdivision unless the building permit was obtained on or before July 1, 1987. Any person claiming a use of wetlands permitted as a right under this subdivision shall document the validity of said right by providing a certified copy of the building permit and a site plan showing proposed and existing topographic contours, house and well locations, septic system, driveway, approval dates or other necessary information to document his or her right hereunder;
Such individual shall not be relieved of the obligation to take measures reasonably required by the Agency to minimize damage to such wetlands.
c. boat anchorage or mooring, not to include dredging or dock construction;
d. uses incidental to the enjoyment or maintenance of residential property, such property defined as equal to or smaller than the largest minimum residential lot size permitted anywhere in the municipality (provided that in any town where there are no zoning regulations establishing minimum residential lot sites, the largest minimum lot site shall be two acres) and containing a residence. Such incidental uses shall include maintenance of existing structures and landscaping, but shall not include removal or deposit of significant amounts of material from or into a wetland or watercourse, or diversion or alteration of a watercourse.
e. construction and operation by water companies as defined by Section 16-1 of the Connecticut General Statutes, or by municipal water supply systems as provided for in Chapter 102, of the Connecticut General Statutes, of dams, reservoirs and other facilities necessary to the impounding, storage, and withdrawal of water in connection with public water supplies except as provided in Sections 22a-401 through 22a-410 of the Connecticut General Statutes.
f. maintenance relating to any drainage pipe which existed before the effective date of any municipal regulations adopted pursuant to Section 22a-42a of the Connecticut General
9
Statutes, or July 1, 1974, whichever is earlier, provided such pipe is on property which is zoned as residential but which does not contain hydrophytic vegetation. For purposes of this section, “maintenance” means the removal of accumulated leaves, soil, and other debris, whether by hand or machine, while the pipe remains in place.
4.2 The following operations and uses shall be permitted as non-regulated uses in wetlands and watercourses, provided they do not disturb the natural and indigenous character of the wetland or watercourse by removal or depostition of material, alteration or obstruction of water flow or pollution of the wetland or watercourse:
a. conservation of soil, vegetation, water fish, shellfish, and wildlife. Such operation or use shall include, but is not limited to, minor work to control erosion, or to encourage proper fish, wildlife, and silviculture management practices.
b. outdoor recreation including the use of play and sporting areas, golf courses, field trails, nature study, hiking, horseback riding, swimming, skin and scuba diving, camping, boating, water skiing, trapping, hunting, fishing and shellfishing, and cross country skiing where otherwise legally permitted and regulated.
c. The installation and maintenance of a dry hydrant by or under the authority of a municipal fire department, provided such dry hydrant is only used for firefighting purposes and there is no alternative access to a public water supply. For purposes of this section, “dry hydrant” means a non-pressurized pipe system that:
i. is readily accessible to fire department apparatus from a proximate public road,
ii. provides for the withdrawal of water by suction to such fire department apparatus, and
iii. is permanently installed into an existing lake, pond or stream that is a dependable source of water.
4.3 All activities in wetlands and watercourses involving filling, excavation, dredging, clear cutting, clearing, or grading or any other alteration or use of a wetland or watercourse not specifically permitted by this Section shall require a permit from the Agency in accordance with Section 6 of these Regulations.
4.4 To carry out the purposes of this Section, any person proposing to carry out a permitted or nonregulated operation or use of a wetland or watercourse which may disturb the natural and indigenous character of the wetland or watercourse shall, prior to commencement of such operation or use, notify the Agency on a form provided by it, and provide the Agency with sufficient information to enable it to properly determine that the proposed operation and use is a permitted or nonregulated use of the wetland or watercourse. The Agency or its designated agent shall rule that the proposed operation or use is a permitted or a nonregulated use or operation or that a permit is required. Such ruling shall be in writing and shall be made no later than the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Agency following the meeting at which the request was received. The designated agent for the Agency may make such ruling on behalf of the Agency at any time.
10
SECTION 5
ACTIVITIES REGULATED BY THE STATE
5.1 In addition to any permit or approval required by the Agency, the Commissioner of Environmental Protection shall regulate activities in or affecting wetlands or watercourses subject to the following jurisdiction:
a. Construction or modification of any dam pursuant to Sections 22a-401 through 22a-410 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
b. Construction, encroachment or placement of any obstruction within stream channel encroachment lines pursuant to Sections 22a-342 through 22a-349 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
c. Construction or placement of any structure or obstruction within the tidal, coastal or navigable waters of the State pursuant to Section 22a-359 through 22a-363 or in designated tidal wetlands pursuant to Section 22a-28 through 22a-35 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
d. Diversion of water including withdrawals of surface or groundwater in excess of fifty thousand gallons per day or any piping, culverting, channelization, relocation, damming or other alteration of the location of flow of any surface waters of the state where the tributary watershed area above the point of such alteration is 100 acres or larger, pursuant to sections 22a-365 through 22a-378 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
e. Discharges into the waters of the State pursuant to Section 22a-430 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
f. Discharge of fill or dredged materials into the wetlands and watercourses of the State pursuant to Section 401 of the Federal Clean Water Act, as amended, for activities regulated by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers under Section 404 of the Federal Clean Water Act.
5.2 The Commissioner of Environmental Protection shall have exclusive jurisdiction over regulated activities and other activities, in or affecting wetlands or watercourses, undertaken by any department, agency or instrumentality of the State of Connecticut, except any local or regional Board of Education, pursuant to sections 22a-39 or 22a-45a of the Connecticut General Statues;
(1) after an advisory decision on such license or permit has been rendered to the Commissioner by the wetland agency or the municipality within which such wetland is located or (2) thirty-five
(35) days after receipt by the Commissioner of such application, whichever occurs first.
5.3 The Commissioner of Environmental Protection shall have exclusive jurisdiction over tidal wetlands designated and regulated pursuant to Sections 22a-28 through 22a-35 of the Connecticut General Statutes.
5.4 The Commissioner of Environmental Protection shall have exclusive jurisdiction over activities authorized under section 22a-402 or a dam construction permit issued by the Commissioner of Environmental Protection under sections 22a-403 or 22a-41 of the Connecticut General Statutes. Any person receiving such dam repair of removal order or dam construction permit shall not be required to obtain a permit from a municipal wetlands agency for any action necessary to comply with said dam order or to carry out the activities authorized by said dam permit.
11
SECTION 6
REGULATED ACTIVITIES TO BE LICENSED
6.1 No person shall conduct or maintain a regulated activity without first obtaining a permit for such activity from the East Hampton Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Agency.
6.2 The Agency shall regulate any operation within or use of a wetland or watercourse involving removal or deposition of material, or any obstruction, construction, alteration or pollution of such wetlands or watercourses and any other regulated activity, unless such operation or use is permitted or non-regulated pursuant to Section 4 of these Regulations.
6.3 Any person found to be conducting or maintaining a regulated activity without the prior authorization of the Agency, or violating any other provision of these Regulations, shall be subject to the enforcement proceedings and penalties prescribed in Section 14 of these Regulations and any other remedies as provided by law.
12
SECTION 7 APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS
7.1. Any person intending to conduct a regulated activity or to renew or amend a permit to conduct such activity, shall apply for a permit on a form provided by the Agency. The application shall contain the information described in this section and any other information the Agency may reasonably require. Application forms may be obtained in the offices of the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Agency.
7.2 If an application to the Town of East Hampton Planning, Zoning, or Planning and Zoning commission for subdivision or resubdivision of land involves land containing a wetland or watercourse, the applicant shall, in accordance with Section 8-3(g), 8-3c, or 8-26, as applicable, of the Connecticut General Statutes, submit an application for a permit to the Agency in accordance with this Section, no later than the day the application is filed with such planning, zoning, or planning and zoning commission.
7.3 All applications shall be filed for receipt with the Clerk of the Agency. The application fee shall be paid at the time of filing. A schedule of fees shall be available at the Offices of the Agency and the Town Clerk. All applications shall contain such information that is necessary for a fair and informed determination of the case.
7.4 The application shall contain such information as is necessary for affair and informed determination thereon by the Agency.
7.5 A prospective applicant may request the Agency to determine whether or not a proposed activity involves a significant impact activity.
7.6 All applications shall include the following information in writing or on maps or drawings:
a. the applicant’s name, home and business mailing addresses and telephone numbers;
b. the owner’s name, mailing address and telephone number and written consent of the land owner if the applicant is not the owner of the land upon which the subject activity is proposed;
c. applicant’s interest in the land;
d. the geographical location of the land which is the subject of the proposed activity and a description of the land in sufficient detail to allow identification of the inland wetlands and watercourses, the area(s) (in acres or square feet) of wetlands or watercourse to be disturbed, soil type(s) and wetland vegetation;
e. a location map of a scale no smaller than 1:1000’ scale, showing neighboring roads;
f. the purpose and a description of the proposed activity and proposed erosion and sedimentation controls and other management practices and mitigation measures which may be considered as a condition of issuing a permit for the proposed regulated activity including, but not limited to, measures to (1) prevent or minimize pollution or other environmental damage, (2) maintain or enhance existing environmental quality, or (3) in the following order of priority: restore, enhance and create productive wetland or watercourse resources;
g. alternatives considered and subsequently rejected by the applicant and why the alternative as set forth in the application was chosen; all such alternatives shall be diagramed on a site plan or drawing;
h. a site plan of A-2 level accuracy or other survey type showing existing and proposed conditions in relation to wetlands and watercourses on the property and identifying any further activities associated with, or reasonably related to, the proposed regulated activity
12
which are made inevitable by the proposed regulated activity and which may have an impact on wetlands or watercourses may be required;
i. names and addresses of adjacent property owners;
j. statement by the applicant that the applicant is familiar with all the information provided in the application and is aware of the penalties for obtaining a permit through deception or through inaccurate or misleading information;
k. authorization for the members and agents of the Agency to inspect the subject land, at reasonable times, both before and after a final decision has been issued;
l. a completed DEP reporting form; the Agency shall revise or correct the information provided by the applicant and submit the form to the Commissioner of Environmental Protection in accordance with section 22a-39-14 of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies;
m. submission of the appropriate filing fee based on the fee schedule established in Section 19 of these regulations.
n. alternatives considered by the applicant and why the proposal to alter wetlands set forth in the application was chosen;
o. application must be made by the property owner of record or the duly authorized agent of such owner, such authorization to be in writing and to accompany the application. The application is to be submitted in six (6) copies. The non-owner applicant must specify his/her interest in the property referred to in the application and attach documentary proof.
p. an evaluation of the significance of the wetlands on the property, specifically noting any vernal pools or other environmentally sensitive areas.
7.7 If the proposed activity involves a significant activity as determined by the Agency, additional information, based on the nature and anticipated effects of the activity, including but not limited to the following, is required:
a. site plans for the proposed activity and the land which will be affected thereby which show existing and proposed conditions, wetland and watercourse boundaries, land contours, boundaries of land ownership, proposed alterations and uses of wetlands and watercourses and other pertinent features of the land and the proposed activity, prepared by a professional engineer, land surveyor, architect or landscape architect licensed by the State, or by such other qualified person;
b. engineering reports and analyses and additional drawings to fully describe the proposed activity including any filling, excavation, drainage or hydraulic modifications to watercourses and the proposed erosion and sedimentation control plan;
c. mapping of soil types consistent with the categories established by the National Cooperative Soil Survey of the U.S. Natural Resources Conservation Service; the wetlands shall be delineated in the field by a soil scientist and the soil scientist’s field delineation shall be depicted on the site plans;
d. a description of the ecological communities and function of the wetlands or watercourses involved with the application and the effects of the proposed activity on the communities and wetland functions;
e. a description of how the applicant will change, diminish, or enhance the ecological communities and functions of the wetlands or watercourses involved in the application, and each alternative, and a description of why each alternative provided was deemed neither feasible nor prudent;
13
f. analysis of chemical or physical characteristics of any fill material; and
g. management practices and other measures designed to mitigate the impact of the proposed activity.
7.8 The applicant shall certify whether:
a. any portion of the property on which the regulated activity is proposed is located within 500 feet of the boundary of an adjoining municipality;
b. traffic attributable to the completed project on the site will use streets within the adjoining municipality to enter or exit the site;
c. sewer or water drainage from the project site will flow through and significantly impact the sewage or drainage system within the adjoining municipality; or,
d. water run-off from the improved site will impact streets or other municipal or private property within the adjoining municipality.
7.9 10 copies of all application materials shall be submitted to comprise a complete application unless an applicant is otherwise directed, in writing, by the Agency.
7.10 Any application to renew or amend an existing permit shall be filed with the Agency in accordance with Section 8 of these regulations at least sixty-five (65 days prior to the expiration date of the permit. Any application to renew or amend such an existing permit shall contain the information required under section 7 of these regulations provided:
a. the application may incorporate the documentation and record of the prior application;
b. the application shall describe the extent of work completed at the time of filing and the schedule for completing the activities authorized in the permit;
c. the application shall state the reason why the authorized activity was not initiated or completed within the time specified in the permit;
d. the application shall describe any changes in facts or circumstances involved with or affecting wetlands or watercourses or use of the land for which the permit was issued;
e. the Agency may, prior to the expiration of a permit, accept an untimely application to renew such permit if the authorized activity is ongoing and allow the continuation of work beyond the expiration date if, in its judgment, the permit is likely to be renewed and the public interest or environment will be best served by not interrupting the activity;
7.11 Any application to renew a permit shall be granted upon request of the permit holder unless the Agency finds that there has been a substantial change in circumstances which requires a new permit application or an enforcement action has been undertaken with regard to the regulated activity for which the permit was issued provided no permit may be valid for more than ten years.
7.12 The Agency and the applicant may hold a pre-application meeting to determine whether or not the proposed application involves a significant activity. Whenever possible the determination relative to significant activities should be made at the pre-application meeting.
14
7.13 If the proposed activity involves a significant activity as determined by the Agency and defined in Section 2 of these Regulations, additional information, based on the nature and anticipated effects of the activity, including but not limited to the following is required:
a. Site plan for the proposed use or operation and the property which will be affected, which show existing and proposed conditions, wetland and watercourse boundaries, land contours, boundaries of land ownership, proposed alterations and uses of wetlands and watercourses and other pertinent features of the development prepared by a licensed surveyor, professional engineer or landscape architect registered in the State of Connecticut or by such other qualified person;
b. Engineering reports and analyses and additional submissions to fully describe the proposed project and any filling, excavation, drainage or hydraulic modifications to watercourses and the proposed erosion and sedimentation control plan;
c. Mapping of soil types consistent with the categories established by the National Cooperative Soil Survey of the U.S. Soil Conservation Service (the Agency shall require the applicant to have the wetlands delineated in the field by a soil scientist and that the field delineation be incorporated into the site plans);
d. Description of the ecological communities and function of the wetlands or watercourses involved with the application and the effects of the proposed regulated activities on the communities and wetland functions;
e. Description of how the applicant will change, diminish, or enhance the ecological communities and functions of the wetlands or watercourses involved in the application, and with each alternative a description of why each alternative provided was deemed neither feasible nor prudent;
f. Analysis of chemical or physical characteristics of any material;
g. Measures which mitigate the impact of the proposed activity. Such measures include, but are not limited to, plans or actions which avoid destruction or diminution of wetland or watercourse functions, recreational uses and natural habitats, which prevent flooding, degradation of water quality, erosion and sedimentation and obstruction of drainage or which otherwise safeguard water resources.
15
SECTION 8 APPLICATION PROCEDURES
8.1 All applications shall be submitted to the East Hampton Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Agency.
8.2 Any person wishing to undertake a regulated activity within a regulated area shall apply for a permit to the Agency. (See Appendix for an information checklist)
8.3 The Agency shall, in accordance with Connecticut General Statutes Sections 8-7b and 22a-42b. notify the clerk of any adjoining municipality of the penency of application, petition, appeal, request or plan concerning any project on any site in which:
a. any portion of the property affected by a decision of the agency is within five hundred (500) feet of the boundary of an adjoining municipality;
b. a significant portion of the traffic to the completed project on the site will use streets within the adjoining municipality to enter or exit the site;
c. a significant portion of the sewer or water drainage from the project site will flow through and significantly impact the drainage or sewerage system within the adjoining municipality; or,
d. water run-off from the improved site will impact streets or other municipal or private property within the adjoining municipality.
8.4 The Agency shall, in accordance with Connecticut General Statutes Section 22a-42b, notify the clerk of any adjoining municipality of the pendency of any application to conduct a regulated activity when:
a. any portion of the property on which the regulated activity is proposed is located within 500 feet of the boundary of an adjoining municipality;
b. a significant portion of traffic to the completed project on the site will use streets within the adjoining municipality to enter or exit the site;
c. a significant portion of the sewer or water drainage from the project site will flow through and significantly impact the sewage or drainage system within the adjoining municipality; or,
d. water run-off from the improved site will impact streets or other municipal or private property within the adjoining municipality.
Notice of pendency of such application shall be made by certified mail, return receipt requested and shall be mailed within seven (7) days of the date of receipt of the application.
8.5 The date of receipt of any application shall be the day of the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Agency immediately following the day of submission to the Agency, provided such meeting is no earlier than three (3) business days after receipt, or thirty-five (35) days after such submission, whichever is sooner.
8.6 The date of receipt of any application shall be the day of the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Agency immediately following the day of submission to the Agency, or thirty-five (35) days after such submission, whichever is sooner (effective 2/06).
8.7 At any time during the review period, the applicant shall provide such additional information as the Agency may reasonably require. Requests for such additional information shall not stay the time limitations as set forth in subsection 11.2 of these regulations.
8.8 All applications shall be open for public inspection.
8.9 Incomplete applications may be denied.
16
SECTION 9 PUBLIC HEARINGS
9.1 The Agency shall not hold a public hearing on an application unless the Agency determines that the proposed activity may have a significant impact on wetlands or watercourses or a petition signed by at least twenty-five persons who are eighteen years of age or older and are residents of the Town of East Hampton requesting a hearing is filed with the Agency not later than fourteen days after the date of receipt of such application or the Agency finds that a public hearing regarding such application would be in the public interest. The Agency may issue a permit without a public hearing provided no petition provided for in this section is filed with the Agency not later than fifteen (15) days (on or before the fourteenth day) after the date of receipt of the application. All applications and maps and documents relating thereto shall be open for public inspection. Any person may appear and be heard at any public hearing (effective 2/06).
9.2 Notice of the public hearing shall be published at least twice at intervals of not less than two (2) days, the first not more than fifteen (15) days and not fewer than tens (10) days, and the last not less than two (2) days before the date set for the hearing in a newspaper having a general circulation in each town where the affected wetland and watercourse is located.
9.3 The applicant shall provide notice of the application to each owner of property abutting the land which is the subject of the hearing, as their names and addresses appear in the most recent Grand List of the Town Assessor, said notice to be by United States First Class mail, evidenced by a Certificate of mailing issued by the United States Postal Service. Said notice shall be mailed no less than ten (10) days prior to the initial public hearing, and the Applicant shall submit to Town Staff, at least five (5) days prior to such hearing, evidence of such mailing. The Applicant need not provide similar notice of any continuation of the initial public hearing. (Effective 07/23/2012)
9.4 A sign or signs shall be placed on the subject property, at least fifteen (15) days prior to the meeting at which the proposal shall be heard. The sign(s), which shall be no less than ten (10 square feet in area, shall state the following: THIS PROPERTY IS SUBJECT TO ACTION BY THE INLAND / WETLANDS WATERCOURSES AGENCY, the date, the time and place of the meeting. Such sign(s) shall be of durable material(s), have black lettering two (2) inches (minimum), white background, shall be located so as to be clearly visible from the public street nearest the front of the property. Signs posted shall be no further apart along public streets than five hundred (500) feet. All signs shall be placed at the applicant’s expense and shall be removed immediately after the appeal period (fifteen (15) days) has expired.
9.5 In the case of any application which is subject to the notification provisions of subsection 8.3 of these regulations, a public hearing shall not be conducted until the clerk of the adjoining municipality(ies) has received notice of the pendency of the application. Proof of such notification shall be entered into the hearing record.
17
SECTION 10 CONSIDERATION FOR DECISION
10.1 The Agency may consider the following in making its decision on an application:
a. The application and its supporting documentation.
b. Public comments, evidence and testimony.
c. Reports from other agencies and commissions including but not limited to the Town of East Hampton;
1. Conservation Commission
2. Planning, Zoning, or Planning and Zoning Commissions
3. Building Official
4. Health Officer
d. The Agency may also consider comments on any application from the Middlesex County Soil and Water Conservation District, the Midstate Regional Planning Agency or other regional organizations (i.e. Council of Elected Officials); agencies in adjacent municipalities which may be affected by the proposed activity, or other technical agencies or organizations which may undertake additional studies or investigations.
e. Non-receipt of comments from agencies and commissions listed in Sections 10.1.c and d above within the prescribed time shall neither delay nor prejudice the decision of the Agency.
10.2 Criteria for Decision. In carrying out the purposes and policies of sections 22a-36 to 22a-45, inclusive, of the Connecticut General Statues, including matters relating to regulating, licensing and enforcing of the provisions thereof, the Agency shall take into consideration all relevant facts and circumstances, including but not limited to:
a. The environmental impact of the proposed regulated activity on wetlands or watercourses;
b. The applicant’s purpose for, and any feasible and prudent alternatives to, the proposed regulated activity which alternatives would cause less or no environmental impact to wetlands or watercourses;
c. The relationship between the short-term and long-term impacts of the proposed regulated activity on wetlands or watercourses and the maintenance and enhancement of long-term productivity of such wetlands or watercourses;
d. Irreversible and irretrievable loss of wetland or watercourse resources which would be caused by the proposed regulated activity, including the extent to which such activity would foreclose a future ability to protect, enhance or restore such resources, and any mitigation measures which may be considered as a condition of issuing a permit for such activity including, but not limited to, measures to:
(1) Prevent or minimize pollution or other environmental damage;
(2) Maintain or enhance existing environmental quality, or
(3) In the following order of priority: Restore, Enhance and Create productive wetland or watercourse resources.
e. The character and degree of injury to, or interference with, safety health, or the reasonable use of property which is caused or threatened by the proposed regulated activity, and;
f. Impacts of the proposed regulated activity on wetlands or watercourses outside the area for which the activity is proposed and future activities associated with or reasonably related to,
18
the proposed regulated activity which are made inevitable by the proposed regulated activity and which may have an impact on wetlands or watercourses.
10.3 In the case of an application which received a public hearing finding by the Inland Wetlands Agency that the proposed activity may have a significant impact on wetlands or watercourses, a permit shall not be issued unless the Agency finds on the basis of the record that a feasible and prudent alternative does not exist. In making this finding, the Agency shall consider the facts and circumstances set forth in Section 10.2 of these Regulations. This finding and the reasons therefore shall be stated in the record in writing.
10.4 In the case of an application which is denied on the basis of a finding that there may be feasible and prudent alternatives to the proposed regulated activity which have less adverse impact on wetlands or watercourses, the Agency shall propose on the record in writing the types of alternatives which the applicant may investigate provided this section shall not be construed to shift the burden from the applicant to prove that he is entitled to the permit or to present alternatives to the proposed regulated activity.
10.5 For purposes of this section, (1) “wetlands or watercourses” includes aquatic, plant or animal life and habitats in wetlands or watercourses, and (2) “habitats” means areas or environments in which an organism or biological population normally lives.
10.6 A municipal Inland Wetlands Agency shall not deny or condition an application for regulated activity in an area outside wetlands or watercourses on the basis of an impact or effect on aquatic, plant or animal life unless such activity will likely impact or affect the physical characteristics of such wetlands or watercourses.
10.7 In reaching its decision on any application after a public hearing, the Agency shall base its decision on the record of that hearing. Documentary evidence or other material not in the hearing record shall not be considered by the Agency in its decision. A conclusion that a feasible and prudent alternative does not exist does not create a presumption that a permit should be issued. The applicant has the burden of demonstrating that his application is consistent with the purposes and policies of these regulations and sections 22a-36 to 22a-45, inclusive, of the Connecticut General Statutes.
19
20
SECTION 11
DECISION PROCESS AND PERMIT
11.1 The Agency, or its duly authorized agent acting pursuant to Section 12 of these regulations, may, in accordance with Section 10 of these regulations, grant the application as filed or grant it upon other terms, conditions, limitations or modifications of the regulated activity designed to carry out the purposes and policies of the Act, or deny the application. Such terms may include any reasonable measures which would mitigate the impacts of the regulated activity and would (a) prevent or minimize pollution or other environmental damage, (b) maintain or enhance existing environmental quality, or (c) in the following order of priority: restore, enhance and create productive wetland or watercourse resources.
11.2 No later than sixty-five (65) days after receipt of an application, the Agency may hold a public hearing on such application. At such hearing any person or persons may appear and be heard and may be represented by agent or attorney. The hearing shall be completed within thirty-five
(35) days of its commencement. Action shall be taken on application within thirty-five (35) days after completion of a public hearing. In the absence of a public hearing, action shall be taken on applications within sixty-five (65) days from the receipt of the application. The applicant may consent to one or more extensions of the periods specified in this subsection, provided the total extension of all such periods shall not be for longer than sixty-five (65) days, or may withdraw such application. The failure of the Agency to act within any time period specified in this subsection, or any extension thereof, shall not be deemed to constitute approval of the application. An application deemed incomplete by the Agency shall be withdrawn by the applicant or denied by the Agency.
11.3 The Agency shall state upon its record the reasons and bases for its decision and, in the case of any public hearing, such decision shall be based fully on the record of such hearing and shall be in writing and shall, as applicable and in accordance with section 10 of these regulations, incorporate a statement relative to the consideration of feasible and prudent alternatives.
11.4 The Agency shall notify the applicant and any person entitled to such notice of its decision within fifteen (15) days of the date of the decision by certified mail, return receipt requested, and the Agency shall cause notice of its order in the issuance or denial of the permit, to be published in a newspaper having general circulation in the town wherein the inland wetland or watercourse lies. In any case in which such notice is not published within such fifteen (15) day period, the applicant may provide for the publication of such notice within ten (10) days thereafter.
11.5 If an activity authorized by the inland wetland permit also involves an activity or project which requires a zoning or subdivision approval, special zoning permit or variance or special exception, under sections 8-3(g), 8-3c, or 8-26 of the Connecticut General Statutes, the Agency shall file a copy of the decision and report on the application with the Town of East Hampton Planning and Zoning Commission within fifteen (15) days of the date of the decision thereon.
11.6 Any permit issued by the Agency for the development of land for which an approval is required under Section 8-3, 8-25 or 8-26 of the Connecticut General Statutes shall be valid for five (5) years provided the Agency may establish a specific time period within which any regulated activity shall be conducted. Any permit issued by the Agency for any other activity shall be valid for not less than two (2) years and not more than five (5) years. Any such permit shall be renewed upon request of the permit holder unless the Agency finds that there has been a substantial change in circumstances which requires a new permit application or an enforcement action has been undertaken with regard to the regulated activity for which the permit was issued provided no permit may be valid for more than ten (10) years.
11.7 No permit issued by the Agency shall be assigned or transferred without the written permission of the Agency.
21
11.8 In granting, denying or limiting any permit for a regulated activity the Agency shall state upon the record the reason for its decision. Evidence not in the hearing record shall not be considered by the Agency in its decision.
11.9 In granting a permit the Agency may grant the application as filed or grant it upon such terms, conditions, limitations or modifications of the regulated activity designed to carry out the policy of Sections 22a-36 to 22a-45a, inclusive of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
11.10 Any application to amend an existing permit shall be filed with the Agency in accordance with Section 8 of these regulations at least sixty-five (65) days prior to the expiration date of the permit. Any application to amend such an existing permit shall contain the information required under Section 7 of these regulations provided:
a. The application may incorporated the documentation and record of prior application.
b. The application shall describe the extent of work completed at the time of filing and the schedule for completing the activities authorized in the permit.
c. The application shall state the reason why the authorized activity was not initiated or completed within the time specified in the permit.
d. The application shall describe any changes in facts or circumstances involved with or affecting wetlands or watercourses or use of the land for which the permit was issued.
e. The Agency may, prior to the expiration of a permit, accept an untimely application to renew such permit if the authorized activity in ongoing and allow the continuation of work beyond the expiration date if, in its judgment, the permit is likely to be renewed and the public interest or environment will be best served by not interrupting the activity.
11.11 General provisions in the issuance of all permits:
a. The Agency has relied in whole or in part on information provided by the applicant and if such information subsequently proves to be false, deceptive, incomplete or inaccurate, the permit may be modified, suspended or revoked.
b. All permits issued by the Agency are subject to and do not derogate any present or future rights or powers of the Agency or the Town of East Hampton, and convey no rights in real estate or material nor any exclusive privileges, and are further subject to any and all public and private rights and to any federal, state, and municipal laws or regulations pertinent to the subject land or activity.
c. If the activity authorized by the Agency’s permit also involves an activity which requires zoning or subdivision approval, special permit, variance, or special exception under section 8.3(g), 8-3c, or 8-26 of the Connecticut General Statutes, no work pursuant to the wetland permit may begin until such approval is obtained.
d. The constructing the authorized activities, the permittee shall implement such management practices consistent with the terms and conditions of the permit as needed to control storm water discharges and to prevent erosion and sedimentation and to otherwise prevent pollution of wetlands and watercourses.
e. Permits are not transferable without the prior written consent of the Agency.
22
SECTION 12
ACTION BY DULY AUTHORIZED AGENT
12.1 Action by agent:
a. The Agency may delegate to its duly authorized agent the authority to approve or extend an activity that is not located in a wetland or watercourse when such agent finds that the conduct of such activity would result in no greater than a minimal impact on any wetlands or watercourses provided such agent has completed the comprehensive training program developed by the Commissioner of Environmental Protection pursuant to section 22a-39 of the Connecticut General Statutes. Requests for such approval shall be made on a form provided by the Agency and shall contain the information listed under Section 7.6 of these regulations and any other information the Agency may reasonably require. Notwithstanding the provisions for receipt and processing application prescribed in Section 8, 9 and 11 of these regulations, such agent may approve or extend such an activity at any time.
b. Any persons receiving such approval from such agent shall, within ten days of the date of such approval, publish, at the applicant’s expense, notice of the approval in a newspaper having a general circulation in the town wherein the activity is located or will have an effect. Any person may appeal such decision of such agent to the Agency within fifteen days after the publication date of the notice and the Agency shall consider such appeal at its next regularly scheduled meeting provided such meeting is no earlier than three business days after receipt by such Agency or its agent of such appeal. The Agency shall, at its discretion, sustain, alter, or reject the decision of its agent or require an application for a permit in accordance with Section 7 of these regulations.
12.2 Fines for violation:
a. As provided and allowed under the provision of Section 22a-42g of the General Statutes of Connecticut, as amended, the Town of East Hampton hereby establishes a fine of up to
$1,000.00 for any person who violates the provisions of the wetlands regulations of the Town of East Hampton.
b. Any police officer or other person authorized by the Town Council (ie: Town Manager) of the Town of East Hampton may issue a citation to any person who commits such a violation. The Town of East Hampton has adopted the hearing procedure set forth under the provisions of Section 7-152c of the General Statutes of Connecticut with reference to the issuance of any such citation. The Town Council of the Town of East Hampton has authorized appropriate rules of procedure pursuant to the implementation of the hearing procedure set forth in said section.
c. Any fine collected by a municipality pursuant to this regulation shall be deposited into a special fund designated by the Town of East Hampton to receive said fine. Any monies deposited in said fund shall thereafter be available to be used by the Town of East Hampton for the purpose of furthering and implementing the policies of the State of Connecticut inland wetlands laws, and the inland wetland regulations of the Town of East Hampton. Permitted expenditures shall included, but not be limited to, wetland delineation, protection, enhancement, and creation. It shall also include administration costs, including professional consulting fee and fees incurred by the Agency for review of applications before the Agency, and for determination of violations and enforcement of the inland wetland regulations.
(for Fining Guidelines see Appendix A)
23
SECTION 13 BOND AND INSURANCE
13.1 The applicant, upon approval of the application and prior to issuance of a permit may, at the discretion of the Agency, be required to file a bond with such surety in such amount and in a form approved by the Agency.
13.2 The bond shall be conditioned on compliance with all provisions of these terms, regulations, conditions, and limitations imposed on the permit.
13.3 When a performance bond is required by the Agency, a non-refundable amount representing three percent (3%) of the bond amount shall be paid to the Town upon approval of the permit for regulated activities in a regulated area. This amount is to be utilized for engineering and inspection services to insure that performance measures are designed and implemented in accordance with these Regulations. This bonding clause requirement may be assigned to other relative agencies as applicable.
13.5 The following methods of bonding for erosion control or regulated activities are acceptable; cash, check, savings passbook.
24
SECTION 14 ENFORCEMENT
14.1 The Agency may appoint an agent or agents to act in its behalf with the authority to inspect property, except a private residence, and issue notices of violation or cease and desist orders and carry out other actions or investigations necessary for the enforcement of these regulations. In carrying out the purposes of this section, the Agency or its duly authorized agent shall take into consideration the criteria for decision under section 10.2 of these regulations.
14.2 The Agency or its agent may make regular inspections, at reasonable hours, of all regulated activities for which permits have been issued under these regulations.
14.3 If the Agency or its designated agent(s) find that any person is conducting or maintaining any activity, facility or condition which is in violation of the Act or these Regulations, the Agency or its duly authorized agent may:
a. Issue a notice of violation to such person conducting such activity or maintaining such facility or condition, stating the nature of the violation, the jurisdiction of the Agency, and prescribing the necessary action and steps to correct the violation including, without limitation, halting work in wetlands or watercourses. The Agency may request that the individual appear at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Agency to discuss the unauthorized activity, and/or provide written reply to the notice or file an application for the necessary permit. Failure to carry out the action(s) directed in a notice of violation may result in issuance of the order provided in subsection 14.3.b of this section or other enforcement proceedings as provided by law.
b. Issue a written order by certified mail, return receipt requested, to such person conducting such activity or maintaining such facility or condition to immediately cease such activity or to correct such facility or condition. Within ten (10) calendar days of the issuance of such order the Agency shall hold a hearing to provide the person an opportunity to be heard and show cause why the order should not remain in effect. The Agency shall consider the facts presented at the hearing and within ten (10) days of the completion of the hearing notify the person by certified mail that the original order remains in effect, that a revised order is in effect, or that the order has been withdrawn.
The Agency shall publish notice of its decision in a newspaper having general circulation in the municipality. The original order shall be effective upon issuance and shall remain in effect until the Agency affirms, revises or withdraws the order. The issuance of an order pursuant to this subsection shall not delay or bar an action pursuant to Section 22a-44(b) of the General Statutes, as amended.
c. Suspend or revoke a permit if it finds that the permittee has not complied with the terms, conditions or limitations set forth in the permit or has exceeded the scope of the work as set forth in the application including application plans. Prior to revoking or suspending any permit, the Agency shall issue notice to the permittee, personally or by certified mail, return receipt requested, setting forth the facts or conduct which warrants the intended action. The Agency shall hold a public hearing to provide the permittee an opportunity to show that it is in compliance with its permit and any and all requirements for retention of the permit. The permittee shall be notified of the Agency’s decision to suspend, revoke, or maintain a permit by certified mail within fifteen (15) days of the date of its decision. The Agency shall publish notice of the suspension or revocation in a newspaper having general circulation in the municipality.
14.4 As-Built plans of any work done under a permit issued by the Agency may be required by the Agency.
25
SECTION 15 AMENDMENTS
15.1 These regulations and the official Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Map for the Town of East Hampton may be amended, from time to time, by the Agency in accordance with changes in the Connecticut General Statutes or regulations of the State Department of Environmental Protection, or as new information regarding soils and inland wetlands and watercourses becomes available.
15.2 An application filed with the Agency which is in conformance with the applicable inland wetlands regulations as of the date of the receipt of such application shall not be required thereafter to comply with any change in inland wetland regulations, including changes to setbacks and buffers, taking effect on or after the date of such receipt and any appeal from the decision of such agency with respect to such application shall not be dismissed by the Superior Court on the grounds that such change has taken effect on or after the date of such receipt. The provisions of this section shall not be construed to apply (1) to the establishment, amendment, or change of boundaries of inland wetlands or watercourses or (2) any change in regulations necessary to make such regulations necessary to make such regulations consistent with the provisions of the Act as of the date of such receipt.
15.3 These regulations and the Town of East Hampton Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Map shall be amended in the manner specified in Section 22a-42a of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended. The Agency shall provide the Commissioner of Environmental Protection with a copy of any proposed regulations and notice of the public hearing to consider any proposed regulations or amendments thereto, except map amendments (determinations of boundaries), at least thirty five (35) days before the public hearing on their adoption.
(Note: Application fee schedules shall be adopted as Agency regulations or as otherwise provided by town ordinance.)
15.4 Petitions requesting changes or amendments to the “Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Map, East Hampton, Connecticut” shall contain at least the following information:
a. The applicant’s name, address and telephone number;
b. The owner’s name (if not the applicant), address, telephone number, and a written consent to the proposed action set forth in the application;
c. Applicant’s interest in the land;
d. Map(s) showing the geographic location of the land affected by the petition and the existing and the proposed wetland(s) and watercourse(s) boundaries on such land in accurate detail together with the documentation supporting such proposed boundary locations.
e. The reasons for the requested action;
f. The names and addresses of adjacent property owners; and
g. A map showing proposed development of the property and site location map.
15.5 Any person who submits a petition to amend the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Map, East Hampton, Connecticut, shall bear the burden of proof for all requested map amendments. Such proof may include, but is not limited to, professional interpretation of aerial photography and remote sensing imagery, resource mapping, soils mapping, or other information acceptable to the Agency. If such person is the owner, developer or contract purchaser of the land which is the subject of the petition, or if such person is representing the interests of such an owner, developer or purchaser, in addition to the information required in subsection 15.4, the petition shall include;
26
a. the name, mailing address and telephone number of the owner(s) of such land and owner(s) agent or other representative;
b. the names and mailing addresses of the owners of abutting land;
c. documentation by a soil scientist of the distribution of wetland soils on said land. Such documentation shall at a minimum include the report of the soil scientist documenting the location of wetland soils on the land and a map of the said land indicating the flag locations set by the soil scientist and defining the boundaries of wetland soil types; and
d. map(s) showing any proposed development of the land in relation to existing and proposed wetland and watercourse boundaries.
15.6 The Agency may require the petitioner to present documentation by a soil scientist that the land in question does not have a soil type classified by the National Cooperative Soils Survey as poorly drained, very poorly drained, alluvial, or flood plain. Such documentation includes a map of the land in question signed by a soil scientist on which the flag locations defining the boundaries of the regulated soil types are depicted.
15.7 A public hearing shall be held on petitions to amend the regulations and the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Map. Notice of the hearing shall be published in a newspaper having general circulation in the municipality where the land that is the subject of the hearing is located at least twice at intervals of not less than two (2) days, the first not more than fifteen (15) days nor less than ten (10) days, and the last not less than two (2) days, before the date set for the hearing. All materials including maps and documents relating to the petition shall be open for public inspection.
15.8 The Agency shall hold a public hearing on a petition to amend the regulations and the Inland Wetlands and watercourses Map within sixty-five (65) days after receipt of such petition. The hearing shall be completed within thirty-five (35) days after commencement. The Agency shall act upon the changes requested in such petition within sixty-five (65) days after completion of such hearing. At such hearing, any person or persons may appear and be heard and may be represented by agent or attorney. The petitioner may consent to one or more extensions of any period specified in this subsection provided the total extension of all such periods shall not be for longer than sixty-five (65) days or may withdraw such petition. Failure of the Agency to act within any time period specified in this subsection, or any extension thereof, shall not be deemed to constitute approval of the petition.
15.9 Within ninety (90) days after receipt of a petition for a change in the mapped boundaries of any wetland or watercourse, the Agency shall hold a public hearing to consider the petition. The Agency shall act upon the changes requested in such petition within sixty (60) days after the close of the hearing. The petitioner may consent to one or more extensions of the period specified in this subsection for the holding of the hearing and for action on such petition, provided the total extension of any such period shall not be for longer than the original period as specified in this subsection, or may withdraw such petition. The failure of the Agency to act within any time period specified in this subsection, or any extension thereof, shall not be deemed to constitute approval of the petition.
15.10 The Agency shall make its decision and state, in writing, the reasons why the change in the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Map was made.
27
SECTION 16 APPEALS
16.1 Appeals on actions of the Agency shall be made in accordance with the provisions of section 22a- 43 of the General Statutes, as amended.
16.2 Notice of such appeal shall be served upon the Agency and the Commissioner of Environmental Protection.
28
SECTION 17 CONFLICT AND SEVERANCE
17.1 Where there is a conflict between the provisions of these regulations and those of and other applicable statute, ordinance or regulation, the provision of that statute, ordinance or regulation which imposes the greatest restrictions on the uses of wetlands and watercourses shall govern. The invalidity of any work, clause, sentence, section, part, subsection or provision of these Regulations shall not affect the validity of any other part which can be given effect without such valid part or parts.
17.2 If there is a conflict between the provisions of these regulations and the provisions of the Act, the provisions of the Act shall govern.
29
SECTION 18 OTHER PERMITS
18.1 Nothing in these regulations shall obviate the requirements for the applicant to obtain any other assents, permits or licenses required by law or regulation by the Town of East Hampton, the State of Connecticut or the Government or the United States including any approval required by the Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. Obtaining such assents, permits or licenses is the sole responsibility of the applicant.
30
SECTION 19 APPLICATION FEES
19.5 Fee Schedule. Application fees will be based on the following schedule:
**$60.00 DEEP fee required by C.G.S. 22a-27j will be added to the base fee.
19.5.1 Application Fee** plus fee from Schedule A
19.5.1.1 Residential Uses. $75.00 Plus
*$50.00/lot
*Each additional lot with regulated activities.
19.5.1.2 Commercial/Industrial/Other Uses. $400.00
19.5.2 Approval by Authorized Agent
19.5.2.1 Residential $60.00
19.5.2.2 Commercial/Industrial $75.00
19.5.3 Public Hearing Fee
19.5.3.1 Single Residential $150.00
19.5.3.2 Subdivision $400.00
19.5.3.2 Commercial, Industrial, Other $400.00
19.5.4 Complex Application Fee Actual Cost
The Inland Wetland Agency may charge an additional fee sufficient to cover the cost of reviewing and acting on complex applications. Such fee may include, but not be limited to, the cost of retaining experts, to advise, review, and report on issues requiring such experts. The Agency shall estimate the complex application fee, which shall be paid pursuant to section 19 of these regulations within 10 days of the applicant’s receipt or notice of such estimate. Any portion of the complex application fee in excess of the actual cost shall be refunded to the applicant no later than 30 days after publication of the Agency’s decision.
19.5.5 Permitted and Nonregulated Uses:
19.5.5.1 Permitted Uses as of Right $25.00
19.5.5.2 Nonregulated $0.00
19.5.6 Regulation Amendment Petitions $150.00 (Does not include Notices or Regulation Advisories from DEP.)
19.5.6.1 Map Amendment Petitions $50.00 Plus fee from Schedule B
19.5.7 Modification of Previous Approval
19.5.7.1
Residential
$25.00
19.5.7.2
Subdivision
$50.00
19.5.7.3
Commercial/Industrial/Other
$75.00
19.5.8 Renewal of Previous Approval $50.00
31
19.5.8.1 SCHEDULE A. For the purposes of calculating the permit application fee, the area in schedule A is the total area of wetlands and watercourses and upland review area upon which a regulated activity is proposed.
SQUARE FEET OF AREA
19.5.9.1
Less than 1,000
$0.00
19.5.9.2
1,000 to 5,000
$200.00
19.5.9.3
More than 5,000
$400.00
19.5.10 SCHEDULE B. For the purposed of calculating the map amendment petition fee, the linear feet in schedule B is the total length of wetlands and watercourses boundary subject to the proposed boundary change.
LINEAR FEET
19.5.10.1
Less than 500
$0.00
19.5.10.2
500 to 1,000
$100.00
19.5.10.3
More than 1,000
$200.00
32
SECTION 20
RECORDS RETENTION AND DISPOSITION
20.1 The Agency and the Town Clerk for the Town of East Hampton shall retain complete administrative records of Agency actions and dispose of such records in accordance with the retention/ disposition schedules set for in subsection 20.2.
20.2 The public records administrator of the Connecticut State Library established the following new records retention/disposition schedules for municipal Inland Wetlands Agencies effective April 24, 1989;
RECORD TITLE
Applications (inc.
MINIMUM RETENTION
10 years
TOWN CLERK
-
supporting materials)
Decision Letters
10 years
Permanent
Approved Site Plans
10 years
-
Legal Notices
10 years
Permanent
Staff and Public Written Testimony (hearing records)
10 years
-
Minutes of Meetings & Public Hearings
15 years
Permanent
Tapes, Audio-Inland Wetland Matter
4 years
-
Notices of Violation
& Orders
10 years
-
Text of Changes Adopted In Regulations
Continuous Update/ Permanent
-
General Correspondence Issued or Reviewed
5 years
-
33
SECTION 21
EFFECTIVE DATE OF REGULATIONS
21.1 These Regulations including boundaries of inland wetlands and watercourses shall not become effective or be established until after a public hearing in relation thereto is held by the Agency, that which parties in interest and citizens shall have an opportunity to be heard. Notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be published in the form of a legal advertisement, appearing in a newspaper having a substantial circulation in the municipality at least twice at intervals of not less than two (2) days, the first not more than fifteen (15) days nor less than ten (10) days, and the last not less than two (2) days, before such hearing, and a copy of such proposed regulation or boundary shall be filed in the office of the Town of East Hampton for public inspection at least ten (10) days before such hearing.
These regulations shall become effective upon filing in the office of the Town Clerk of East Hampton, Connecticut, and publication of legal notice in promulgation in a newspaper having general circulation in the Town.
34
SECTION 22 PROPERTY REVALUATION
22.1 Connecticut General Statutes, Section 22a-45a provides for the right of a property owner denied a wetlands permit for a revaluation of the property.
35
APPENDIX A
SITE PLAN AND ENVIRONMENTAL INFORMATION
The applicant shall submit a map or maps and such information concerning the proposed regulated activity(ies) as the Agency indicates below:
1. Sheet sizes
Maps and charts shall meet the requirements of Section 7.31 of the General Statutes of Connecticut, as amended, as to size and materials used.
2. Graphic scale for site plan information:
Scale Required
A. Regulated area 1” = 40’ minimum
B. Area directly involved in 1” = 40’ minimum regulated activity
C. Property boundaries 1” = 200’ minimum
D. Additional area 1” = 200’ minimum
E. Location map ( required for 1” = 1,000’ minimum any site plan part of a
wetlands activity application)
3. North arrow – identified as being true, grid or magnetic north (with date of last reading).
4. Title block in lower right corner of sheet showing:
A. Name of project.
B. Name of owner and applicant per Sec. 6.1.d.
C. Date and subsequent date of revisions.
D. Legible signature and professional seal of person responsible for drawing plan.
E. Professionals certifying plan shall be appropriate to nature of activities proposed. Such site information about proposed uses or effects in the regulated area must be certified by a licensed land surveyor, professional engineer, professional architect, or professional landscape architect, any of which must be registered in the State of Connecticut. Further, certified soils scientists, where their signature is required shall provide their certification number with such signature on documents such as inland wetland soils boundary delineation.
5. Location of any watercourses or inland wetlands covered by the site plan as defined in Sections 2 of these Regulations, and determined per Sections 3.1 and 3.4 (to include the boundaries and symbols of soil mapping units).
6. Site areas of permit and designation of each activity.
7. Existing and proposed buildings or other structures.
A. Location
B. Floor elevation
36
8. Location, size and composition of sidewalks, off-street parking and loading, including driveway entrances and exits, parking and loading spaces, traffic islands and barriers and all other proposed and existing site work.
A. Percent of regulated area to be covered with impermeable surfaces.
9. Location of tree stands, shrubs and other significant vegetation, both existing and planned.
10. Source of water supply.
11. Proposed method of sewage disposal.
A. Proposed design and specifications of on-site sewage disposal certified by a sanitary engineer.
12. Design of existing storm drainage system including elevations at contours referenced in Section 5.6.D.i-v inclusive, East Hampton Subdivision Regulations.
Contour lines. Requirements for topographic details are as follows:
i. Two foot (2’) contours for the entire piece when such information is requested by the Agency
ii. For proposed roads: two foot (2’) contours taken in the field.
iii. For areas required by the Agency for health, welfare and safety reasons: two foot (2’) contours taken in the field.
iv. For stream gradients as required by the Agency: two foot (2’) contours taken in the field.
v. For existing and proposed drainage ways, utilities below proposed homes, leaching fields, and reserve areas: Two foot (2’) contours to be taken in the field.
vi. All other areas may be plotted using ten foot (10’) contours as shown on the applicable quadrangle maps prepared by the United States Geological Survey at a scale of 1:24,000.
Additional details may be required by the Agency referencing:
- Town of East Hampton Street Standards. Section 06-01 through 06-13
- East Hampton Subdivision Regulations. Section VIII, “Stormwater Runoff Control”
- East Hampton Zoning Regulations. Sections 25.3.A.
13. Proposed grading by not less than two foot (2’) contours of any material to be moved. Additional details may be required.
14. Location of all percolation pits, test pits and observation holes.
15. Physical Data – Material to be deposited and/or excavated:
A. Area
B. Volume
C. Physical composition (texture, components) of material to be deposited.
D. Chemical composition of all toxic materials, whether such materials are enclosed in containers or deposited openly.
37
E. Potential chemical reactions of deposited materials yielding toxic products or concentrations of products.
F. Final height of filled area above seasonal high water table.
G. Texture and composition of soil left after excavation.
H. Slope of excavation/filled material.
I. Depth to water table or water level if inundated after excavation. Water Course Data
A. Open water characteristics
1. Size of ponds or lakes.
2. Maximum depth and estimated volume of water.
B. Stream characteristics
1. Intermittent or permanent
2. Stream gradient
3. Velocity
4. Discharge units
5. Average width in project area of stream
C. Known flood levels to be indicated on map as shown on Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), Town of East Hampton, Connecticut, Middlesex County, Panels 5 and 10 of 15, Community Panel numbers:
090064 005 B
090064 0010 B
D. Discharges, if any, including:
1. Type
2. Frequency, volume and velocity
3. Chemical composition
17. Biological data
Trees Shrubs
Grasses, weeds, etc.
Aquatic fish, wildlife, vegetation Pasture – livestock
Cultivated area – crops Soil types
Percent of All Dominant
Regulated Areas Species
38
18. Probable effects of changes on:
A. Vegetation
B. Wildlife
C. Topography
19. Measures to protect regulated area from:
A. Erosion and sedimentation
B. Leaching and pollutants
C. Direct discharge or pollutants
D. Increased flooding and surface runoff hazards
E. Diminution of aesthetic qualities of site and immediate adjacent areas.
20. Narrative describing the purpose and the proposal.
21. Erosion and sedimentation control as per Section 27, East Hampton Zoning Regulations and Connecticut Guidelines for Soil Erosion $ Sediment Control 2002 as may be amended.
22. Adjacent property owners and/or municipalities.
A. Noted on the plan in respective locations.
B. Advised by certified mail, return receipt requested, if a public hearing is required by the Agency.
23. Bond estimates as required by Section 10 of these Regulations:
A. Soil erosion and sedimentation control bond.
B. Performance bond.
C. Engineering fee (equal to three percent (3%) of the total required performance bonding).
24. Other information as the Agency deems necessary to meet the objective of these Regulations and Public Act 87-533 to include, but not limited to:
- Connecticut DEP reports and documents
- Soil Conservation Service reports and comments
- Reports/comments of any other official Town body or enforcement officer
25. Compliance with Zoning and Subdivision Regulation requirements where applicable.