Part I, Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 7-28-1992]
§ 1-1. Adoption.
The compilation of the Town Charter and ordinances of the Town of
Farmington, codified and consolidated into parts, chapters and sections
in the form attached hereto and made a part hereof, is hereby approved,
adopted, ordained and enacted as the “Code of the Town of Farmington,
Connecticut,” hereinafter called the “Code.” All provisions contained in the
compilation provided for herein and known as the “Code of the Town of
Farmington” shall be in force and effect on and after the effective date of
this ordinance.
§ 1-2. Continuation of existing provisions.
The provisions of the Code, insofar as they are substantively the same as
those ordinances in force immediately prior to the enactment of the Code
by this ordinance, are intended as a continuation of such ordinances and
not as new enactments, and the effectiveness of such provisions shall date
from the date of adoption of the prior ordinance. All such provisions are
hereby continued in full force and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as to
their adoption by the Town Council.
§ 1-3. Repeal of inconsistent ordinances.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances of the Town of Farmington of a general
and permanent nature in force on the date of the adoption of this ordinance
which are inconsistent with any provisions of the Code are hereby repealed
from and after the effective date of this ordinance; provided, however,
that nothing herein shall be construed as repealing or altering the zoning,
subdivision or inland wetlands regulations of the Town.
§ 1-4. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section, article or part of this ordinance
or of any ordinance appearing in the Code or included in this Code through
supplementation shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction
to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the
remainder thereof but shall be confined in its operation to the clause,
sentence, paragraph, section, article or part thereof directly involved in the
controversy in which such judgment shall have been rendered.
§ 1-5. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code, in loose-leaf form, has been filed in the office of the
Town Clerk of the Town of Farmington and shall remain there for use and
examination by the public until final action is taken on this ordinance; and,
if this ordinance shall be adopted, such copy shall be certified to by the
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-5
1:3
Town Clerk of the Town of Farmington by impressing thereon the Seal of the
Town of Farmington, and such certified copy shall remain on file in the office
of said Town Clerk to be made available to persons desiring to examine
the same during all times while said Code is in effect. The enactment and
publication of this ordinance, coupled with the availability of a copy of the
Code for inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and considered to
be due and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-6. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Town
Charter or to any of the ordinances known collectively as the “Code of the
Town of Farmington,” or any new ordinances, when enacted or adopted
in such form as to indicate the intention of the Town Council to be a
part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into such Code so that
reference to the Code shall be understood and intended to include such
additions, deletions, amendments or supplements. Whenever such
additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code shall be
enacted or adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided
hereunder, inserted in the loose-leaf book containing said Code, as
amendments and supplements thereto. Nothing contained in this ordinance
shall affect the status of the Charter or any ordinance contained herein, and
such ordinances may be amended, deleted or changed from time to time as
the Town Council deems desirable.
§ 1-7. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Town Clerk to keep up-to-date the certified copy
of the book containing the Code of the Town of Farmington required to be
filed in the office of the Town Clerk for use by the public. All changes in said
Code and all ordinances adopted by the Town Council subsequent to the
enactment of this ordinance in such form as to indicate the intention of said
Board to be a part of said Code shall, when finally enacted or adopted, be
included therein by temporary attachment of copies of such changes until
such changes are printed as supplements to said Code book, at which time
such ordinances may be amended, deleted or changed from time to time as
the Town Council deems desirable.
§ 1-8. Sale of Code book; supplementation.
Copies of the Code may be purchased from the Town Clerk of the Town of
Farmington upon the payment of a fee to be set by resolution of the Town
Council, which Board may also arrange by resolution for procedures for the
periodic supplementation thereof.
§ 1-9. Penalties for tampering with Code.
Any person who, without authorization from the Town Clerk, changes or
amends, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of the Code of
the Town of Farmington, or who alters or tampers with such Code in
§ 1-5 FARMINGTON CODE § 1-9
1:4
any manner whatsoever which will cause the legislation of the Town of
Farmington to be misrepresented thereby, or who violates any other
provision of this ordinance, shall be guilty of an offense and shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not more than $90.
§ 1-10. Changes in previously adopted legislation.
A. In compiling and preparing the Charter and ordinances for publication
as the Code of the Town of Farmington, no changes in the meaning
or intent of such Charter or ordinances have been made. Certain
grammatical changes and other minor nonsubstantive changes were
made in one or more of said ordinances, as authorized by the Town
Counsel. It is the intention of the Town Council that all such changes
be adopted as part of the Code as if the ordinances had been previously
formally amended to read as such.
B. In addition. the following changes, amendments or revisions are made
herewith, to become effective upon the effective date of this ordinance.
(Chapter and section number references are to the ordinances as they
have been renumbered and appear in the Code.)1
1. Editor’s Note: Pursuant to § 1-108, the following nomenclature changes were made
throughout the Code: Zoning Enforcement Official to Zoning Enforcement Officer;
Building Inspector to Building Official; Sewer Authority to Water Pollution Control
Authority; Tax Collector to Collector of Revenue; Inland Wetlands Commission to Inland
Wetlands and Watercourses Agency; Department of Health to Department of Health
Services; Director of Public Health, Town Health Officer and Director or Health to
Farmington Valley Health District; Commissioner of Community Affairs to Commissioner
of Housing; and Court of Common Pleas to Superior Court. In addition, the following
sections were added or amended §§ 5-1, 5-2A, 5-4, 5-6, 5-7, 9-1, 9-2A, 20-1, 20-7, 24-2,
27-1, 31-6E, 31-12A, 35-2A, 38-1, 41-1, 47-5, 47-6, 47-7, 47-8, 59-1, 62-1, 68-1, 68-1, 75-3,
75-7, 83-2, 87-6, 106-3, 111-1B, 111-2, 111-3D and E, 111-5, 111-9A, 118-3, 118-4A,
118-9B(3), 118-13, 118-68, 135-4, 135-8, 140-4, 140-8, 140-10, 140-11, 144-12B, 144-14,
152-2, 152-4, 152-5, 152-6, 152-18B, 152-20C, 152-26, 156-1, 156-2, 156-10, 156-29A,
156-30A, 156-31, 156-32, 156-35, 156-43B and D, 169-2A, 169-3, 169-6B and D, 169-13,
169-14B, 169-15, 169-16A, 169-17, 169-19, 169-24, 169-25, 169-28, 169-29, 176-1, 176-5,
182-11, 186-3A, 189-2, 189-4, 193-2, 193-3 and 193-4. In addition, the following original
sections or articles were deleted: Section 3 of Ord. No. 36; Sections 4.2, 4.3 and 6 of Ord.
No. 81; the definition of “Director of Public Health” in Section 1 of Ord. No. 84; and Art
VII of Ord. No. 50.
§ 1-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-10
1:5
Chapter 5
BUILDING CODE BOARD OF APPEALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 83.
Demolition of buildings — See Ch. 86.
Blighted buildings — See Ch. 88.
Subdivision regulations — See Ch. 172.
Zoning regulations — See Ch. 197.
§ 5-1. Establishment. [Amended 7-28-1992]
Pursuant to C.G.S. § 29-266, as amended, and pursuant to Section 124, as
amended, of the Building Code of the State of Connecticut, a Building Code
Board of Appeals of the Town of Farmington, hereinafter referred to as
the "Board," is hereby established to perform the duties set forth in C.G.S.
§ 29-266 of the Building Code of the State of Connecticut and as set forth in
this chapter.
§ 5-2. Membership; qualifications; officers; compensation.
[Amended 2-28-1984 by Ord. No. 82]
A. The Council of the Town of Farmington shall appoint five members to
the Board for terms of five years in such manner that the term of one
member shall expire on September 30 of each year, except that an
appointment to fill an unexpired term shall be for the duration of said
unexpired term. [Amended 7-28-1992]
B. Members shall be qualified by training to pass upon matters pertaining
to building construction and shall have at least 10 years' experience
in construction design, construction supervision or construction of
buildings. Members of the Board may also be members of Building Code
Boards of Appeals in other municipalities.
C. Following the appointment of members to the Board, the Board shall
meet within 30 days from October 1 of each year and elect a Chairman.
D. The office of the Building Official shall designate a clerk to serve as
secretary to the Board and to keep a detailed record of all proceedings
on file in the office of the Building Official.
E. No member of the Board shall pass on any question in which he is
engaged as contractor or material dealer or in the preparation of plans
or specifications or which he has any personal interest.
F. Compensation of appointed members of the Board shall be determined
by the Town Council.
§ 5-3. Absences from meetings. [Added 11-22-1977 by Ord. No. 76]
The membership of any person who is absent from three regular meetings
during any six-month period shall terminate as of the time the third such
absence occurs, unless such absences are waived by the Chairman of the
§ 1-10 FARMINGTON CODE § 5-3
1:6
Board because of illness or other extenuating circumstances. The Chairman
of the Board shall notify the Town Manager promptly after the third such
absence occurs.
§ 5-4. Powers and duties. [Amended 7-28-1992]
The Board shall be vested with all powers and shall faithfully perform all
duties imposed upon such Boards by C.G.S. § 29-266 and Section 124 of the
Building Code of the State of Connecticut.
§ 5-5. Applications for appeals.
A. Applications for appeals to the Board may be filed under the following
circumstances:
(1) When the Building Official rejects or refuses to approve the mode or
manner of construction proposed to be followed or the materials to
be used in the erection or alteration of a building or structure;
(2) When it is claimed that the provisions of the code do not apply or
that an equally good or more desirable form of construction can be
employed in a specific case; or
(3) When it is claimed that the true intent and meaning of the code and
regulations have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted.
B. The permit, in whole or in part, having been refused by the Building
Official, the owner of such building or structure, whether already
erected or to be erected, or his authorized agent, may appeal, in writing,
from the decision of the Building Official to the Board. When a person
other than such owner claims to be aggrieved by any decision of the
Building Official, such person or his authorized agent may appeal, in
writing, from the decision of the Building Official to the Board and,
before determining the merits of such appeal, the Board of Appeals shall
first determine whether such person has a right to appeal.
§ 5-6. Procedure. [Amended 7-28-1992]
Upon receipt of an appeal from an owner or his representative or approval
of an appeal by a person other than the owner, the Chairman of the Board
shall appoint a panel of not less than three members of such Board to
hear such appeal. Such appeal shall be heard in the Town of Farmington
within five days, exclusive of Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays, after
the date of receipt of such appeal. The panel shall render a decision upon
the appeal and file the same with the Building Official from whose decision
such appeal has been taken no later than five days, exclusive of Saturdays,
Sundays and legal holidays, following the day of the hearing thereon. A copy
of such decision shall be mailed, prior to such filing, to the party taking the
appeal. All hearings shall be public, and the party taking the appeal, his
representative, the official of the Town and any other person whose interest
may be affected by the matter on appeal shall be given an opportunity to be
heard.
§ 5-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-7
1:7
§ 5-7. Appeals to state agency. [Amended 7-28-1992]
Any person aggrieved by the decision of a panel may appeal to the State
Codes and Standards Committee within seven days after the filing of the
decision with the Building Official. Any determination made by the panel
of the Farmington Building Code Board of Appeals shall be subject to
review de novo by the State Codes and Standards Committee. Any person
aggrieved by any ruling of the State Codes and Standards Committee may
appeal to the Superior Court where such building or structure has been or
is being erected.
§ 5-8. Nonapplicability.
This chapter shall not apply to structures, other than buildings, of public
service companies subject to regulation by the Public Utilities Commission.
§ 5-9. Action by Building Official.
The Building Official shall take action in accordance with the decision of the
Board, unless an appeal is taken.
Chapter 9
CONSERVATION AND INLAND WETLANDS COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Budget requests — See Charter, Art. IX.
Enforcement of zoning regulations and inland
wetland regulations — See Ch. 22.
Water Pollution Control Authority — See Ch.
68.
Inland wetlands and watercourses — See Ch.
125.
Zoning regulations — See Ch. 197.
§ 9-1. Establishment; purposes.
A. The purpose of this chapter is to clarify that the existing Conservation
Commission and Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Agency will be
abolished on February 27, 2012, and that a new commission, the
Farmington Conservation and Inland Wetlands Commission, will be
constituted on the same day.
B. In order i) to carry out and effectuate the purposes and policies of
the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Act of the State of Connecticut
pursuant to C.G.S. § 22a-37 et seq., and ii) to promote the development
and conservation of natural resources, including water resources, within
the territorial limits of the Town of Farmington pursuant to C.G.S.
§ 7-131a, there is hereby created an agency of the Town of Farmington
(the "Town") to be known as the "Farmington Conservation and Inland
Wetlands Commission" (the "Commission"). The Commission, when
acting in the capacity of the Inland Wetlands Commission or the
§ 5-7 FARMINGTON CODE § 9-1
1:8
Conservation Commission, shall operate each commission as a separate
and distinct body.
§ 9-2. Membership; officers; compensation; removal; vacancies.
A. The Commission shall consist of seven regular members and two
alternate members appointed for terms of four years. Terms shall expire
on September 30 of each year, except that an appointment to fill an
unexpired term shall be for the duration of said unexpired term only. No
more than three members' terms shall expire at one time. The expiration
of the initial appointments of the members of the Commission shall be
as follows: two (2) regular members' terms shall expire on September
30, 2012; two (2) regular members' terms shall expire on September 30,
2013; two (2) regular members' terms shall expire on September 30,
2014; and one (1) regular member's term shall expire on September 30,
2015. One alternate member's term shall expire on September 30, 2013,
and one alternate member's term shall expire on September 30, 2015.
Thereafter, members and alternates shall be appointed to serve terms
of four (4) years. The two alternates cannot be members of the same
political party.
B. Members shall be electors of the Town of Farmington holding no salaried
Town office.
C. Organization.
(1) The first meeting of the Commission following the effective date of
this chapter shall be constituted as an organizational meeting. At
such organizational meeting the Commission shall elect a Chairman,
Vice Chairman and Secretary from its regular members. Only
regular members of the Commission, or alternates seated in lieu of a
regular member who is absent or otherwise not participating, shall
be entitled to vote in the election of officers. The professional staff
will run the organizational meeting until such time as elections are
complete.
(2) Where a regular member cannot attend the organizational meeting,
such member may select the alternate to vote in his or her place.
If the regular member fails to select an alternate member, the
selection shall be made using a method agreed upon by the regular
members present.
(3) At the first organizational meeting, the Commission shall begin to
discuss the creation of new bylaws. Such bylaws shall be created
and adopted no later than July 1, 2012. For the purposes of adopting
bylaws, only regular members of the Commission, or alternates
seated in lieu of a regular member who is absent or otherwise not
participating, shall be entitled to vote.
D. Thereafter beginning in 2012, within a period not exceeding 30 days
after the first day of October of each year, the members of the
Commission shall elect a Chairman, Vice Chairman and Secretary from
its regular members. Only regular members of the Commission, or
alternates seated in lieu of a regular member who is absent or otherwise
not participating, shall be entitled to vote in the election of officers.
E. All members shall serve without compensation.
§ 9-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-2
1:9
F. The Town Council shall appoint all regular and alternate members, may
remove any such member for cause and may fill any vacancy that may
arise.
G. The appointment of members of the Commission shall be governed by
the applicable minority representation provisions of the Town Charter
and the Connecticut General Statutes.
H. Members of the Commission shall attend and complete the
comprehensive training program developed and conducted by the
Connecticut Department of Energy and Environmental Protection within
three years of their appointment.
I. Alternate members when serving as members of the Conservation
Commission shall have full powers and duties as regular members and
shall be permitted to vote on all issues before it.
§ 9-3. Absences from meetings.
The membership of any person who is absent from three regular meetings
during any six-month period shall terminate as of the time the third such
absence occurs, unless such absences are waived by the Chairman of the
Commission because of illness or other extenuating circumstances. The
Chairman of the Commission shall notify the Town Manager promptly after
the third absence occurs.
§ 9-4. Powers and duties.
The Commission shall fix the time and place of its regular meetings and
provide a method for calling special meetings. The Commission shall
determine its own rules of procedure. The presence of four members shall
constitute a quorum. The Commission may adopt regulations, rules and
procedures to carry out the purposes of this chapter. The Commission shall
keep records of its meetings and activities and shall make an annual report
to the Town Council through the Town Manager. The Commission may
submit a budget request to the Town Council through the Town Manager in
accordance with the procedures set forth in the Town Charter.2
A. Inland Wetlands Commission.
(1) The Commission shall be vested with all powers authorized by the
Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Act of the State of Connecticut,
as amended, and, in particular, shall promulgate such regulations in
conformity with the regulations promulgated by the Commissioner
of Energy and Environmental Protection of the State of Connecticut
as are necessary to protect the inland wetlands and watercourses
within the territorial limits of the Town of Farmington. The
Commission shall provide, through regulations, the manner in which
the boundaries of inland wetland areas and watercourses in the
Town of Farmington shall be established, amended or changed and
shall follow the procedures set forth in the Inland Wetlands and
Watercourses Act of the State of Connecticut.
2. Editor's Note: See Article IX, Budget, of the Charter.
§ 9-2 FARMINGTON CODE § 9-4
1:10
(2) The Commission shall be solely responsible for the permitting of all
regulated activities conducted upon or upland of an inland wetland
or watercourse, as those terms are defined in the Inland Wetlands
and Watercourses Act of the State of Connecticut and in the
Farmington Regulations for Inland Wetlands, within the Town of
Farmington. In carrying out its permitting activities, the Commission
shall follow the standards and procedures set forth in the Inland
Wetlands and Watercourses Act of the State of Connecticut and in
the Farmington Regulations for Inland Wetlands.
B. Conservation Commission.
(1) The Commission shall be vested with all powers authorized by C.G.S.
§ 7-131a of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
(2) The Commission shall conduct researches into the utilization and
possible utilization of land areas of the municipality and may
coordinate the activities of unofficial bodies organized for similar
purposes and may advertise, prepare and distribute books, maps,
charts, plans and pamphlets as necessary for its purpose.
(3) The Commission shall keep an index of all open areas, publicly
or privately owned, including open marshlands, swamps and other
wetlands, for the purpose of obtaining information on the proper use
of such areas, and may from time to time recommend to the Town
Plan and Zoning Commission of the Town of Farmington plans and
programs for the development and use of such areas, which may
include the acquisition of conservation easements.
(4) The Commission may recommend acquisition of land to the Town
Council for any of its purposes as set out in this section or as
authorized in C.G.S. § 7-131a of the Connecticut General Statutes, as
amended.
(5) The Commission, upon approval of the Town Council and the Town
Meeting, may receive gifts of land in the name of the Town of
Farmington for purposes not inconsistent with this chapter.
(6) The Commission may receive gifts of money in the name of the Town
of Farmington for any purpose not inconsistent with the purpose of
this Chapter. Such gifts of money, if not designated for the special
purpose by the donor, shall become part of the general fund of the
Town of Farmington. Special gifts of money shall be deposited in
a special fund of the Town of Farmington created for this purpose
by the Town Treasurer and may be used by the Commission for
such special purposes upon approval by the Town Council. The Town
Treasurer shall keep an accurate record of all funds received.
(7) The Commission shall give particular consideration to the following
matters and shall inform the Town Council and other appropriate
agencies with respect to the same:
(a) Uses and avoidance of pollution of the Farmington River.
(b) Land that should be kept as open space or for recreation
purpose.
(c) Methods of keeping open space without purchase by public
agencies, such as the acquisition of easements or agreements
with property owners.
§ 9-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-4
1:11
(d) Recommended land practices and land development of present
Town-owned properties.
(e) Coordinating information from and among each of the Town
agencies involved with any aspect of conservation of natural
resources.
(f) Making maximum use of federal and state agencies, such as the
Soil Conservation Service of the United States Department of
Agriculture and the Connecticut Department of Agriculture and
Natural Resources.
(g) Coordination of activities of various organizations and groups in
the Town of Farmington having an interest in conservation, such
as garden clubs and other civic associations.
(h) Cooperation with Conservation Commissions of neighboring
towns.
(i) Coordination of efforts with Farmington River Watershed
Associations.
(j) Stimulation and promotion of conservation within the Town of
Farmington.
§ 9-5. Auxiliary services.
The facilities and services of the Town Planner, his/her staff and office shall
be available to the Commission. The Commission shall otherwise operate
within the amount of the appropriation provided in the Town budget each
year.
§ 9-6. Transition period.
A. The Farmington Conservation Commission, as constituted under the
prior version of this Chapter 9, shall continue to be responsible for all
regulations pursuant to the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Act until
February 27, 2012.
B. All existing Commission regulations shall remain in full force and effect
during this transition period.
Chapter 12
COOPERATIVE HOUSING TRUST FUND
GENERAL REFERENCES
Housing agencies — See Ch. 31.
§ 12-1. Background.
For several years the Housing Authority of the Town of Farmington has been
administering a program to promote the construction of housing for lowand
moderate-income persons and families by leasing land at a nominal rent
on which the lessee constructs and finances a home to be occupied by the
§ 9-4 FARMINGTON CODE § 12-1
12:12
lessee and his or her family. A summary of the plan is attached hereto as
Exhibit A.3 The Housing Authority is hereby authorized to revise Exhibit A
from time to time, as appropriate. At the time of sale of the property or at
the time that a lessee purchases the land, the Town receives the current fair
market value for the land. In order to have a fund in which the proceeds
of the sale of land and other money may be deposited and held for use in
effecting future purchases of land for the program, it is appropriate that a
trust fund be established.
§ 12-2. Purpose.
The purpose of a trust fund is to hold and maintain proceeds derived
from the sale of cooperative housing lots, accrued interest income and any
other money received for the purpose of acquiring additional lots for the
Cooperative Housing Program.
§ 12-3. Establishment.
A trust fund, to be known as the "Farmington Cooperative Housing Trust
Fund" (the "trust fund") be and is hereby established to promote the
acquisition of additional lots for construction of housing for persons and
families having low or moderate income.
§ 12-4. Trustee.
The trustee of the trust fund shall be the Housing Authority of the Town
of Farmington. All actions involving the receipt of funds into the trust fund
and the expenditure of funds from the trust fund shall be approved by the
trustee. Approval by the trustee shall consist of a vote by a majority of the
members of the Authority present at any meeting at which a quorum is
present.
§ 12-5. Signing of checks; investment.
All checks drawn on the trust fund shall be signed by the Town Manager
and the Town Treasurer or their designated agents approved by the Town
Council. The trust fund shall be held or invested in bank accounts or shortterm
securities which can be readily liquidated to obtain funds to carry out
the purpose of the trust.
§ 12-6. Auxiliary services.
The facilities and services of the various agencies and departments of the
Town of Farmington shall be available to the trustee as it may reasonably
require.
3. Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the Clerk's office.
§ 12-1 COOPERATIVE HOUSING TRUST FUND § 12-6
12:13
Chapter 16
DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees — See Ch. 47.
§ 16-1. Indemnification by Town of certain persons.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the Town of Farmington
(hereinafter called the "Town") shall indemnify any person who was or is
a party or was threatened to be made a party to any threatened, pending
or completed claim, demand, action, suit or proceeding, whether civil,
criminal, administrative or investigative (other than an action by or in
the right of the Town), when it appears that such person, or the person
whose legal representative he is, is or was serving as an official, officer,
employee or agent of the Town or any board, committee, council, agency or
commission of the Town or is or was serving at the request of the Town as
an official, officer, employee or agent of any other governmental body or any
other entity, whether elected, appointed or otherwise employed, and when
it further appears that such service was or is the basis of, or was or is in
any way connected with, such claim, demand, action, suit or proceeding.
Indemnification shall include reimbursement of judgments, fines, penalties,
amounts paid in settlement and expenses, including legal fees and costs,
if any, actually and reasonably incurred in connection with such claim,
demand, action, suit or proceeding, or any appeal therefrom.
§ 16-2. Determination of good-faith action.
No such indemnification or defense shall be provided by the Town where it
is concluded that such person, and the person whose legal representative
he is, did not act in good faith and in a manner he reasonably believed
to be in the best interests of the Town and, with respect to any criminal
action or proceeding, where he had reasonable cause to believe his conduct
was unlawful. The final determination, other than through settlement or
compromise, of the claim, demand, action, suit or proceeding in a manner
favorable to such person shall be conclusive evidence that such person
acted in good faith and in a manner he reasonably believed to be in the
best interests of the Town and, with respect to any criminal action or
proceeding, that he had reasonable cause to believe his conduct was lawful;
but determination in a manner unfavorable to such person shall not, of
itself, create a presumption that the person did not act in good faith or in
a manner which he did reasonably believe to be in the best interests of
the Town or, with respect to any criminal action or proceeding, that he had
reasonable cause to believe that his conduct was unlawful.
§ 12-6 FARMINGTON CODE § 16-3
16:14
§ 16-3. Indemnification by Town of persons determined to be
entitled thereto.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the Town shall indemnify any
person who was or is a party or was threatened to be made a party to any
threatened, pending or completed claim, demand, action, suit or proceeding
by or in the right of the Town to procure a judgment in its favor when it
appears that such person, or the person whose legal representative he is,
is or was serving as an official, officer, employee or agent of the Town or
any board, committee, council, agency or commission of the Town or is or
was serving at the request of the Town as an official, officer, employee or
agent of any other governmental body or any other entity, whether elected,
appointed or otherwise employed, and when it further appears that such
service was or is the basis of, or was or is in any way connected with,
such claim, demand, action, suit or proceeding, against expenses, including
legal fees and costs, if any, actually and reasonably incurred by him in
connection with such claim, demand, action, suit or proceeding, or any
appeal therefrom, in relation to matters as to which such person, or the
person whose legal representative he is, is finally adjudged not to have
breached his duty to the Town or where it is concluded that in view of
all the circumstances such person is fairly and reasonably entitled to be
indemnified.
§ 16-4. Majority vote of Town Council or committee.
The conclusions provided for in §§ 16-2 and 16-3 of this chapter may be
reached by a majority of the members of the Town Council or, if a majority
of the members of the Town Council are parties or threatened parties to the
claim, demand, action, suit or proceeding, by a majority of a committee of
three electors of the Town appointed by the Town Manager to consider such
matter.
§ 16-5. Payment of expenses in advance; service of Corporation
Counsel to be provided by Town.
Expenses which may be indemnifiable under this chapter incurred in
defending a claim, demand, action, suit or proceeding may be paid by the
Town in advance of the final disposition of such claim, demand, action,
suit or proceeding, as authorized by a majority of the members of the
Town Council, whether or not they are parties to the proceeding, upon
agreement by or on behalf of such person or his legal representative to
repay such amount if he is later found not entitled to be indemnified
by the Town as authorized in this chapter. The Town shall, in addition
to such indemnification, provide the services of the Corporation Counsel
or other counsel, if appropriate, at no expense to any person entitled
to indemnification, and the Corporation Counsel or other counsel shall
provide a full and complete defense on behalf of such person to all such
claims, demands, actions, suits and proceedings, including any appeals.
Any counsel other than the Corporation Counsel to be provided under this
section shall be subject to the approval of the Town Council.
§ 16-3 DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION § 16-6
16:15
§ 16-6. Limits on indemnification amount; insurance.
The Town shall not indemnify any person to any extent greater than that
authorized by this chapter, but the Town may procure insurance providing
greater indemnification.
Chapter 20
ECONOMIC AND BUSINESS DEVELOPMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Annual appropriation — See Charter, Art. IX.
§ 16-6 FARMINGTON CODE § 16-6
20:16
ARTICLE I
Economic Development Commission
[Adopted 10-19-1966 by Ord. No. 52]
§ 20-1. Establishment. [Amended 7-28-1992]
The Town of Farmington does hereby establish an Economic Development
Commission pursuant to the provisions of C.G.S. § 7-136, to be known
and designated as the "Farmington Economic Development Commission,"
hereinafter referred to as the "Commission."
§ 20-2. Membership. [Amended 6-21-1993]
The Commission shall consist of seven members, who shall serve without
compensation. The President of the Farmington Chamber of Commerce or
a designee of that organization shall serve as one of the members of the
Commission.
§ 20-3. Appointment; terms. [Amended 2-28-1984 by Ord. No. 82;
6-21-1993]
A. Except for the representative of the Farmington Chamber of Commerce,
the members of the Commission and any vacancies in the membership
of the Commission shall be appointed by the Town Manager upon
recommendation of the Town Council.
B. Each appointed member of the Commission shall serve for a term of
two years, which term shall commence on October 1 of each year;
provided, however, that three of the appointees shall be appointed for
terms expiring on September 30, 1994, and three of the appointees shall
be appointed for terms expiring on September 30, 1995.
§ 20-4. Powers and duties; reports.
A. The Commission shall conduct research into the economic conditions
and trends in the Town and shall make recommendations to the Town
Manager and/or the Town Council regarding action to improve its
economic condition and development. It shall seek to coordinate the
activities of and cooperate with unofficial bodies organized to promote
such economic development and, with the approval of the Town Council,
may advertise, prepare, print and distribute books, maps, charts and
pamphlets which in its judgment will further the official purposes of the
Commission.
B. On or before the first day of July each year, the Commission shall have
prepared and shall transmit to the Town Council a report of its activities
and of its recommendations for improving the economic condition and
development of the Town.
§ 20-5. Annual appropriation.
An annual appropriation for the expenses of the Commission may be made
upon application by the Commission to the Town Manager pursuant to
the provisions of Article IX of the Charter of the Town of Farmington, as
§ 20-1 ECONOMIC AND BUSINESS DEVELOPMENT § 20-5
20:17
revised effective July 1, 1965; provided, however, that in no event shall such
appropriation exceed of 1/20 of 1% of the last completed grand list of the
taxable property in the Town of Farmington.
§ 20-6. Organization; officers and staff. [Amended 2-28-1984 by
Ord. No. 82; 6-21-1993]
A. Within thirty days after October 1 of each year, the members of the
Commission shall meet and elect from among the appointed members a
Chairman and other appropriate officers.
B. The office of the Town Planner shall provide administrative support to
the Commission.
§ 20-7. Absence from meetings. [Added 11-22-1977 by Ord. No. 76;
amended 7-28-1992]
The membership of any person who is absent from three regular meetings
during any six-month period shall terminate as of the time the third such
absence occurs, and the vacancy shall be filled by the appointing body,
unless such absences are waived by the Chairman of the Commission
because of illness or other extenuating circumstances. The Chairman of the
Commission shall notify the Town Manager promptly after the third such
absence occurs.
§ 20-5 FARMINGTON CODE § 20-7
20:18
ARTICLE II
Business Development Incentive Program
[Adopted 7-23-1996]
§ 20-8. Program established.
A business development incentive program is established to be exercised
at the sole discretion of the Council upon recommendation of the Economic
Development Commission acting pursuant to the limitations as set forth
herein. The incentives to be considered by the Council upon
recommendation by the Economic Development Commission shall include
the waiver of Town-imposed fees and entering into agreements with persons
owning or proposing to acquire an interest in real property in the Town to
fix the assessment of real property as authorized by C.G.S. Section 12-65b.
§ 20-9. Recommendation of Economic Development Commission.
The Council shall only consider and act upon the offer of incentives to
businesses and industries in the Town when such incentives have been
recommended to the Council by a 2/3 vote of the total membership of the
Economic Development Commission, after the Commission has concluded
that such an incentive is in the best long-term, economic interest of the
Town.
§ 20-8 ECONOMIC AND BUSINESS DEVELOPMENT § 20-9
20:19
Chapter 22
ENFORCEMENT OF ZONING REGULATIONS, INLAND
WETLAND REGULATIONS AND AQUIFER PROTECTION AREA
REGULATIONS FOR LEVEL A MAPPED AREAS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Inland Wetlands and Watercourses
Agency — See Ch. 38
Citation hearing procedure — See Ch. 91
Historic areas — See Ch. 111
Inland wetlands and watercourses — See Ch.
125
Aquifer Protection Agency — See Ch. 126
Parking lots — See Ch. 140
Signs — See Ch. 159
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 169
Subdivision regulations — See Ch. 172
Zoning regulations — See Ch. 197
§ 22-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish penalties for violations of the
Town's zoning regulations, inland wetland regulations and aquifer
protection area regulations for Level A mapped areas, establish procedure
for issuance of citations to violators and for collections of fines and to have
the Town's citation hearing procedure (Chapter 91 of the Town Code) apply
to citations hereunder issued.
§ 22-2. Enforcement.
The Town's Enforcement Officer or agent is authorized to issue cease and
desist orders or other appropriate orders to a violator of the Town's zoning
regulations, inland wetland and watercourses regulations, aquifer
protection area regulations for Level A mapped areas or of any approval or
permit issued by the Town Plan and Zoning Commission, Inland Wetlands
and Watercourses Agency or Aquifer Protection Agency. If such violation
has not been remedied either immediately or within 10 days of the date
of issuance of the cease and desist order or other appropriate order, as
provided in the order, the Enforcement Officer, or such other Town official
or employee designated by the Town Manager to issue citations, unless such
time has been extended for good cause by the Enforcement Officer, shall
issue a citation to the violator which shall invoke the Town's citation hearing
procedure set forth in Chapter 91 of the Town Code. However, in the case
where a violation is found by the Enforcement Officer or agent to be willful,
penalties may be assessed from the date such violation has been committed.
§ 22-3. Violations and penalties; hearing.
A. The penalty for each violation of the zoning regulations or approvals or
permits issued shall be $150 for each day that such violation continues
beyond the compliance date in the cease and desist order.
§ 20-9 FARMINGTON CODE § 22-3
20:20
Notwithstanding the preceding, in instances of willful violations and
instances where the violation is not corrected within such manner and
time period stipulated in the order, fines may be assessed from the date
such violation has been committed.
B. The penalty for each violation of the inland wetlands and watercourses
regulations or approvals or permits issued shall be from $150 to $1,000
for each day that such violation continues beyond the compliance date in
the cease and desist order. Notwithstanding the preceding, in instances
of willful violations and instances where the violation is not corrected
within such manner and time period stipulated in the order, fines may
be assessed from the date such violation has been committed. The
Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Agency, within 10 days of the date
of issuance of an order, shall hold a hearing to provide the alleged
violator an opportunity to be heard and show cause why the order should
not remain in effect. No fines may be levied against the state or any
employee of the state acting within the scope of his employment.
C. The penalty for each violation of the aquifer protection area regulations
for Level A mapped areas shall be $150 for each day that such violation
continues beyond the compliance date in the cease and desist order.
Notwithstanding the preceding, in instances of willful violations and
instances where the violation is not corrected within such manner and
time period stipulated in the order, fines may be assessed from the
date such violation has been committed. The Aquifer Protection Agency,
within 10 days of the date of issuance of an order, shall hold a hearing to
provide the alleged violator an opportunity to be heard and show cause
why the order should not remain in effect.
§ 22-4. Procedure.
The procedure to be followed with respect to all citations issued under this
chapter shall be the citation hearing procedure set forth in Chapter 91 of
the Farmington Code.
Chapter 24
ETHICS, CODE OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Financial interest — See Charter, Art. VIII.
Conservation Commission — See Ch. 9.
Justices of the Peace — See Ch. 41.
Officers and employees — See Ch. 47.
Water Pollution Control Authority — See Ch.
68.
§ 24-1. Purpose.
A. The purpose of these standards is to guide Town officials, elected and
appointed, Town employees and citizens by establishing standards of
§ 22-3 ETHICS, CODE OF § 24-1
24:21
conduct for persons in the decision-making process. It is intended to
strengthen the tradition of good government in Farmington.
B. Good government depends upon decisions which are based upon the
merits of the issue and are in the best interest of the Town as a whole,
without regard to personal gain.
§ 24-2. Definitions.
The following words or phrases shall have the following meanings:
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION — Any information concerning the
property, business or affairs of the Town not generally available to the
public.
EMPLOYEE — Any person receiving a salary, wages or compensation from
the Town for services rendered.
OFFICIAL — Any person holding elective or appointive office in the
government of the Town, including the Town Treasurer, Corporation
Counsel, Town Clerk, Town Auditors and members and alternate members,
if any, of the Town Council, Board of Education, Town Plan and Zoning
Commission, Zoning Board of Appeals, Water Pollution Control Authority,
Conservation Commission and committees appointed to oversee the
construction or improvement of Town facilities or any other board,
commission or agency which exercises legislative or judicial functions or
financial authority. Justices of the Peace are excepted.[Amended
7-28-1992]
§ 24-3. Use of Town assets restricted.
No official or employee shall use or permit the use of Town funds, services,
property, equipment, owned or leased vehicles or materials for personal
convenience or profit, except when such services are available to the public
generally or are provided in conformance with established Town policies for
the use of such officials or employees.
§ 24-4. Fair and equal treatment.
No official or employee shall grant or accept any special consideration,
treatment or advantage to or from any person beyond that which is
available to every other person.
§ 24-5. Conflicts of interest.
A. Financial interest prohibited. No member of the Town Council nor any
person holding any other elective or appointed Town office nor any
employee of the Town shall be financially interested, directly or
indirectly, as a principal, surety, officer or otherwise, except as a
minority stockholder of a publicly held corporation, in any contract with,
sales to or purchases from the Town or comparable services rendered
to the Town; provided, however, that any elected or appointed officer or
employee of the Town whose office or position is not directly connected
with the department, commission, board or agency of the Town
§ 24-1 FARMINGTON CODE § 24-5
24:22
purchasing or selling said material or service shall not be barred from
contracting with the Town on such sales or purchases or services.
B. Disclosure of confidential information. No official or employee shall
disclose or use any confidential information obtained in an official
capacity for the purpose of advancing the financial or personal interest
of himself or others.
C. Gifts and favors. No official or employee or member of his/her immediate
family shall solicit or accept any gift having a substantial value, whether
in the form of service, loan, thing, promise or any other form, from any
person or persons who to his/her knowledge is interested, directly or
indirectly, in any manner whatsoever in business dealings with the Town.
D. Use of influence. No official or employee shall solicit any business,
directly or indirectly, from another official or employee over whom he
has any direct or indirect control or influence with respect to tenure,
compensation or duties.
E. Representation of private interests. No official or employee shall appear
on behalf of private interests before any board, commission or agency
of the Town, as defined in § 24-2 above, nor shall he represent private
interests in any action or proceeding against the Town in any litigation
when said appearance or representation would be in conflict with or
would impair his independence of judgment and action in the
performance of his official duties as such officer or employee.
F. Disclosure of interest.
(1) Any official or employee who has a personal beneficial interest in any
matter coming before the Town Council or any board, commission
or agency of the Town, as defined in § 24-2 above, shall make the
same known to such body, and such interest shall be disclosed on the
records of such body. If such official or employee is a member of such
body, he shall refrain from voting upon or otherwise participating in
the consideration of such matter or any determination in connection
therewith by such body.
(2) Any official or employee who believes he or she may have a personal
beneficial interest in any matter coming before the Town Council or
any board, commission or agency of the Town, as defined in § 24-2
above, shall make the same known to such body, and such interest
shall be disclosed on the records of such body. If such official or
employee is a member of such body, he or she shall disclose fully to
other members of the board, commission or agency the facts relating
to his or her personal or financial interest. The remaining members,
by secret ballot in his or her absence, shall determine whether or not
he or she should participate in the matter.
§ 24-6. Written information on conflicts of interest.
Any person having reasonable cause to believe that an official or employee
has a personal interest in any matter coming before him in his capacity
as such official or employee which might affect his ability to make an
objective determination with respect to such matter or that an official or
employee has violated any provision of this chapter may make such factual
information known, in writing, to the Town Council. The Town Council, upon
§ 24-5 ETHICS, CODE OF § 24-6
24:23
receipt of such information, shall take such action thereon as it may deem
proper.
Chapter 27
FAIR RENT COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Cooperative Housing Trust Fund — See Ch.
12.
Housing agencies — See Ch. 31.
§ 27-1. Creation. [Amended 7-25-1978; 7-28-1992]
Pursuant to C.G.S. §§ 7-148b through 7-148f, as amended, there is hereby
created the Farmington Fair Rent Commission (the "Commission"). The
Commission shall consist of the Housing Authority of the Town of
Farmington, and membership on the Commission shall be concurrent with
membership on the Housing Authority of the Town of Farmington. Loss
of membership on the Town of Farmington Housing Authority shall
automatically mean loss of membership on the Commission, and attainment
of membership on the Housing Authority of the Town of Farmington shall
automatically mean attainment of membership on the Commission. The
Chairman and Secretary of the Housing Authority of the Town of
Farmington shall be the Chairman and Secretary of the Commission. All
members shall serve without compensation.
§ 27-2. Duties.
The Commission shall make studies and investigations, conduct hearings
and receive complaints relative to rental charges on housing
accommodations, except those accommodations rented on a seasonal basis,
within its discretion, in order to control and eliminate excessive rental
charges on such accommodations. The Commission, for such purposes,
may compel the attendance of persons at hearings, issue subpoenas and
administer oaths. The Commission shall have such powers as may from time
to time be granted to it under the state statutes.
§ 27-3. Meetings.
The Commission shall meet at the call of the Chairman at any appropriate
time or reasonable time.
§ 27-4. Procedures.
The procedures to be followed by the Commission as to considerations in
determining whether rental charges are excessive and in ordering rent
reduction or suspension shall be as provided by state law.
§ 24-6 FARMINGTON CODE § 27-5
27:24
§ 27-5. Auxiliary services.
The facilities and services of the various agencies and departments of the
Town shall be available to the Commission as it may reasonably require.
Chapter 29
FIRE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees — See Ch. 47.
Pensions — See Ch. 51.
Fire hydrants — See Ch. 101.
Fire lanes — See Ch. 182.
§ 29-1. Repeal of former provisions.
The former Chapter 29 is repealed and the following is substituted in lieu
thereof.
§ 29-2. Establishment; purpose.
A unified Town-wide Fire Department (Department) consisting of the
Farmington Volunteer Fire Department, LLC, the Tunxis Hose Company No.
1, and the East Farmington Volunteer Fire Department, Inc., is established
for the purpose of providing fire-fighting, rescue and emergency medical
services throughout the Town.
§ 29-3. Structure; authority.
The Department in its operations shall utilize the Farmington Fire Station,
the Tunxis Hose Fire Station, the East Farmington Fire Station, the Oakland
Gardens Fire Substation, the Southwest Fire Substation, and any other
station or substation as may from time to time be established. The existing
volunteer fire companies shall continue as operating entities and shall
function as constituent units of the Department. The Director of Fire and
Rescue Services is hereby charged with managing the Department and with
directing and being responsible to the Town Manager for all fire, rescue
and emergency medical services provided within the Town; however onscene
fire ground operations shall be commanded by the Fire Chiefs as
well as their officers. Each volunteer fire company and its officers shall
be responsible for operating in conformance with unified procedures
established by the Director of Fire and Rescue Services.
§ 29-4. Board of Fire Chiefs: membership; vacancies.
The Board of Fire Chiefs shall consist of three members: the Fire Chief from
each of the three existing volunteer fire companies. The Fire Chiefs shall
personally serve on the Board of Fire Chiefs; and shall not be permitted to
name designees. If the Fire Chief is unable to fulfill his or her duties, takes
§ 27-5 FIRE DEPARTMENT § 29-4
29:25
a leave of absence, and appoints an Acting Fire Chief, the Acting Fire Chief
shall be permitted to serve on the Board of Fire Chiefs so long as he or she
is serving in the capacity of Acting Fire Chief.
§ 29-5. Powers and duties.
A. The Director of Fire and Rescue Services shall have all reasonable
powers necessary to fulfill the obligations of managing and being
responsible for all fire, rescue and emergency medical services
excluding on-scene fire ground operations which shall be commanded by
the Fire Chief(s) as well as their officers.
B. The Director of Fire and Rescue Services, with assistance from the Board
of Fire Chiefs, shall establish standard policies, rules and procedures for
providing fire-fighting, rescue and other emergency and safety services
throughout the Town as from time to time deemed appropriate. Such
policies, rules and procedures shall be consistent with policies and
direction from the Town Manager and shall comply with the Town
Charter and applicable collective bargaining agreements.
C. The Director of Fire and Rescue Services, with assistance from the
Board of Fire Chiefs, shall coordinate the training and physical fitness
programs of the Department; take appropriate steps to improve
efficiency, recruitment and public relations; develop specifications for
needed equipment and determine purchase requirements; evaluate risk
management issues; develop annual budget recommendations; and
develop strategic and tactical plans for future equipment and facilities.
D. The Director of Fire and Rescue Services, with assistance from the Board
of Fire Chiefs, shall plan new programs and take necessary steps to
have such programs implemented and represent the Department before
the Town Council, other Town agencies, other state and local agencies
and the general public. The Director of Fire and Rescue Services, with
assistance from the Board of Fire Chiefs, shall analyze the needs of the
Department and coordinate programs to meet those needs, keeping in
mind the unique nature of volunteer emergency services being rendered
by the volunteer fire companies.
E. The Director of Fire and Rescue Services, with assistance from Board
of Fire Chiefs, shall interview candidates for any paid positions within
the Department and recommend candidates for such positions for
appointment by the Town Manager. Such recommendations shall comply
with the provisions of any applicable labor contract and with the Town
Charter.
F. The Director of Fire and Rescue Services shall make recommendations
to the Town Manager regarding the direction, discipline, suspension and
relief from active duty of any paid employee or voluntary member in the
Department, subject to the provisions of applicable collective bargaining
contracts and the Town Charter. The Fire Chiefs shall be the direct
supervisors of the career fire fighters that are assigned to their fire
stations. All direction from the Fire Chiefs to the career fire fighters shall
be consistent with all policies, rules, and procedures set forth by the
Director of Fire and Rescue Services.
§ 29-4 FARMINGTON CODE § 29-5
29:26
G. The Fire Chiefs shall be the supervisors of the volunteer fire fighters
assigned to their stations. The Fire Chiefs are responsible for carrying
out the directives of the Director of Fire and Rescue Services and
ensuring that they are followed by the volunteer fire fighters assigned to
their stations.
§ 29-6. Organization.
The Board of Fire Chiefs shall meet with the Director of Fire and Rescue
Services as necessary to manage and conduct the operations of the Fire
Department.
Chapter 31
HOUSING AGENCIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Cooperative Housing Trust Fund — See Ch.
12.
Fair Rent Commission — See Ch. 27.
Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Agency
— See Ch. 38.
Housing standards — See Ch. 118.
§ 29-5 HOUSING AGENCIES § 29-6
31:27

ARTICLE I
Housing Authority
[Adopted 3-28-1972 by Ord. No. 65]
§ 31-1. Findings. [Amended 10-26-1976]
Pursuant to the provisions of C.G.S. §§ 8-40 and 8-41, it is hereby found that
there is a shortage of safe or sanitary dwelling accommodations in the Town
of Farmington available to families of low and moderate income at rentals
they can afford.
§ 31-2. Need established.
It is hereby declared that a need exists for a housing authority in the Town
of Farmington.
§ 31-3. Establishment.
A housing authority to be known as the "Housing Authority of the Town of
Farmington" (hereinafter referred to as the "Authority") be and hereby is
established pursuant to C.G.S. §§ 8-40 and 8-41, as amended.
§ 31-4. Powers.
The Authority shall be vested with all the powers provided in Chapter 128
of the General Statutes of Connecticut, as amended.
§ 31-5. When effective.
The Authority shall be authorized to transact business and to exercise its
powers on the date this article becomes effective.
§ 31-6. Membership; vacancies; quorum; officers.
A. The Authority shall consist of six persons appointed by the Town Council,
which persons shall be hereinafter referred to as "Commissioners."
Commissioners shall be residents of the Town of Farmington. The term
of each Commissioner shall be five years, expiring on September 30,
except that, with respect to the initial appointment, four of the six
Commissioners shall be appointed for terms of one, two, three and
four years, respectively, so that the term of one Commissioner shall
expire at the end of each year for four of the Commissioners. Two
of the Commissioner's terms will expire at the same time. [Amended
2-28-1984 by Ord. No. 82; 5-14-2002]
B. A vacancy occurring because of a change of residence by a
Commissioner, removal of a Commissioner, resignation or death shall be
filled by the Town Council for the unexpired portion of the term.
C. No Commissioner may hold any public office in the Town of Farmington.
A Commissioner shall hold office until his successor is appointed and
has qualified. A certificate of the appointment or reappointment of any
Commissioner shall be filed with the Town Clerk and shall be conclusive
§ 31-1 HOUSING AGENCIES § 31-6
31:29
evidence of the legal appointment of such Commissioner, after he has
taken the oath of office as prescribed in C.G.S. § 1-25.
D. Three Commissioners shall constitute a quorum. Action may be taken
by the Authority upon a vote of not less than a majority of the
Commissioners present, unless the bylaws of the Authority require a
larger number.
E. Within 30 days from October 1 of each year, the Authority shall select
from among its Commissioners a Chairman and a Vice Chairman.
[Amended 2-28-1984 by Ord. No. 82; 7-28-1992]
F. The Town Manager shall supply the Authority with such personnel and
with such equipment as it shall reasonably require and all such
personnel shall receive wages and benefits as established by the Town
Council. Commissioners shall serve without compensation.
§ 31-7. Conflicts of interest.
No Commissioner or employee of the Authority shall acquire any interest,
direct or indirect, in any housing project or in any property included or
planned to be included in any project, nor shall he have any interest, direct
or indirect, in any contract or proposed contract for materials or services
to be furnished or used in connection with any housing project. If any
Commissioner or employee of the Authority owns or controls an interest,
direct or indirect, in any property included or planned to be included in any
housing project, he shall immediately disclose the same, in writing, to the
Authority, and such a disclosure shall be entered upon the minutes of the
Authority. Failure to so disclose such interest shall constitute misconduct in
office.
§ 31-8. Removal of Commissioners.
For inefficiency or neglect of duties or misconduct in office, a Commissioner
may be removed by the Town Council as provided in C.G.S. § 8-43.
§ 31-9. Absences from meetings. [Added 11-22-1977 by Ord. No. 76]
The membership of any person who is absent from three regular meetings
during any six-month period shall terminate as of the time the third such
absence occurs, unless such absences are waived by the Chairman of the
Authority because of illness or other extenuating circumstances. The
Chairman of the Authority shall notify the Town Manager promptly after the
third such absence occurs.
§ 31-10. Auxiliary services.
The facilities and services of the various agencies and departments of the
Town of Farmington shall be available to the Authority as it may reasonably
require.
§ 31-6 FARMINGTON CODE § 31-10
31:30
ARTICLE II
Housing Partnership
[Adopted 2-28-1989 by Ord. No. 88]
§ 31-11. Purpose; membership.
A. The Farmington Housing Partnership is hereby established for the
purpose of increasing the supply and availability of affordable housing in
the Town of Farmington.
B. The Partnership shall consist of the following members:
(1) The Chairman of the Council of the Town of Farmington.
(2) A representative from each of the Plan and Zoning Commission,
Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Agency and Housing Authority.
(3) Two representatives of the Farmington business community.
(4) Two representatives from public interest groups interested in
developing a supply and availability of affordable housing.
(5) The Town Planner and one other professional engaged in urban, land
use and housing planning.
§ 31-12. Responsibilities for receiving initial designation under
state program.
The responsibilities of the members of the Farmington Housing Partnership,
in order to receive initial designation under the Connecticut Housing
Partnership Program, shall include the following:
A. Submission of evidence to the Commissioner of Housing that the
Farmington Housing Partnership has been established in accordance
with C.G.S. § 8-336f et seq. [Amended 7-28-1992]
B. Submission of evidence to the Commissioner of Housing that sufficient
local resources have been committed to the Farmington Housing
Partnership.
§ 31-13. Responsibilities for receiving development designation
under state program.
The responsibilities of the members of the Farmington Housing Partnership,
in order to receive development designation under the Connecticut Housing
Partnership Program, shall include the following:
A. The examination and identification of housing needs and opportunities
within the community.
B. The exploration of the availability of any state, municipal or other land
within the Town of Farmington that is suitable for the development of
affordable housing.
C. The review of applicable planning and zoning regulations4 to determine
whether such regulations restrict the development of affordable housing
in the Town of Farmington.
D. The identification of any necessary changes to existing planning and
zoning regulations.
4. Editor's Note: See Ch. 172, Subdivision Regulations, and Ch. 197, Zoning Regulations.
§ 31-11 HOUSING AGENCIES § 31-13
31:31
E. The establishment of priorities and the development of a long-range
plan to meet identified housing needs in the community consistent with
regional housing needs.
F. The establishment of procedures for development of a written proposal
to achieve priorities in accordance with the plan.
G. The initiation of an activity, development or project designed to create
additional affordable housing in the Town of Farmington.
§ 31-14. Construal of provisions.
This chapter shall be construed so as not to conflict with any state or federal
statute, rule or regulation.
§ 31-15. Expenses; expenditure of funds.
There shall be included in the Town budget reasonable funds to cover the
expenses of the Farmington Housing Partnership. No person shall have the
right to expend any public funds of the Town of Farmington in carrying out
any Partnership activities authorized by this chapter without prior approval
of the Town Council, nor shall any person have any right to bind the Town
by contract, agreement or otherwise without prior and specific approval of
the Town Council.
§ 31-16. Absences from meetings. [Added 7-23-1991]
The membership of any person who is absent from three regular meetings
during any six-month period shall terminate as of the time the third such
absence occurs, unless such absences are waived by the Chairman of the
Partnership because of illness or other extenuating circumstances. The
Chairman of the Partnership shall notify the Town Manager promptly after
the third such absence occurs.
§ 31-13 FARMINGTON CODE § 31-16
31:32
ARTICLE III
Housing Site Development Agency
[Adopted 6-26-1990 by Ord. No. 92]
§ 31-17. Designation of Agency.
Pursuant to C.G.S. § 8-216b, the Housing Authority of the Town of
Farmington is designated as a Housing Site Development Agency within the
Town.
§ 31-18. Powers and duties.
The Housing Authority of the Town of Farmington shall have all the powers
set forth in C.G.S. § 8-216b, as said statute may be amended, to include the
following:
A. To engage in all services reasonably related to the acquisition,
construction, maintenance, operation, sale and lease of facilities and
property associated with a housing and community development project.
B. To research and prepare for submission and submit to federal and state
agencies applications and data to obtain financial assistance and to
receive and utilize such financial assistance for carrying out a housing
and community development project.
C. To plan, finance and provide technical and other assistance to promote
the development of dwelling units within the Town for low- and
moderate-income persons, elderly persons or disadvantaged persons.
D. To provide financing for rehabilitation of housing and facilities and to
provide technical and other assistance to promote conservation of the
Town's housing stock.
E. To initiate and undertake appropriate activities under federal or state
housing and community development grant programs.
F. To undertake and manage affordable housing programs and cooperative
ownership programs within the Town.
§ 31-17 HOUSING AGENCIES § 31-18
31:33
Chapter 35
HUMAN RELATIONS COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fair Rent Commission — See Ch. 27. Housing agencies — See Ch. 31.
§ 35-1. Authority.
Pursuant to the authority granted to the Council of the Town by the General
Statutes and Special Acts of the State of Connecticut, there shall be
established, organized and appointed for the a Human Relations
Commission created for the purposes stated herein and having delegated to
it the duties and powers hereinafter set forth.
§ 35-2. Establishment; membership.
A. There is hereby created a Commission on Human Relations of the Town
to be known as the "Farmington Human Relations Commission" (the
"Commission"). The Commission shall consist of seven members who
shall be appointed by the Town Council. Members shall be appointed for
two-year terms, commencing on July 1. [Amended 6-26-2001]
B. Membership shall be open to persons interested in the aims and
programs of the Commission as set forth in this chapter. In determining
membership of the Commission, consideration shall be given to
representation of a diverse economic, social and cultural cross section of
the community.
C. The Town Council shall appoint the Chairperson of the Commission for
the ensuing year, who shall be charged with calling the first meeting of
the Commission within 30 days following the date of the appointment
of the members of the Commission. At the first meeting of each year,
the Commission shall elect from its members a Vice Chairperson and
recording secretary and shall establish a schedule of regular meeting
dates for the ensuing year.
§ 35-3. Vacancies; absences from meetings.
Any vacancy on the Commission from whatever cause occurring shall be
filled by appointment by the Town Council for the unexpired portion of
the term in accordance with the preceding section. The membership of
any person who is absent from two regular meetings during any twelvemonth
period shall terminate as of the time the second such absence occurs,
unless such absences are waived by the Chairperson of the Commission
because of illness or other extenuating circumstances. The Chairperson of
the Commission shall notify the Town Manager promptly after the second
such absence occurs.
§ 35-4. Meetings; quorum.
§ 31-18 FARMINGTON CODE § 35-4
35:34
A. The Commission shall hold a minimum of four meetings each year at
such regular intervals as it may designate. At any regular meeting, any
member of the public may present an oral petition to the Commission
requesting the Commission to hear public comments or complaints. The
Chairperson of the Commission may call a special meeting at any time.
Any three members of the Commission may at any time request, in
writing, that the Chairperson call a special meeting. The Chairperson
shall, within five days after receipt of such request, call a special meeting
for a time within 10 days after the date of the call of the meeting.
B. A quorum at any meeting shall consist of four members and the vote of a
majority of the Commission present at any meeting at which a quorum is
present shall be required for any action taken. [Amended 6-26-2001]
§ 35-5. Purposes.
The purposes of the Commission shall be as follows:
A. To foster mutual understanding and respect among all members of the
community.
B. To encourage equality of treatment of, and opportunity for, all members
of the community, without regard to economic status, race, color,
ethnicity, religion, sex, sexual orientation, age and physical, mental and
learning disabilities. [Amended 6-26-2001]
C. To cooperate with governmental and nongovernmental agencies and
organizations charged with promoting an integrated and diverse
community or having like or kindred functions to those of the
Commission.
§ 35-6. Duties.
The duties of the Commission shall be as follows:
A. To act as a fair hearing body for conflicts arising from the administration
of regulations promulgated under the Americans With Disabilities Act.
B. To receive and hear complaints regarding inequity of treatment or of
discrimination in the Town and to refer such complaints to the proper
agency having jurisdiction in the particular matter if a resolution,
mutually agreeable to the parties involved, cannot be reached following
a hearing by the Commission on the matter.
C. To assist in the resolution of interpersonal conflicts of a noncriminal
nature referred to the Commission by another department or agency in
the , including but not limited to the Police Department, the Department
of Human Services or the Building Department. Such conflicts shall be
heard by the Commission only with the voluntary cooperation of the
parties involved.
D. To seek voluntary compliance with all state and federal laws relating to
human rights and opportunities.
E. To offer its services and to cooperate with every other agency and
department of the in promoting a healthy community by providing
outreach to new neighborhoods and affordable developments.
F. To promote educational activities and programs and assist cooperative
efforts in the community in furtherance of the Commission's objectives.
§ 35-4 HUMAN RELATIONS COMMISSION § 35-6
35:35
G. To carry out such projects as shall be assigned to it by the Town Council.
H. To submit to the Town Council annually, or more frequently if the Council
shall so request, reports concerning the activities of the Commission.
§ 35-7. Auxiliary services.
The facilities and services of the various agencies and departments of the
shall be available to the Commission as it may reasonably require.
Chapter 38
(RESERVED)
Chapter 41
JUSTICES OF THE PEACE
§ 41-1. Nomination. [Amended 7-28-1992; 5-23-2000]
Thirty Justices of the Peace shall be nominated in Farmington for four-year
terms commencing on the first Monday of January 2001, all of whom shall
serve as provided by law.
Chapter 47
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Election of officers — See Charter, Art. II.
Financial interest — See Charter, Art. VIII.
Defense and indemnification — See Ch. 16.
Code of Ethics — See Ch. 24.
Fire Department — See Ch. 29.
Human Relations Commission — See Ch. 35.
Pensions — See Ch. 51.
Public buildings — See Ch. 53.
Fire hydrants — See Ch. 101.
Garbage and refuse collection — See Ch. 165,
Art. I.
§ 35-6 FARMINGTON CODE § 41-1
41:36
ARTICLE I
Deputy Treasurer
[Adopted 7-27-1948 by Ord. No. 3]
§ 47-1. Establishment of office; qualifications.
There shall be and there is hereby established the office of Deputy
Treasurer. Said Deputy Treasurer shall be appointed by the Town Council
upon the recommendation of the Town Treasurer, for such term or terms as
the Council may designate. The Deputy Treasurer shall be selected on the
basis of integrity and ability to perform the duties of the office.
§ 47-2. Duties; bond; compensation.
The Deputy Treasurer shall assist the Treasurer in all duties pertaining to
his office and shall act for and in behalf of the Treasurer in the latter's
absence or inability to act. Before assuming the duties of his office, the
Deputy Treasurer shall file a bond with the Town Clerk in such amount
as the Council may designate. The compensation for said office shall be
established by the Council.
§ 47-1 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 47-2
47:37

ARTICLE II
Town Engineer
[Adopted 12-28-1948 by Ord. No. 10]
§ 47-3. Establishment of office; qualifications.
There shall be and there is hereby established the office of the Town
Engineer. Said Town Engineer shall be appointed by the Town Manager and
shall be selected on the basis of ability to perform the duties of his office.
§ 47-4. Duties.
The Town Engineer shall perform such duties as may be required of him
under the supervision and direction of the Town Manager. He shall maintain
and keep on file the engineering records of the Town and such records shall
be the property of the Town.
§ 47-3 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 47-4
47:39

ARTICLE III
Collector of Revenue
[Adopted 2-25-1969 by Ord. No. 60]
§ 47-5. Sewerage system charges. [Amended 7-28-1992]
Pursuant to C.G.S. § 7-258, the Town Collector of Revenue is hereby
designated as collector of sewerage system connection and use charges
with full power to collect such charges in accordance with the provisions of
the General Statutes for the collection of property taxes.5
§ 47-6. Fire hydrant charges. [Amended 7-28-1992]
The Town Collector of Revenue is hereby designated as collector of service
charges established for the operation, maintenance and installation of fire
hydrants in the Town.6
§ 47-7. Garbage and refuse charges. [Amended 7-28-1992]
The Town Collector of Revenue is hereby designated as collector of service
charges established for the collection of garbage and refuse in the Town.7
5. Editor's Note: See Ch. 156, Sewers.
6. Editor's Note: See Ch. 101, Fire Hydrants.
7. Editor's Note: See Ch. 165, Solid Wastes, Art. I.
§ 47-5 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 47-7
47:41

ARTICLE IV
Ad Hoc Committees
[Adopted 2-28-1984 by Ord. No. 82]
§ 47-8. Expiration of terms. [Amended 7-28-1992]
Unless otherwise specified in a resolution appointing an ad hoc committee
to assist the Council in carrying out its duties, the term of each member
of such committee shall expire on the September 30th following such
appointment and the term of each reappointed or succeeding member of
such committee shall commence on October 1.
§ 47-8 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 47-8
47:43

ARTICLE V
Fire Marshal
[Adopted 1-28-19978]
§ 47-9. Repeal of former provisions.
Former Article V of Chapter 47 of the Farmington Code is repealed and the
following is substituted in lieu thereof.
§ 47-10. Establishment of office; qualifications.
There is hereby established the office of Fire Marshal. The Fire Marshal
shall be appointed by and be responsible to the Town Manager and shall be
selected on the basis of ability to perform the duties of his office.
§ 47-11. Powers and duties.
The Fire Marshal shall have the powers and the duties set forth in Part II of
Chapter 541 of the General Statutes of Connecticut to include, among other
powers and duties, the following:
A. The Fire Marshal shall be responsible for enforcement within the Town
of the State Fire Safety Code and the provisions of Chapter 541 of the
General Statutes of Connecticut.
B. The Fire Marshal shall, in accordance with the provisions of § 29-311
of the Connecticut General Statutes, investigate the cause, origin and
circumstances of any fire or explosion within the Town by reason of
which property has been destroyed or damaged, a person has been
injured or killed, incidents have occurred which threatened property
with destruction or damage or persons with injury or death, and shall
especially investigate whether such fire was the result of an incendiary
device or the result of carelessness, design or criminal act.
C. The Fire Marshal may inspect in the interest of public safety all buildings
and facilities of public service, all building and facilities used for
manufacturing and all occupancies regulated by the Fire Safety Code
within the Town. In each case in which the Fire Marshal conducts an
inspection, he shall keep a record of such an investigation.
D. The Fire Marshal shall have the right of entry at all reasonable hours into
or upon any premises within the Town in the performance of his duties,
except with respect to the residential portion of buildings designed to
be occupied by three or more families which may only be entered for
inspection between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. except in the
event of any emergency requiring immediate attention for safety to life
or in the interest of public safety.
8. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the repeal of former Article V, Fire Chief/
Fire Marshal, adopted 9-28-1993.
§ 47-9 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 47-11
47:45
Chapter 51
PENSIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees — See Ch. 47.
§ 47-11 FARMINGTON CODE § 47-11
47:46
Part 1
Police Employees
ARTICLE I
Establishment of Plan
§ 51-1. Purpose; applicability.
The Town of Farmington Employee Pension Plan (hereinafter referred to as
the "plan") is established, subject to the provisions hereinafter set forth,
for the purpose of providing old-age security to employees of the Town
of Farmington (hereinafter referred to as the "Town"). The plan has been
divided into Part 1, Part 2 and Part 3 for convenience only. Except as
otherwise indicated herein, all articles of this Part 1 shall apply only to
eligible police employees of the Town of Farmington.
§ 51-1 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 51-1
47:47

ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 51-2. Terms defined.
As used herein, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
BOARD — The Board of Administration provided for in Article III of Part 1
of this chapter.
CREDITED SERVICE — Computed to the nearest 1/12 year, time
commencing when a person qualifies as an employee under the plan
pursuant to the definition of "employee" below and ending with the date
upon which an employee ceases to be an employee as defined below, subject
to the limitations set forth in Article VII of this Part 1.
EMPLOYEE — Any person who, on or after the effective date, is a police
employee of the Town; provided, however, that the term shall exclude those
who regularly perform services for the Town for less than 30 hours per week
and with less than 1,500 hours per year. Each employee shall qualify as an
employee under the plan on the employee's date of hire.
POLICE EMPLOYEE — An employee who is a regular full-time permanent
investigating and uniformed member of the Farmington Police Department
having the authority to exercise police powers.
SUPERVISORY POLICE EMPLOYEE — A police employee, as defined above,
who has the rank of Captain or Chief of Police.
An employee shall be deemed to be an employee of the Town during all
periods in which the person is in an employment relation with the Town.
A.
Credited service for police employees may include periods of military
service in the United States Armed Forces, prior approved police
service within or without the Town and sick leave in excess of one year,
so long as all costs determined by the actuary for the plan related to
said additional periods of service for members of Local 331 IBPO are
borne by the employee. Such additionally purchased credited service
may exceed the limits set forth in Article VII, § 51-15A, below.
B.
§ 51-2 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 51-2
47:49

ARTICLE III
Administration of Plan
§ 51-3. Board of Administration; membership.
The plan shall be administered by a Board of Administration consisting of
11 members, appointed by the Town Council, at least one of whom shall be
a member of the Council and at least five of whom shall be Town employees.
Local No. 60 of the Connecticut Independent Labor Union, Local No. 1689
American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees, Local No.
2001 CSEA/SEIU, Local 331 of the International Brotherhood of Police
Officers and Local 3103 of the International Association of Fire Fighters
shall all have the right to nominate one person who shall be on the elevenmember
Board of Administration, and the Town Council shall appoint those
persons nominated. Local No. 60, Local No. 1689, Local 331, Local 2001
and Local 3103 shall each have the right to recall its appointee and to
nominate a second person to replace the first, and the Council will make
such appointment. The term of the Board members shall be coextensive
with that of the term of the appointing Town Council.
§ 51-4. Powers of Board.
The Board shall have such powers as are necessary for proper
administration of the plan, including but not restricted to the following:
A. To prescribe procedures to be followed by employees in filing
applications for benefits and for furnishing evidence necessary to
establish employees' rights to such benefits.
B. To make determinations as to the rights of any employee applying or
receiving retirement benefits and to afford a mechanism for adjusting
the complaint of any individual dissatisfied with any determination.
C. To develop procedures for the establishment of credited service of
employees and, after affording employees an opportunity to make
objection with respect thereto, to establish such service conclusively in
advance of retirement.
D. To have periodic actuarial valuations of the plan by an actuary
designated by the Board, who may be an actuary of the insurance
company chosen by the Town Council pursuant to Article V.
E. To authorize all disbursements from the plan in accordance with the
provisions of this agreement and to establish necessary procedures
therefor.
F. To prepare and distribute, in such manner as the Board determines to be
appropriate, information explaining the plan.
G. To delegate any of the above powers and duties in such manner as the
Board considers necessary and appropriate.
§ 51-5. Quorum.
To constitute a quorum for the transaction of business, six members shall
be required to be present at any meeting of the Board.
§ 51-3 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 51-6
47:51
§ 51-6. Executive officer.
The Town Manager of Farmington shall act as executive officer of the plan
and, subject to the approval of the Board, take in its name such action as is
necessary to administer the plan.
§ 51-7. Liability.
Neither the Board nor any of its members, nor the Town nor any officer or
official or other representative of the Town, shall be liable because of any
act or failure to act on the part of the Board or any of its members, to any
person whatsoever, except that nothing herein shall be deemed to relieve
any such individual from liability for his own fraud or bad faith.
§ 51-6 FARMINGTON CODE § 51-7
47:52
ARTICLE IV
Payments to Plan
§ 51-8. Contributions.
A. Employee contributions.
(1) Percent of contribution; deduction from pay.
(a) During the period of July 1, 1987, through June 30, 1991, each
police employee shall contribute to the plan 6% of his salary or
earnings.
(b) During the period of July 1, 1991, through June 30, 1993, each
police employee shall contribute to the plan 6 1/2% of his salary
or earnings.
(c) During the period of July 1, 1993, and continuing thereafter, each
police employee shall contribute to the plan 7% of his salary or
earnings.
(d) An employee's salary or earnings shall be the compensation paid
by the Town to an employee as shown on the W-2 Form submitted
to the Internal Revenue Service and shall be determined without
regard to any reductions pursuant to Section 125, 414(h)(2) or
457 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended. Such
contributions shall be deducted from each employee's pay by
the Town and shall be paid immediately by it to the plan. An
employee's obligation to contribute to the plan shall cease after
he has contributed for a period of 30 years or has accumulated
30 years of credited service.
(2) Town assumption of employee contributions. Pursuant to the
provisions of Section 414(h)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code of
1986, as amended, the Town shall assume and pay the employee
contributions required by Subsection A above which would otherwise
be payable by employees who are employed by the Town in an
administrative capacity in the general government portion of the
budget and whose employment is not subject to the terms of a
collective bargaining agreement with respect to salary or earnings
on account of service on and after August 1, 1991. Employee
contributions so paid by the Town shall be paid from the same source
of funds used for the payment of compensation to employees, and
a deduction shall be made from each employee's salary or earnings
equal to the amount of the employee's contribution so paid by the
Town.
(3) Accounting. Employee contributions paid by the Town shall be
accounted for separately from employee contributions not so paid
but shall, nevertheless, be treated as employee contributions for
purposes of Article VI, § 51-13, hereof. In no case shall an employee
for whom contributions are paid by the Town pursuant to this
Subsection A(2) and (3)have the option of receiving such amounts in
salary or earnings from the Town.
B. Town contributions. The Town shall annually contribute an amount based
on an annual actuarial survey.
§ 51-8 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 51-8
47:53

ARTICLE V
The Plan and Insurance Company
§ 51-9. (Reserved)
§ 51-10. Use of plan to pay benefits; administrative expenses.
The plan shall be used to pay benefits as provided in the plan. Expenses
of administering the plan as are authorized by the Board and approved by
the Council will be borne directly by the Town. No part of the principal or
income of the plan shall in any event be used for or diverted to purposes
other than those provided in the plan, and no benefits shall be paid out of
the plan without prior authorization by the Board or by the Town Manager
acting for the Board.
§ 51-9 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 51-10
47:55

ARTICLE VI
Eligibility
§ 51-11. Normal retirement date.
A. The normal retirement date for police employees with at least 10 years of
credited service (except as noted below) shall be the first day of the month
next following the earlier of the date on which they complete 26 years of
credited service or the appropriate birthday which occurs in the time period
listed in the following table:
Time Period Birthday
Prior to July 1, 1987 56th
July 1, 1987 - June 30, 1990 55th
July 1, 1990 - June 30, 1993 54th
July 1, 1993 - June 30, 1995 52nd
July 1, 1995 and thereafter 48th
B. For those police employees who have accumulated 26 or more years of
credited service as of June 30, 1989, their normal retirement date shall be
July 1, 1989.
C. In no event shall a police employee work beyond age 65.
§ 51-12. Early retirement.
Any police employee with 10 or more years of credited service whose
employment with the Town is terminated when or after he reaches the age
of 55 but prior to attainment of the normal retirement date shall be eligible,
at his option, for either a deferred or immediate early retirement benefit as
provided in Article VII, § 51-17 or § 51-18 hereof.
§ 51-13. Termination of employment.
A. A police employee with 10 or more years of credited service whose
employment with the Town is terminated for any reason after July 1,
1987, and prior to the following ages and who elects to leave his own
contributions in the plan shall be entitled to a deferred retirement
benefit payable according to the provisions of Article VII, § 51-17 hereof:
(1) Age 56 on or before June 30, 1987.
(2) Age 55 effective July 1, 1987.
(3) Age 54 effective July 1, 1990.
(4) Age 52 effective July 1, 1993.
(5) Age 48 effective July 1, 1995.
B. A police employee with less than 10 years of credited service whose
employment with the Town is terminated (excluding terminations caused
by the death of the employee) shall be entitled to the return of his own
contributions to the plan together with compound interest at the rate of
5% per annum.
§ 51-14. Disability retirement.
§ 51-11 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 51-14
47:57
A. A police employee with 10 or more years of credited service whose
employment with the Town is terminated as a result of unavoidable total
and permanent disability so as to permanently prevent such employee
from engaging in any occupation for remuneration or profit,
notwithstanding the fact that such employee may not have attained age
56 prior to July 1, 1987; age 55 effective July 1, 1987; age 54 effective
July 1, 1990; age 52 effective July 1, 1993; or age 48 effective July
1, 1995, shall be eligible for a normal retirement benefit as provided
in Article VII hereof, said normal retirement benefit to commence not
earlier than six months following the date of disability.
(1) A covered police employee shall be deemed to be within the scope
of total and permanent disability only if he is found by the Board
to have been totally disabled by bodily injury or disease so as to be
prevented from engaging in any regular occupation or employment
for remuneration or profit. Such police employee shall be retired for
disability only if the Board shall determine that he will be so totally
and permanently disabled during the remainder of his life on the
basis of an opinion certified by a qualified physician designated by
the Board.
(2) The disability shall be deemed to have resulted from an unavoidable
cause, unless incurred while the covered police employee was
engaged in a criminal enterprise or because of habitual
drunkenness, addiction to narcotics or intentionally self-inflicted
injury.
B. Once each year, the Board shall have the right to require any disability
pensioner who has not reached the normal retirement date to undergo
a medical examination by a physician designated by the Board. Should
any such pensioner refuse to submit to such medical examination, his
disability pension shall be discontinued until his withdrawal of such
refusal, and should his refusal continue for a year, all pension rights
shall terminate. If the Board finds from such medical examination or
otherwise that the incapacity of a disability pensioner has been removed
and that he has regained his earning capacity in whole or in part, his
disability pension shall terminate, provided that the Town at that time
offers him employment.
C. A total and permanent disability, as referred to in Subsection A above,
shall be a service-connected disability if it occurs solely and exclusively
as a result of an accident or injury received during the performance of
the employee's duties for the Town.
D. With respect to a police employee who incurs a service-connected
disability which prevents the employee from performing police duties
but which permits him to perform duties required of one or more other
positions of employment with the Town, the Town will use its best efforts
to relocate the employee to another position with the Town with no
reduction in the base salary that the employee was earning at the time of
incurring the disability. The salary of the employee shall continue at said
level until such time as the salary of the position to which the employee
has been relocated exceeds the salary being paid to the employee, at
which time the employee shall receive the higher salary. If the Town
§ 51-14 FARMINGTON CODE § 51-14
47:58
does not have a position which the employee is capable of filling, the
employee shall be eligible for an amount equal to 50% of the base salary
that the employee was earning at the time of incurring the disability or
2% of said base salary times the years of credited service, whichever is
higher, less the amount of workers' compensation payments received by
the employee resulting from the service-connected disability.
§ 51-14 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 51-14
47:59

ARTICLE VII
Retirement Benefits
§ 51-15. Normal retirement benefit.
The annual retirement benefits of a police employee eligible for a normal
retirement benefit who has applied therefor shall be determined from the
following table at the time of application for retirement:
2.00% prior to July 1, 1988
2.25% effective July 1, 1988
2.50% effective July 1, 1992
of the annual average of the highest annual earnings received by a police
employee from the Town during any four consecutive years, multiplied by
the police employee's years of credited service and fractions thereof. If the
final year of earnings before retirement or termination is a partial year,
this partial year of earnings will be annualized before determining the four
highest years of earnings.
A. For current members of Local 331, IBPO, service after 26 years of
credited service shall not be considered as credited service for
retirement purposes except as provided in Article II, § 51-2, or in Article
VI, § 51-11, above.
B. A police employee who retires on or after July 1, 1987, with at least 20
years of credited service on the normal retirement date shall be entitled
to a pension of at least 50% of the police employee's highest average
annual earnings, computed as stated hereinabove.
C. A police employee who retires after July 1, 1989, shall be entitled to
a pension not to exceed 65% of the police employee's highest average
annual earnings, computed as stated hereinabove, except that, to the
extent that the use of additionally purchased credited service as
provided in Article II, § 51-2, results in a retirement benefit greater
than 65%, then the higher benefit shall be allowed. A police employee
who, as of June 30, 1989, has accumulated more than 65% of the police
employee's highest average annual earnings under the formula in effect
on that date shall have that percentage as his maximum benefit.
D. Notwithstanding the foregoing, if otherwise qualified, a supervisory
police employee who retires on or after July 1, 1989, shall be subject
to a pension limitation of 70% of the police employee's highest average
annual earnings, computed as stated hereinabove, and not 65% of such
earnings.
E. In no event shall the total annual retirement benefits payable to any
police employee exceed the lesser of 65% of the employee's highest
average annual earnings, computed as stated hereinabove, and the
maximum benefits permitted under any federal or state law applicable to
this plan. One-twelfth of a police employee's annual retirement benefits
shall be paid each month.
§ 51-15 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 51-15
47:61
F. A police employee who retires after January 12, 2012, shall be subject to
a pension limitation of 105% of the police employee's base salary at the
time of retirement.
G. Any police employee hired after January 12, 2012, shall be subject to a
pension limitation of 85% of the police employee's base salary at the time
of retirement.
§ 51-16. Annual earnings.
For purposes of calculating retirement benefits pursuant to this Article
VII, an employee's annual earnings shall be determined without regard to
any reductions pursuant to Section 125, 414(h)(2) or 457 of the Internal
Revenue Code of 1986, as amended.
§ 51-17. Deferred retirement benefits.
The monthly deferred retirement benefit at the normal retirement date of
an eligible employee shall be equal to the normal retirement benefit at set
ages determined in accordance with § 51-15 of this Article VII based on his
credited service at the time of termination of active employment.
§ 51-18. Immediate early retirement benefit.
The monthly immediate early retirement benefit of an eligible employee
shall be equal to the normal retirement benefit determined in accordance
with § 51-15 of this Article VII based on his credited service at the time
of early retirement, reduced actuarially in accordance with the number of
months by which such employee has not reached his normal retirement date
at the time of withdrawal from active employment; provided, however, that
in making the actuarial reduction hereunder for immediate commencement
of benefits, in the case of an eligible employee who has completed 35 or
more years of actual service with the Town at the time of withdrawal from
active employment, there shall be added to the actual age of such employee
at the time of withdrawal from active employment one additional year for
every five years of service of the employee with the Town in excess of
30 years. For purposes hereof, years of service shall be calculated in the
manner provided for credited service in the definition of "credited service"
in § 51-2 of Article II.
§ 51-19. Optional retirement benefits.
A. In lieu of the retirement benefits provided under §§ 51-15 and 51-17 of
this Article VII, employees who signify, by written notice to the Board
at least two years prior to their retirement or within 90 days of their
retirement date if an employee meets physical and health requirements.
that they wish to elect an optional form of retirement benefit may elect
to receive an actuarially equivalent pension:
(1) During the lifetime of the employee and continued either in full
or reduced by one half during the remaining lifetime, if any, of a
contingent annuitant designated by the employee.
§ 51-15 FARMINGTON CODE § 51-19
47:62
B. Nomination of a contingent annuitant may be invoked, revoked or
changed at any time not later than two years prior to the employee's
retirement or within 90 days of his retirement date if he meets physical
and health requirements, but not thereafter.
§ 51-20. Payment to beneficiary in event of death.
In the event that an employee, a retired employee or a former employee
who is entitled to a deferred retirement benefit shall die before receiving
an aggregate amount of pension at least equal to the aggregate of his own
contributions to the plan plus five-percent interest, the difference shall be
paid in a lump sum to his beneficiary or his estate.
§ 51-21. Dependents' survivors benefits.
A. Non-service-connected death. In the case of a non-service-connected
death, if an employee who has attained the age of 45, has been married
for at least one year and has five or more years of credited service dies
before retirement, his dependent spouse, so long as she lives and does
not remarry, or, if she predeceases him or if he has no dependent spouse,
his children surviving, so long as they are under the age of 18 or, if
a student, under the age of 23, shall be entitled to 50% of the normal
retirement benefit determined in accordance with § 51-15 of this Article
VII based on the employee's credited service at the time of his death.
In the event that the surviving spouse of said employee dies leaving
children of said employee, the amount of the retirement benefit received
by the surviving spouse shall be paid in equal parts to such children of
said employee so long as said children are under the age of 18 or, if a
student, under the age of 23.
B. Service-connected death. In the case of a service-connected death (a
death resulting solely and exclusively as a result of an accident or injury
received during the performance of the employee's duties for the Town)
of an employee prior to retirement, the benefits paid, regardless of the
age, year of marriage or years of credited service of the employee, shall
be the higher of benefits payable under Subsection A above or 25% of
the deceased employee's basic annual compensation at the time of death,
payable to the person and under the conditions set forth in Subsection A
above.
§ 51-19 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 51-21
47:63

ARTICLE VIII
Commencement and Duration of Benefits
§ 51-22. Normal and immediate retirement.
Normal and immediate retirement benefits shall be payable to any employee
who has applied therefor, commencing as of the first day of the month after
such employee becomes eligible for such benefits, and shall be payable on
the first day of each month thereafter during the life of such employee.
§ 51-23. Deferred retirement.
Deferred retirement benefits shall be payable to an eligible employee who
has applied therefor, commencing as of the first day of the month after the
employee attains the normal retirement date, and shall be payable on the
first day of each month thereafter during the life of such employee.
§ 51-24. Normal and early retirement.
Normal and early retirement benefits shall be continued during any period
in which a retired employee returns to active service with the Town. During
any such period of reemployment, the employee shall not be eligible for
further participation in the plan.
§ 51-25. (Reserved)
§ 51-22 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 51-25
47:65

ARTICLE IX
Nonalienation of Benefits
§ 51-26. Payment to person incurring expenses for retiree.
In the event of the death of a retired employee or in the event that the
Board shall find that he is unable to care for his affairs because of illness
or accident, any payments due may, unless claim shall have been made
therefor by a duly appointed legal representative, be paid by the Board
to the spouse, a child or parent or other blood relative or to any person
deemed by the Board to have incurred expense for such retired employee,
and any such payments so made shall be complete discharge of the
liabilities of the plan therefor.
§ 51-27. Encumbrance of retirement benefits restricted.
Any assignment, pledge or encumbrance of retirement benefits of any kind
shall not be permitted or recognized under any circumstances, nor shall
benefits be subject to attachment or legal process for debts of retired
employees; and upon notice of any assignment or attachment of any kind,
the benefits shall terminate and shall be applied by the Board for the benefit
of the retired employee, his spouse, children or other dependents or any
of them. Notwithstanding the provisions of this Article IX, however, the
Town shall be authorized by the Board to deduct from the monthly benefit
payable to any retired employee who has elected to continue as part of the
employee groups for hospital, surgical and medical coverage, pursuant to
arrangements made therefor, the full amount of the group subscription rate
as it may be established from time to time for such coverage and to pay such
amount directly to the carrier or insurer of such coverage.
§ 51-26 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 51-27
47:67

ARTICLE X
Termination of Plan
§ 51-28. Precedence for allocation of plan assets.
In the event of discontinuance of the plan, the assets then remaining in
the plan shall be allocated by the Board, to the extent that they shall be
sufficient, for the purpose of paying retirement benefits (the amount of
which shall be computed on the basis of credited service to the date of
discontinuance of the plan) in the following order of precedence:
A. To provide retirement benefits to employees (and/or their beneficiaries)
who shall have retired under the plan prior to its discontinuance, without
reference to the order of retirement.
B. To provide normal retirement benefits upon normal retirement to
employees who have reached their normal retirement dates on the date
of discontinuance of the plan, without reference to the order in which
they shall have reached said normal retirement dates.
C. To provide deferred retirement benefits to former employees eligible
therefor, without reference to the order in which they shall reach their
normal retirement dates, provided that said employees have elected
such deferred retirement benefits.
D. To provide for the return of their own contributions with three-percent
interest to all employees who have not received a distribution under
Subsection A, B or C above.
E. After satisfaction of the above liabilities, any remaining assets of the
plan shall be distributed pro rata, on a basis proportionate to earnings
and to total credited service at the date of discontinuance of the plan,
to employees in active employment with the Town at said date who have
not then attained the normal retirement date.
§ 51-29. Accomplishment of allocation.
Such allocation shall be accomplished through either the continuance of
the plan or a new plan or the purchase of annuity contracts; provided,
however, that the Board, upon finding that it is not practicable or desirable
under the groups listed above, may provide for allocation of a part or all
of the assets of the plan as cash payments of equivalent actuarial value to
any or all of such groups; and provided, further, however, that no change
shall be effected in the order of precedence and basis for allocation above
established.
§ 51-30. Location of terminated employees with rights under the
plan.
The Board shall make reasonable effort to locate any terminated employees
who have deferred retirement rights at the date of discontinuance of the
plan.
§ 51-28 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 51-31
47:69
§ 51-31. Amendment or termination of plan.
The plan may be amended or terminated by the Town Council after giving
90 days' notice to all participants.
§ 51-32. Use of income of plan restricted.
In the event of the termination of this plan, no part of the corpus or income
of the plan can be used for or diverted to purposes other than the exclusive
use of the beneficiaries and employees of the plan, nor may any part of the
plan revert to the Town.
§ 51-31 FARMINGTON CODE § 51-32
47:70
ARTICLE XI
Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 51-33. Moratorium provisions.
This Part 1, as amended effective January 13, 2012, as it relates to police
employees shall remain in full force and effect and shall be frozen through
June 30, 2019.
§ 51-34. Pension benefit review.
The Board of Administration shall cause a study to be made by the plan
actuary and prepare a report to the Town Manager for submission to the
Town Council every five years, commencing with the fiscal year ending June
30, 1988, on the current status of the pension benefits made to all retirees
who were previously police employees and the effect of economic conditions
on the payments over that period. The Town Council, after receiving the
report referred to, shall have the right, in its sole and exclusive discretion,
to make adjustments in the payments being made to former police
employees previously retired under this plan. The Town Council shall vote
on any such proposed adjustment within 90 days from the date it receives
the report from the actuary.
§ 51-33 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 51-34
47:71

Part 2
Nonpolice Employees
ARTICLE XII
Establishment of Plan
§ 51-35. Purpose; applicability.
The Town of Farmington Employee Pension Plan (hereinafter referred to as
the "plan") is established, subject to the provisions hereinafter set forth,
for the purpose of providing old-age security to employees of the Town
of Farmington (hereinafter referred to as the "Town"). The plan has been
divided into Part 1, Part 2 and Part 3 for convenience only. Except as
otherwise indicated herein, all Articles of this Part 2 shall apply only to
eligible employees of the Town of Farmington other than police employees
and library employees.
§ 51-35 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 51-35
47:73

ARTICLE XIII
Definitions
§ 51-36. Terms defined.
As used herein, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
BOARD — The Board of Administration provided for in Article XIV of the
plan.
CREDITED SERVICE — Computed to the nearest 1/12 year, time
commencing when a person qualifies as an employee under the plan
pursuant to the definition of "employee" below and ending with the date
upon which an employee ceases to be an employee as defined below, subject
to the limitations set forth in Article XVIII.
EMPLOYEE — Any person, other than a police employee or an employee
of the Farmington Village Green and Library Association, who, on or after
the effective date, is an employee of the Town; provided, however, that
the term shall exclude those who regularly perform services for the Town
for less than 30 hours per week and with less than 1,500 hours per year,
except for secretarial employees of the Board of Education, who shall be
considered "employees" under the plan if they work more than 30 hours
An employee shall be deemed to be an employee of the Town during
all periods in which the person is in an employment relation with the
Town; is on military leave, subject to the approval of the Board; or is on
approved sick leave, not to exceed one year.
A.
An employee, other than secretarial employees of the Board of
Education, whose service was previously excluded from his credited
service under the definition of employee may purchase an amount
of credited service (not to exceed the number of years of service
previously excluded) at the cost of 5% of the employee's current base
rate of annual earnings multiplied by the number of years of credited
service desired to be purchased. An employee shall have 30 days to
accept the Town's determination of the cost of purchasing such years
of credited service and, upon acceptance, shall have 12 months to pay
for such credited service through payroll withholding. Credit for such
service shall only be given when the full payment has been made.
B.
Employees with military service prior to their credited service with the
Town may purchase years of credited service for such years served in
the military. The entire cost of purchasing such service, as determined
by the actuary for the plan, shall be borne by the employee.
C.
School secretarial employees of the Board of Education may purchase
years of service previously excluded from their credited service under
the definition of "employee" as are necessary to meet the vesting
requirements of Article XVII of this plan. The cost of purchasing such
service, as determined by the actuary for the plan, shall be borne
equally by the Town and by the employee.
D.
§ 51-36 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 51-36
47:75
per week and more than 1,000 hours per year. An elected official who
is an employee of the Town and meets the above qualifications shall be
considered an "employee" under the meaning of this definition. All teaching
personnel of the Education Department shall be excluded. Each "employee"
shall qualify as an "employee" under the plan on the employee's date of
hire. Under prior plan provisions, an employee qualified as an "employee"
on the later of the employee's date of hire or the employee's twentyfifth
birthday, except that an employee who was hired on or after July 1,
1983, qualified as an "employee" under the plan from his date of hire. An
employee who was affected by such prior plan requirements shall qualify
as an "employee" retroactive to such employee's date of hire; provided,
however, that credited service for such period of retroactive participation in
the plan shall be subject to the rules set forth in the definition of "credited
service" above.[Amended 12-11-2018]
Effective July 1, 2010, SEIU members hired after this date will not be
eligible to be a part of this plan.
Effective July 1, 2011, AFSCME members hired after this date will not be
eligible to be a part of this plan.
Effective July 1, 2011, unaffiliated employees hired after this date will not
be eligible to be a part of this plan.
Effective July 1, 2019, Farmington Public Schools Employees United, ATF,
members hired after this date will not be eligible to be a part of this plan.
FIRE EMPLOYEE — An employee who is a regular full-time member of the
Farmington Fire Department. Fire employees hired after July 15, 2012, shall
at the time of employment, have the option of participating in the Town of
Farmington Employee Pension Plan or an alternative defined contribution
plan offered by the Town. The decision by the employee shall be final and
cannot be changed once put into effect.[Amended 12-18-2012]
POLICE EMPLOYEE — An employee who is a regular full-time permanent
investigating and uniformed member of the Farmington Police Department
having the authority to exercise police powers.
§ 51-36 FARMINGTON CODE § 51-36
47:76
ARTICLE XIV
Administration of Plan
§ 51-37. Board of Administration; membership.
The plan shall be administered by a Board of Administration consisting of
11 members, appointed by the Town Council, at least one of whom shall be
a member of the Council and at least five of whom shall be Town employees.
Local No. 60 of the Connecticut Independent Labor Union, Local No. 1689
American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees, Local No.
2001 CSEA/SEIU, Local 331 of the International Brotherhood of Police
Officers and Local 3103 of the International Association of Fire Fighters
shall all have the right to nominate one person who shall be on the elevenmember
Board of Administration, and the Town Council shall appoint those
persons nominated. Local No. 60,, Local No. 1689, Local No. 2001, Local
331 and Local 3103 shall each have the right to recall its appointee and to
nominate a second person to replace the first, and the Council will make
such appointment. The term of the Board members shall be coextensive
with that of the term of the appointing Town Council.
§ 51-38. Powers of Board.
The Board shall have such powers as are necessary for proper
administration of the plan, including but not restricted to the following:
A. To prescribe procedures to be followed by employees in filing
applications for benefits and for furnishing evidence necessary to
establish employees' rights to such benefits.
B. To make determinations as to the rights of any employee applying or
receiving retirement benefits and to afford a mechanism for adjusting
the complaint of any individual dissatisfied with any determination.
C. To develop procedures for the establishment of credited service of
employees and, after affording employees an opportunity to make
objection with respect thereto, to establish such service conclusively in
advance of retirement.
D. To have periodic actuarial valuations of the plan by an actuary
designated by the Board, who may be an actuary of the insurance
company chosen by the Town Council pursuant to Article XVI.
E. To authorize all disbursements from the plan in accordance with the
provisions of this agreement and to establish necessary procedures
therefor.
F. To prepare and distribute, in such manner as the Board determines to be
appropriate, information explaining the plan.
G. To delegate any of the above powers and duties in such manner as the
Board considers necessary and appropriate.
§ 51-39. Quorum.
To constitute a quorum for the transaction of business, six members shall
be required to be present at any meeting of the Board.
§ 51-37 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 51-40
47:77
§ 51-40. Executive officer.
The Town Manager of Farmington shall act as executive officer of the plan
and, subject to the approval of the Board, take in its name such action as is
necessary to administer the plan.
§ 51-41. Reliance on information from insurance company; liability.
Neither the Board nor any of its members, nor the Town nor any officer or
official or other representative of the Town, shall be liable because of any
act or failure to act on the part of the Board or any of its members, to any
person whatsoever, except that nothing herein shall be deemed to relieve
any such individual from liability for his own fraud or bad faith.
§ 51-40 FARMINGTON CODE § 51-41
47:78
ARTICLE XV
Payments to Plan
§ 51-42. Employee contributions.
A. Employee contributions for all employees except fire employees.
(1) During the period from October 1, 1956, through June 30, 1962, each
employee shall contribute to the plan 3% of his salary or earnings.
(2) During the period from June 1, 1962, through June 30, 1977, each
employee shall contribute to the plan 4 1/2% of his salary or
earnings.
(3) During the period from July 1, 1977, through June 30, 1990, each
employee shall contribute to the plan 5% of his salary or earnings.
(4) During the period from July 1, 1990, through June 30, 1993, each
employee shall contribute to the plan 5 1/2% of his salary or
earnings.
(5) During the period from July 1, 1993, through June 30, 1995, each
employee shall contribute to the plan 5 3/4% of his salary or
earnings.
(6) Commencing July 1, 1995, and continuing thereafter, each employee
shall contribute to the plan 6% of his salary or earnings.
B. Employee contributions for fire employees.
(1) Percent of contribution for certain periods.
(a) During the period from July 1, 1977, through June 30, 1990, each
fire employee shall contribute to the plan 5% of his salary or
earnings.
(b) During the period from July 1, 1990, through June 30, 1991, each
fire employee shall contribute to the plan 6% of his salary or
earnings.
(c) During the period from July 1, 1991, through June 30, 1992, each
fire employee shall contribute to the plan 7% of his salary or
earnings.
(d) During the period July 1, 1992 through June 30, 2000, each fire
employee shall contribute to the plan 7 1/2% of his salary or
earnings.
(e) Commencing July 1, 2000, and continuing thereafter, each fire
employee shall contribute to the plan 7 3/4% of his salary or
earnings.
(f) Fire employees hired after July 15, 2012, and continuing
thereafter, shall contribute to the plan 8% of their salary or
earnings. [Added 12-18-2012]
(2) A fire employee's salary or earnings shall be the compensation paid
by the Town to the fire employee as shown on the W-2 Form
submitted to the Internal Revenue Service and shall be determined
without regard to any reductions pursuant to Section 125, 414(h)(2)
or 457 of the code. Such contributions shall be deducted from each
fire employee's pay by the Town and shall be paid immediately by it
to the plan.
§ 51-42 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 51-42
47:79
(3) A fire employee's obligation to contribute to the plan shall cease
after he has contributed for a period of 30 years or has accumulated
30 years of credited service.
C. Town assumption of employee contributions.
(1) Pursuant to the provisions of Section 414(h)(2) of the Internal
Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, the Town shall assume and pay
the employee contributions required by Subsections A and B above
which would otherwise be payable by employees who are employed
by the Town in an administrative capacity in the general government
portion of the budget and whose employment is not subject to the
terms of a collective bargaining agreement with respect to salary
or earnings on account of service on and after August 1, 1991.
Commencing April 13, 2001, all employee contributions required
by Subsection A above will be subject to the provisions of Section
414(h)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986. Employee
contributions so paid by the Town shall be paid from the same source
of funds used for the payment of compensation to employees, and
a deduction shall be made from each employee's salary or earnings
equal to the amount of the employee's contribution so paid by the
Town.
(2) Employee contributions paid by the Town shall be accounted for
separately from employee contributions not so paid but shall,
nevertheless, be treated as employee contributions for purposes of
Article XVII, § 51-48, hereof. In no case shall an employee for whom
contributions are paid by the Town pursuant to this Subsection C
have the option of receiving such amounts in salary or earnings from
the Town.
§ 51-43. Town contributions.
During the period commencing on October 1, 1956, and continuing
thereafter, the Town shall annually contribute an amount based on an
annual actuarial survey.
§ 51-42 FARMINGTON CODE § 51-43
47:80
ARTICLE XVI
Plan Expenses
§ 51-44. (Reserved)
§ 51-45. Use of plan to pay benefits; administration expenses.
The plan shall be used to pay benefits as provided in the plan. Expenses
of administering the plan as are authorized by the Board and approved by
the Council will be borne directly by the Town. No part of the principal or
income of the plan shall in any event be used for or diverted to purposes
other than those provided in the plan, and no benefits shall be paid out of
the plan without prior authorization by the Board or by the Town Manager
acting for the Board.
§ 51-44 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 51-45
47:81

ARTICLE XVII
Eligibility
§ 51-46. Normal retirement date.
A. Normal retirement date for all employees except fire employees. For all
employees, the normal retirement date shall be the 62nd birthday of
said employee. Effective July 1, 1990, the normal retirement date shall
be the earlier of the 62nd birthday of said employee or the date, on or
after the employee's 58th birthday, on which the sum of said employee's
age and credited service equals 85. Effective July 1, 1995, the normal
retirement date shall be the earlier of the 62nd birthday of said employee
or the date on which the sum of said employee's age and credited service
equals 85. Effective July 1, 2000, the normal retirement date shall be
the earlier of the 62nd birthday of said employee or the date on which
the sum of the employee's age and credited service equals 80. This
Subsection A shall not apply to fire employees.
B. Normal retirement date for fire employees. For all fire employees, the
normal retirement date shall be the 65th birthday of said employee;
provided, however, that for a fire employee who has at least 10 years of
credited service, the normal retirement date shall be the 58th birthday
of said fire employee. In no event shall a fire employee work beyond age
65. [Amended 12-18-2012]
§ 51-47. Early retirement.
A. Early retirement for all employees except fire employees. Any employee
with five or more years of credited service whose employment with the
Town is terminated when or after he reaches the age of 55 but prior to
attainment of the normal retirement date shall be eligible, at his option,
for either a deferred or immediate early retirement benefit as provided
in Article XVIII, § 51-51 or 51-52. hereof. This Subsection A shall not
apply to fire employees.
B. Early retirement for fire employees. Any fire employee with 10 or more
years of credited service whose employment with the Town is terminated
when or after he reaches the age of 55 but prior to attainment of
the normal retirement date shall be eligible, at his option, for either a
deferred or immediate early retirement benefit as provided in Article
XVIII, § 51-51 or § 51-52 hereof.
C. Early retirement for fire employees hired after July 15, 2012. Any fire
employee hired after July 15, 2012 with 15 or more years of credited
service, whose employment with the Town is terminated when or after
he reaches the age of 58 but prior to attainment of the normal retirement
date, shall be eligible, at his option, for either a deferred or immediate
early retirement benefit as provided in Article XVIII, § 51-51 or 51-52
hereof. [Added 12-18-2012]
§ 51-48. Termination of employment.
An employee with five or more years of credited service whose employment
with the Town is terminated for any reason after the effective date and prior
to the attainment of age 55 and who elects to leave his own contributions in
§ 51-46 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 51-48
47:83
the plan shall be entitled to a deferred retirement benefit payable according
to the provisions of Article XVIII, § 51-51, hereof. An employee with less
than five years of credited service whose employment with the Town is
terminated (excluding terminations caused by the death of the employee)
shall be entitled to the return of his own contributions to the plan together
with compound interest at the rate of 5% per annum.
§ 51-49. Disability retirement.
A. An employee with 10 or more years of credited service whose
employment with the Town is terminated as a result of unavoidable total
and permanent disability so as to permanently prevent such employee
from engaging in any occupation for remuneration or profit,
notwithstanding the fact that such employee may not have attained the
normal retirement date, shall be eligible for a normal retirement benefit
as provided in Article XVIII hereof, said normal retirement benefit to
commence not earlier than six months following the date of disability.
(1) A covered employee shall be deemed to be within the scope of
"total and permanent disability" only if he is found by the Board to
have been totally disabled by bodily injury or disease so as to be
prevented from engaging in any regular occupation or employment
for remuneration or profit. Such employee shall be retired for
disability only if the Board shall determine that he will be so totally
and permanently disabled during the remainder of his life on the
basis of an opinion certified by a qualified physician designated by
the Board.
(2) The disability shall be deemed to have resulted from an unavoidable
cause unless incurred while the covered employee was engaged in a
criminal enterprise or because of habitual drunkenness, addiction to
narcotics or intentionally self-inflicted injury.
B. Once each year, the Board shall have the right to require any disability
pensioner who has not reached the normal retirement date to undergo
a medical examination by a physician designated by the Board. Should
any such pensioner refuse to submit to such medical examination, his
disability pension shall be discontinued until his withdrawal of such
refusal, and should his refusal continue for a year, all pension rights
shall terminate. If the Board finds from such medical examination or
otherwise that the incapacity of a disability pensioner has been removed
and that he has regained his earning capacity in whole or in part, his
disability pension shall terminate, provided that the Town at that time
offers him employment.
C. In the case of service-connected disability, as defined below, an
employee, regardless of years of service, whose employment with the
Town is terminated as a result of unavoidable total and permanent
disability shall be eligible for an amount equal to the benefits provided
in Subsection A above or 25% of the employee's basic compensation at
the time of disability, whichever is higher, less any payments of workers'
compensation received by law.
D. A total and permanent disability, as referred to in Subsections A and
C above, shall be a service-connected disability if it occurs solely and
§ 51-48 FARMINGTON CODE § 51-49
47:84
exclusively as a result of an accident or injury received during the
performance of the employee's duties for the Town.
E. With respect to a fire employee who incurs a service-connected disability
which prevents such fire employee from performing fire duties but which
permits him to perform duties required of one or more other positions of
employment with the Town, the Town will use its best efforts to relocate
the fire employee to another position with the Town with no reduction
in the base salary that the fire employee was earning at the time of
incurring the disability. The salary of the fire employee shall continue
at said level until such time as the salary of the position to which the
fire employee has been relocated exceeds the salary being paid to the
fire employee, at which time the fire employee shall receive the higher
salary. If the Town does not have a position which the fire employee
is capable of filling, the fire employee shall be eligible for an amount
equal to 50% of the average total earnings that the fire employee was
earning for the 26 weeks prior to the disability or 2 1/2% of said base
salary times the years of credited service, whichever is higher, less
the amount of workers' compensation payments received by the fire
employee resulting from the service-connected disability.
§ 51-49 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 51-49
47:85

ARTICLE XVIII
Retirement Benefits
§ 51-50. Normal retirement benefit.
A. Normal retirement benefit for all employees except fire employees.
(1) The annual retirement benefits of an employee eligible for a normal
retirement benefit who has applied therefor shall be 2% of the
annual average of the highest annual earnings received by the
employee from the Town during any three consecutive years,
multiplied by the employee's years of credited service and fractions
thereof. If the final year of earnings before retirement or termination
is a partial year, this partial year of earnings will be annualized
before determining the three highest years of earnings. Commencing
July 1, 2000, the annual retirement benefits of an employee eligible
for a normal retirement benefit who has applied therefor shall be 2%
of the total earnings for the thirty-six months immediately preceding
the retirement date of the employee, divided by three, multiplied by
the employee's years of credited service and fraction thereof. For
school employees whose benefit is covered by a collective bargaining
agreement, the Town shall calculate a sick pay benefit value in
the same manner as the non-school employees' benefit and add
such value, for benefit calculation purposes only, to the 36 months'
earnings described in this section.
(2) In no event shall the total annual retirement benefits payable to
any employee exceed the lesser of 65% of the employee's highest
average annual earnings, computed as stated hereinabove, and the
maximum benefits permitted under any federal or state law
applicable to this plan. One-twelfth of an employee's annual
retirement benefits shall be paid each month. This Subsection A shall
not apply to fire employees.
B. Normal retirement benefit for fire employees.
(1) The annual retirement benefits of a fire employee eligible for a
normal retirement benefit who has applied therefor shall be 2% of
the annual average of the highest annual earnings received by the
fire employee from the Town during any three consecutive years,
multiplied by the fire employee's years of credited service and
fractions thereof. Effective for retirements occurring on or after July
1, 1995, the annual retirement benefits of a fire employee eligible for
a normal retirement benefit who has applied therefor shall be 2 1/
4% of the annual average of the highest annual earnings received
by the fire employee from the Town during any three consecutive
years, multiplied by the fire employee's years of credited service and
fractions thereof. If the final year of earnings before retirement or
termination is a partial year, this partial year of earnings will be
annualized before determining the three highest years of earnings.
Effective for retirements occurring on or after July 1, 2000, the
annual retirement benefits of a fire employee eligible for a normal
retirement benefit who has applied therefor shall be 2 1/2% of the
total earnings for the thirty-six months immediately preceding the
§ 51-50 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 51-50
47:87
employee's retirement date, divided by three, multiplied by the fire
employee's years of credited service and fractions thereof.
(2) In no event shall the total annual retirement benefits payable to any
fire employee hired on or before July 15, 2012, exceed 65% of the
fire employee's highest average annual earnings, computed as stated
hereinabove. One-twelfth of a fire employee's annual retirement
benefits shall be paid each month. [Amended 12-18-2012]
(3) For fire employees hired after July 15, 2012, in no event shall the
total annual retirement benefits payable exceed 68% of the fire
employee’s base salary at the time of retirement. [Added
12-18-2012]
C. Annual earnings. For purposes of calculating retirement benefits
pursuant to this Article XVIII, an employee's annual earnings shall be
determined without regard to any reductions pursuant to Section 125,
414(h)(2) or 457 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended.
D. Base salary. For fire employees hired after July 15, 2012, "base salary"
shall be defined as the salary the employee was being paid at the time
of retirement less any earnings for overtime, bonuses, longevity, or any
other compensation not considered as part of the base salary. [Added
12-18-2012]
§ 51-51. Deferred retirement benefits.
The monthly deferred retirement benefit at the normal retirement date of
an eligible employee shall be equal to the normal retirement benefit at set
ages determined in accordance with § 51-50 of this Article XVIII based on
his credited service at the time of termination of active employment.
§ 51-52. Immediate early retirement benefit.
The monthly immediate early retirement benefit of an eligible employee
shall be equal to the normal retirement benefit determined in accordance
with § 51-50 of this Article XVIII based on his credited service at the time
of early retirement, reduced actuarially in accordance with the number of
months by which such employee has not reached his normal retirement date
at the time of withdrawal from active employment; provided, however, that
in making the actuarial reduction hereunder for immediate commencement
of benefits, in the case of an eligible employee who has completed 35 or
more years of actual service with the Town at the time of withdrawal from
active employment, there shall be added to the actual age of such employee
at the time of withdrawal from active employment one additional year for
every five years of service of the employee with the Town in excess of
30 years. For purposes hereof, years of service shall be calculated in the
manner provided for credited service in the definition of "credited service"
in § 51-36 of Article XIII.
§ 51-53. Optional retirement benefits.
A. In lieu of the retirement benefits provided under §§ 51-50 and § 51-51 of
this Article XVIII, employees who signify, by written notice to the Board
at least six months prior to their retirement or within 90 days of their
§ 51-50 FARMINGTON CODE § 51-53
47:88
retirement date if an employee meets physical and health requirements,
that they wish to elect an optional form of retirement benefit may elect
to receive an actuarially equivalent pension:
(1) During the lifetime of the employee and continued either in full or
reduced by 1/2 during the remaining lifetime, if any, of a contingent
annuitant designated by the employee.
B. Election of this option or nomination of a contingent annuitant may be
invoked, revoked or changed at any time not later than two years prior
to the employee's retirement or within 90 days of his retirement date if
he meets physical and health requirements, but not thereafter.
§ 51-54. Payment to beneficiary in event of death.
In the event that an employee or a retired employee or a former employee
who is entitled to a deferred retirement benefit shall die before receiving
an aggregate amount of pension at least equal to the aggregate of his own
contributions to the plan plus five-percent interest, the difference shall be
paid in a lump sum to his beneficiary or his estate.
§ 51-55. Dependents' survivors benefits.
A. Non-service-connected death. In the case of a non-service-connected
death, if an employee who has attained the age of 45, has been married
for at least one year and has five or more years of credited service dies
before retirement, his dependent spouse, so long as she lives and does
not remarry, or, if she predeceases him or if he has no dependent spouse,
his children surviving, so long as they are under the age of 18 or, if
a student, under the age of 23, shall be entitled to 50% of the normal
retirement benefit determined in accordance with § 51-50 of this Article
XVIII based on the employee's credited service at the time of his death.
In the event that the surviving spouse of said employee dies leaving
children of said employee, the amount of the retirement benefit received
by the surviving spouse shall be paid in equal parts to such children of
said employee so long as said children are under the age of 18 or, if a
student, under the age of 23.
B. Service-connected death. In the case of a service-connected death (a
death resulting solely and exclusively as a result of an accident or injury
received during the performance of the employee's duties for the Town)
of an employee prior to retirement, the benefits paid, regardless of the
age, year of marriage or years of credited service of the employee, shall
be the higher of benefits payable under Subsection A above or 25% of
the deceased employee's basic annual compensation at the time of death,
payable to the person and under the conditions set forth in Subsection A
above.
§ 51-53 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 51-55
47:89

ARTICLE XIX
Commencement and Duration of Benefits
§ 51-56. Normal and immediate retirement.
Normal and immediate retirement benefits shall be payable to any employee
who has applied therefor, commencing as of the first day of the month after
such employee becomes eligible for such benefits, and shall be payable on
the first day of each month thereafter during the life of such employee.
§ 51-57. Deferred retirement.
Deferred retirement benefits shall be payable to an eligible employee who
has applied therefor, commencing as of the first day of the month after the
employee attains the normal retirement date, and shall be payable on the
first day of each month thereafter during the life of such employee.
§ 51-58. Normal and early retirement.
Normal and early retirement benefits shall be continued during any period
in which a retired employee returns to active service with the Town. During
any such period of reemployment, the employee shall not be eligible for
further participation in the plan.
§ 51-59. (Reserved)
§ 51-56 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 51-59
47:91

ARTICLE XX
Nonalienation of Benefits
§ 51-60. Payment to person incurring expenses for retiree.
In the event of the death of a retired employee or in the event that the
Board shall find that he is unable to care for his affairs because of illness
or accident, any payments due may, unless claim shall have been made
therefor by a duly appointed legal representative, be paid by the Board
to the spouse, a child or parent or other blood relative or to any person
deemed by the Board to have incurred expense for such retired employee,
and any such payments so made shall be complete discharge of the
liabilities of the plan therefor.
§ 51-61. Encumbrance of retirement benefits restricted.
Any assignment, pledge or encumbrance of retirement benefits of any kind
shall not be permitted or recognized under any circumstances, nor shall
benefits be subject to attachment or legal process for debts of retired
employees; and upon notice of any assignment or attachment of any kind,
the benefits shall terminate and shall be applied by the Board for the
benefit of the retired employee, his spouse, children or other dependents
or any of them. Notwithstanding the provisions of this Article XX, however,
the insurance company chosen by the Town Council pursuant to Article
XVI shall be authorized by the Board to deduct from the monthly benefit
payable to any retired employee who has elected to continue as part of the
employee groups for hospital, surgical and medical coverage, pursuant to
arrangements made therefor, the full amount of the group subscription rate
as it may be established from time to time for such coverage and to pay such
amount directly to the carrier or insurer of such coverage.
§ 51-60 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 51-61
47:93

ARTICLE XXI
Termination of Plan
§ 51-62. Precedence for allocation of plan assets.
In the event of discontinuance of the plan, the assets then remaining in
the plan shall be allocated by the Board, to the extent that they shall be
sufficient, for the purpose of paying retirement benefits (the amount of
which shall be computed on the basis of credited service to the date of
discontinuance of the plan) in the following order of precedence:
A. To provide retirement benefits to employees (and/or their beneficiaries)
who shall have retired under the plan prior to its discontinuance, without
reference to the order of retirement.
B. To provide normal retirement benefits upon normal retirement to
employees who have reached their normal retirement date on the date of
discontinuance of the plan, without reference to the order in which they
shall have reached said normal retirement dates.
C. To provide deferred retirement benefits to former employees eligible
therefor, without reference to the order in which they shall reach their
normal retirement dates, provided that said employees have elected
such deferred retirement benefits.
D. To provide for the return of their own contributions with three-percent
interest to all employees who have not received a distribution under
Subsection A, B or C above.
E. After satisfaction of the above liabilities, any remaining assets of the
plan shall be distributed pro rata, on a basis proportionate to earnings
and to total credited service at the date of discontinuance of the plan,
to employees in active employment with the Town at said date who have
not then attained the normal retirement date.
§ 51-63. Accomplishment of allocation.
Such allocation shall be accomplished through either continuance of the
plan or a new plan or purchase of annuity contracts; provided, however,
that the Board, upon finding that it is not practicable or desirable under
the groups listed above, may provide for allocation of a part or all of
the assets of the plan as cash payments of equivalent actuarial value to
any or all of such groups; and provided, further, however, that no change
shall be effected in the order of precedence and basis for allocation above
established.
§ 51-64. Location of terminated employees with rights under the
plan.
The Board shall make reasonable effort to locate any terminated employees
who have deferred retirement rights at the date of discontinuance of the
plan.
§ 51-62 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 51-65
47:95
§ 51-65. Amendment or termination of plan.
The plan may be amended or terminated by the Town Council after giving
90 days' notice to all participants.
§ 51-66. Use of income of plan restricted.
In the event of the termination of this plan, no part of the corpus or income
of the plan can be used for or diverted to purposes other than the exclusive
use of the beneficiaries and employees of the plan, nor may any part of the
plan revert to the Town.
§ 51-65 FARMINGTON CODE § 51-66
47:96
ARTICLE XXII
Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 51-67. Moratorium provisions.
A. For all employees except fire employees, this Part 2, as amended
effective July 1, 2000, as it relates to employees other than fire
employees shall remain in full force and effect and shall be frozen
through June 30, 2008.
B. For fire employees, this Part 2, as it relates to fire employees shall
remain in full force and effect and shall be frozen through March 13,
2011.
§ 51-68. Town Manager provision.
The Town Manager and his/her assistant are excluded from the plan and,
instead, shall be included in the International City Management
Association-Retirement Corporation Retirement Plan (ICMA-RC). The Town,
in lieu of making any contribution to the plan for the benefit of the Town
Manager and his/her assistant, shall contribute to the ICMA-RC Deferred
Compensation Plan for their benefit.
§ 51-69. Pension benefit review.
The Board of Administration shall cause a study to be made by the plan
actuary and prepare a report to the Town Manager for submission to the
Town Council every five years, commencing with the fiscal year ending June
30, 1991, on the current status of the pension benefits made to all retirees
who were previously employees and the effect of economic conditions on
the payments over that period. The Town Council, after receiving the report
referred to, shall have the right, in its sole and exclusive discretion, to make
adjustments in the payments being made to former employees previously
retired under this plan. The Town Council shall vote on any such proposed
adjustment within 90 days from the date it receives the report from the
actuary.
§ 51-67 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 51-69
47:97

Part 3
Library Employees
ARTICLE XXIII
Establishment of Plan
§ 51-70. Purpose; applicability.
The Town of Farmington Employee Pension Plan (hereinafter referred to as
the "plan") is established, subject to the provisions hereinafter set forth,
for the purpose of providing old-age security to employees of the Town
of Farmington (hereinafter referred to as the "Town") and employees of
the libraries administered by the Farmington Village Green and Library
Association (hereinafter referred to as the "Library"). The plan has been
divided into Part 1, Part 2 and Part 3 for convenience only. Except as
otherwise indicated herein, all articles of this Part 3 shall apply only to
eligible employees of the Library.
§ 51-70 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 51-70
47:99

ARTICLE XXIV
Definitions
§ 51-71. Terms defined.
As used herein, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
BOARD — The Board of Administration provided for in Article XXV of the
plan.
CREDITED SERVICE — Computed to the nearest 1/12 year, the time
commencing when a person qualifies as an employee under the plan
pursuant to the definition of "employee" below and ending with the date
upon which an employee ceases to be an employee as defined below, subject
to the limitations set forth in Article XXIX.
An employee shall be deemed to be an employee of the Library during
all periods in which the person is in an employment relation with one of
the libraries administered by the Library; is on military leave, subject
to the approval of the Board; or is on approved sick leave, not to exceed
one year. In addition, for purposes of Article XXVIII, §§ 51-82 and 51-83,
if an employee severs his or her service with the Library by reason of
a quit, retirement or discharge and returns to work within 12 months
after the date on which he or she was first absent from service (by
reason of the severance or otherwise), his period of severance shall be
treated as a period of employment with the Library; and any period of
absence not in excess of one year for any reason other than a than a
quit, retirement, discharge or death, such as vacation, holidays, leave
of absence or layoff, shall be treated as a period of employment with the
Library.
A.
An employee whose service was previously excluded from his or her
credited service under the definition of credited service may purchase
an amount of credited service (not to exceed the number of years of
service previously excluded) at the cost of 5% of the employee's current
base rate of annual earnings multiplied by the number of years of
credited service desired to be purchased. An employee shall have 30
days to accept the Library's determination of the cost of purchasing
such years of credited service and, upon acceptance, shall have to pay
for such credited service through payroll withholding. Credit for such
service shall only be given when the full payment has been made.
B.
Employees with military service prior to their credited service with the
Library may purchase years of credited service for such years served in
the military. The entire cost of purchasing such service, as determined
by the actuary for the plan, shall be borne by the employee.
C.
Within 60 days after the date on which this revised and restated chapter
is adopted, employees with prior periods of service with one of the
libraries administered by the Library during which time they were not
participating in the plan and thus not accruing years of credited service
shall be entitled to elect to purchase years of credited service for all or
D.
§ 51-71 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 51-71
47:101
EMPLOYEE — Any person who, on or after the effective date, is an
employee of the Library and is assigned to one of the libraries administered
by the Library; provided, however, that employees who regularly work less
than 35 hours per week shall not be eligible to participate in the plan.
Employees shall be considered employees of the Town for purposes of this
chapter. Each employee shall qualify as an employee under the plan on the
employee's date of hire. Under prior plan provisions, an employee qualified
as an employee on the later of the employee's date of hire or the employee's
25th birthday, except that an employee who was hired on or after July 1,
1983, qualified as an employee under the plan from his or her date of hire.
An employee who was affected by such prior plan requirements shall qualify
as an employee retroactive to such employee's date of hire; provided,
however, that credited service for such period of retroactive participation in
the plan shall be subject to the rules set forth in the definition of "credited
service."
a portion of such years of service. Employees who make the foregoing
election shall specify within the election whether all or a portion of
such prior service will be purchased. The entire cost of purchasing such
service, as determined by the actuary for the plan, shall be borne by
the employee, and the employee shall pay such cost on or before March
1, 1993, in a lump sum, through payroll withholding or through an
installment payment program acceptable to the Library.
§ 51-71 FARMINGTON CODE § 51-71
47:102
ARTICLE XXV
Administration of Plan
§ 51-72. Board of Administration; membership.
The plan shall be administered by a Board of Administration consisting of
11 members, appointed by the Town Council, at least one of whom shall be
a member of the Council and at least five of whom shall be Town employees.
Local No. 60 of the Connecticut Independent Labor Union, Local No. 1689
American federation of State, County and Municipal employees, Local No.
2001 CSEA/SEIU, Local 331 of the International Brotherhood of Police
Officers and Local 3103 of the International Association of Fire Fighters
shall all have the right to nominate one person who shall be on the elevenmember
Board of Administration, and the Town Council shall appoint those
persons nominated. Local No. 60, Local No. 1689, Local No. 2001, Local
331 and Local 3103 shall each have the right to recall its appointee and to
nominate a second person to replace the first, and the Council will make
such appointment. The term of the Board members shall be coextensive
with that of the term of the appointing Town Council.
§ 51-73. Powers of Board.
The Board shall have such powers as are necessary for proper
administration of the plan, including but not restricted to the following:
A. To prescribe procedures to be followed by employees in filing
applications for benefits and for furnishing evidence necessary to
establish employees' rights to such benefits.
B. To make determinations as to the rights of any employee applying or
receiving retirement benefits and to afford a mechanism for adjusting
the complaint of any individual dissatisfied with any determination.
C. To develop procedures for the establishment of credited service of
employees and, after affording employees an opportunity to make
objection with respect thereto, to establish such service conclusively in
advance of retirement.
D. To have periodic actuarial valuations of the plan by an actuary
designated by the Board, who may be an actuary of the insurance
company chosen by the Town Council pursuant to Article XXVII.
E. To authorize all disbursements from the plan in accordance with the
provisions of this agreement and to establish necessary procedures
therefor.
F. To prepare and distribute, in such manner as the Board determines to be
appropriate, information explaining the plan.
G. To delegate any of the above powers and duties in such manner as the
Board considers necessary and appropriate.
§ 51-74. Quorum.
To constitute a quorum for the transaction of business, six members shall
be required to be present at any meeting of the Board.
§ 51-72 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 51-75
47:103
§ 51-75. Executive officer.
The Town Manager of Farmington shall act as executive officer of the plan
and, subject to the approval of the Board, take in its name such action as is
necessary to administer the plan.
§ 51-76. Liability.
Neither the Board nor any of its members, nor the Town nor any officer or
official or other representative of the Town, shall be liable because of any
act or failure to act on the part of the Board or any of its members, to any
person whatsoever, except that nothing herein shall be deemed to relieve
any such individual from liability for his own fraud or bad faith.
§ 51-75 FARMINGTON CODE § 51-76
47:104
ARTICLE XXVI
Payments to Plan
§ 51-77. Employee contributions.
A. Percent of contribution; deduction from pay.
(1) During the period from October 1, 1956, through June 30, 1962, each
employee shall contribute to the plan 3% of his salary or earnings.
(2) During the period from June 1, 1962, through June 30, 1977, each
employee shall contribute to the plan 4 1/2% of his salary or
earnings.
(3) During the period from July 1, 1977, through June 30, 1990, each
employee shall contribute to the plan 5% of his salary or earnings.
(4) During the period from July 1, 1990, through June 30, 1993, each
employee shall contribute to the plan 5 1/2% of his salary or
earnings.
(5) During the period from July 1, 1993, through June 30, 1995, each
employee shall contribute to the plan 5 3/4% of his salary or
earnings.
(6) Commencing July 1, 1995, and continuing thereafter, each employee
shall contribute to the plan 6% of his salary or earnings.
B. An employee's salary or earnings shall be the compensation paid by
the Library to an employee as shown on the W-2 Form submitted to
the Internal Revenue Service and shall be determined without regard
to any reductions pursuant to Section 125, 414(h)(2) or 457 of the
Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended. Such contributions shall
be deducted from each employee's pay by the Library and shall be paid
immediately by it to the plan.
C. An employee's obligation to contribute to the plan shall cease after he
has contributed for a period of 32.5 years or has accumulated 32.5 years
of credited service.
D. Pursuant to the provisions of Section 414(h)(2) of the Internal Revenue
Code of 1986, as amended, the Library shall assume and pay the
employee contributions required by Subsection A above which would
otherwise be payable by employees. Commencing April 13, 2001, all
employee contributions required by Subsection A above will be subject
to the provisions of Section 414(h)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code
of 1986. Employee contributions so paid by the Library shall be paid
from the same source of funds used for the payment of compensation to
employees, and a deduction shall be made from each employee's salary
or earnings equal to the amount of the employee's contribution so paid
by the Town.
§ 51-78. Library contributions.
During the period commencing on October 1, 1956, and continuing
thereafter, the Library shall annually contribute an amount based on an
annual actuarial survey.
§ 51-77 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 51-78
47:105

ARTICLE XXVII
Plan Expenses
§ 51-79. (Reserved)
§ 51-80. Use of plan to pay benefits; administration expenses.
The plan shall be used to pay benefits as provided in the plan. Expenses
of administering the plan as are authorized by the Board and approved by
the Council will be borne directly by the Town. No part of the principal or
income of the plan shall in any event be used for or diverted to purposes
other than those provided in the plan, and no benefits shall be paid out of
the plan without prior authorization by the Board or by the Town Manager
acting for the Board.
§ 51-79 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 51-80
47:107

ARTICLE XXVIII
Eligibility
§ 51-81. Normal retirement date.
For all employees, the normal retirement date shall be the 62nd birthday of
said employee. Effective July 1, 1990, the normal retirement date shall be
the earlier of the 62nd birthday of said employee or the date, on or after
the employee's 58th birthday, on which the sum of said employee's age and
credited service equals 85. Effective July 1, 1995, the normal retirement
date shall be the earlier of the 62nd birthday of said employee or the date
on which the sum of said employee's age and credited service equals 85.
Effective July 1, 2000, the normal retirement date shall be the earlier of
the 62nd birthday of said employee or the date on which the sum of the
employee's age and credited service equals 80.
§ 51-82. Early retirement.
Any employee with five or more years of credited service whose
employment with the Library is terminated when or after he reaches the age
of 55 but prior to attainment of the normal retirement date shall be eligible,
at his option, for either a deferred or immediate early retirement benefit as
provided in Article XXIX, § 51-86 or § 51-87, hereof.
§ 51-83. Termination of employment.
An employee with five or more years of credited service whose employment
with the Library is terminated for any reason after the effective date and
prior to the attainment of age 55 and who elects to leave his own
contributions in the plan shall be entitled to a deferred retirement benefit
payable according to the provisions of Article XXIX, § 51-86, hereof. An
employee with less than five years of credited service whose employment
with the Library is terminated (excluding terminations caused by the death
of the employee) shall be entitled to the return of his own contributions to
the plan together with compound interest at the rate of 5% per annum.
§ 51-84. Disability retirement.
A. An employee with 10 or more years of credited service whose
employment with the Library is terminated as a result of unavoidable
total and permanent disability so as to permanently prevent such
employee from engaging in any occupation for remuneration or profit,
notwithstanding the fact that such employee may not have attained the
normal retirement date, shall be eligible for a normal retirement benefit
as provided in Article XXIX hereof, said normal retirement benefit to
commence not earlier than six months following the date of disability.
(1) A covered employee shall be deemed to be within the scope of
total and permanent disability only if he is found by the Board to
have been totally disabled by bodily injury or disease so as to be
prevented from engaging in any regular occupation or employment
for remuneration or profit. Such employee shall be retired for
§ 51-81 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 51-84
47:109
disability only if the Board shall determine that he will be so totally
and permanently disabled during the remainder of his life on the
basis of an opinion certified by a qualified physician designated by
the Board.
(2) The disability shall be deemed to have resulted from an unavoidable
cause unless incurred while the covered employee was engaged in a
criminal enterprise or because of habitual drunkenness, addiction to
narcotics or intentionally self-inflicted injury.
B. Once each year, the Board shall have the right to require any disability
pensioner who has not reached the normal retirement date to undergo
a medical examination by a physician designated by the Board. Should
any such pensioner refuse to submit to such medical examination, his
disability pension shall be discontinued until his withdrawal of such
refusal; and should his refusal continue for a year, all pension rights
shall terminate. If the Board finds from such medical examination or
otherwise that the incapacity of a disability pensioner has been removed
and that he has regained his earning capacity in whole or in part, his
disability pension shall terminate, provided that the Library at that time
offers him employment.
C. In the case of service-connected disability, as defined below, an
employee, regardless of years of service, whose employment with the
Library is terminated as a result of unavoidable total and permanent
disability shall be eligible for an amount equal to the benefits provided
in Subsection A above or 25% of the employee's basic compensation at
the time of disability, whichever is higher, less any payments of workers'
compensation received by law.
D. A total and permanent disability, as referred to in Subsections A and
C above, shall be a service-connected disability if it occurs solely and
exclusively as a result of an accident or injury received during the
performance of the employee's duties for the Library.
§ 51-84 FARMINGTON CODE § 51-84
47:110
ARTICLE XXIX
Retirement Benefits
§ 51-85. Normal retirement benefit.
A. The annual retirement benefits of an employee eligible for a normal
retirement benefit who has applied therefor shall be 2% of the annual
average of the highest annual earnings received by the employee from
the Library during any three consecutive years, multiplied by the
employee's years of credited service and fractions thereof. If the final
year of earnings before retirement or termination is a partial year,
this partial year of earnings will be annualized before determining the
three highest years of earnings. Commencing July 1, 2000, the annual
retirement benefits of an employee eligible for a normal retirement
benefit who has applied therefor shall be 2% of the total earnings for the
36 months immediately preceding the retirement date of the employee,
divided by three, multiplied by the employee's years of credited service
and fraction thereof.
B. In no event shall the total annual retirement benefits payable to any
employee exceed the lesser of 65% of the employee's highest average
annual earnings, computed as stated hereinabove, and the maximum
benefits permitted under any federal or state law applicable to this plan.
One-twelfth of an employee's annual retirement benefits shall be paid
each month. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the form of benefit payment
under this § 51-85 shall be made in accordance with § 51-88 of this
Article XXIX.
§ 51-86. Deferred retirement benefits.
The monthly deferred retirement benefit at the normal retirement date of
an eligible employee shall be equal to the normal retirement benefit at
set ages determined in accordance with § 51-85 of this Article XXIX, based
on his credited service at the time of termination of active employment.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the form of benefit payment under this
§ 51-86 shall be made in accordance with § 51-88 of this Article XXIX.
§ 51-87. Immediate early retirement benefit.
The monthly immediate early retirement benefit of an eligible employee
shall be equal to the normal retirement benefit determined in accordance
with § 51-85 of this Article XXIX, based on his credited service at the time
of early retirement, reduced actuarially in accordance with the number of
months by which such employee has not reached his normal retirement date
at the time of withdrawal from active employment; provided, however, that
in making the actuarial reduction hereunder for immediate commencement
of benefits, in the case of an eligible employee who has completed 35 or
more years of actual service with the Library at the time of withdrawal from
active employment, there shall be added to the actual age of such employee
at the time of withdrawal from active employment one additional year for
every five years of service of the employee with the Library in excess of
30 years. For purposes hereof, years of service shall be calculated in the
§ 51-85 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 51-87
47:111
manner provided for in the definition of "credited service" in § 51-71 of
Article XXIV. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the form of benefit payment
under this § 51-87 shall be made in accordance with § 51-88 of this Article
XXIX.
§ 51-88. Automatic forms of benefits.
A. Unless otherwise elected as provided below, an employee who is married
on the date when annuity benefits under this Article XXIX commence
and who does not die before such date shall receive the value of his
or her benefits in the form of a joint and survivor annuity. Under such
joint and survivor annuity, survivor benefits following the employee's
death shall continue to the spouse during the spouse's lifetime either in
full or reduced by one half during the remaining lifetime, if any, of the
spouse, at the election of the employee. For purposes of such election,
the Board shall furnish to a married employee, by personal delivery
or mail, at least nine months before his normal retirement date (or
early retirement date, if applicable), the following information in written
nontechnical language: the terms and conditions of a joint and survivor
annuity; the employee's right to make and the effect of a waiver of the
joint and survivor annuity form of benefit; the employee's right to elect
the joint and survivor annuity in full or reduced by one half during the
remaining lifetime of the spouse; and the right to make and the effect
of a revocation of a previous waiver of the joint and survivor annuity. An
unmarried employee shall receive the value of his or her benefit in the
form of a life annuity; provided, however, that such unmarried employee
may elect to waive the life annuity in the manner described below. The
joint and survivor annuity and life annuity forms of distribution shall be
actuarially equivalent to the benefits due to the employee hereunder.
B. Any election to waive the joint and survivor annuity or life annuity
must be made by the employee, in writing, and be consented to by the
employee's spouse, if any, within 90 days of the date on which payment
of benefits will commence; provided, however, that no such spousal
consent shall be required unless the employee and the spouse have been
married throughout the one-year period ending on the earlier of the
employee's annuity starting date or the date of the employee's death.
If the spouse is legally incompetent to give such consent, the spouse's
legal guardian, even if such guardian is the employee, may give consent.
Such election shall designate a beneficiary (or a form of benefits) that
may not be changed without spousal consent (unless the consent of
the spouse expressly permits designations by the employee without the
requirement of further consent by the spouse). Such spouse's consent
shall be irrevocable and must acknowledge the effect of such election
and be witnessed by a representative of the Library or a notary public.
Such consent shall not be required if it is established to the satisfaction
of the Board that the required consent cannot be obtained because there
is no spouse, the spouse cannot be located or other circumstances exist
which prevent the employee from obtaining such consent. The election
made by the employee and consented to by the employee's spouse, if any,
may be revoked by the employee in writing without the consent of the
§ 51-87 FARMINGTON CODE § 51-88
47:112
spouse, if any, at any time during the period within which the election
is to be made. The number of such revocations shall not be limited. Any
new election must comply with the requirements of this Subsection B. A
former spouse's waiver shall not be binding on a new spouse.
§ 51-89. Optional retirement benefits.
A. In lieu of the retirement benefits provided above under this Article
XXIX, employees who signify, by written notice to the Board at least six
months prior to their retirement or within 90 days of retirement date
if an employee meets physical and health requirements, that they wish
to elect an optional form of retirement benefit may elect to receive an
actuarially equivalent pension:
(1) During the lifetime of the employee and continued either in full or
reduced by 1/2 during the remaining lifetime, if any, of a contingent
annuitant designated by the employee.
B. Election of this option or nomination of a contingent annuitant may
be invoked, revoked or changed at any time not later than two years
prior to the employee's retirement or within 90 days of his retirement
date if he meets physical and health requirements but not thereafter;
provided, however, that election of any option under this subsection shall
be consistent with § 51-88 of this Article XXIX.
§ 51-90. Payment to beneficiary in event of death.
In the event that an employee or a retired employee or a former employee
who is entitled to a deferred retirement benefit shall die before receiving
an aggregate amount of pension at least equal to the aggregate of his own
contributions to the plan plus five-percent interest, the difference shall be
paid in a lump sum to his beneficiary or his estate.
§ 51-91. Dependents' survivors benefits.
A. Non-service-connected death.
(1) In the case of a non-service-connected death, if an employee who has
been married for at least one year and who has five or more years
of credited service dies before retirement, his dependent spouse, so
long as she lives, shall be entitled to 50% of the normal retirement
benefit determined in accordance with § 51-85 of this Article XXIX,
based on the employee's credited service at the time of his death.
In the event that the surviving spouse of said employee dies leaving
children of said employee, the amount of the retirement benefit
received by the surviving spouse shall be paid, in equal parts, to such
children of said employee so long as said children are under the age
of 18 or, if a student, under the age of 23.
(2) In the case of a non-service-connected death, if an employee whose
dependent spouse predeceases him or who has no dependent spouse
dies before retirement but after attaining the age of 45 and
completing five or more years of credited service, his children
surviving, so long as they are under the age of 18 or, if a student,
under the age of 23, shall be entitled to 50% of the normal retirement
§ 51-88 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 51-91
47:113
benefit determined in accordance with § 51-85 of this Article XXIX,
based on the employee's credited service at the time of his death.
B. Service-connected death. In the case of a service-connected death (a
death resulting solely and exclusively as a result of an accident or
injury received during the performance of the employee's duties for the
Library) of an employee prior to retirement, the benefits paid, regardless
of the age, year of marriage or years of credited service of the employee,
shall be the higher of benefits payable under Subsection A above or
25% of the deceased employee's basic annual compensation at the time
of death, payable to the person and under the conditions set forth in
Subsection A above.
§ 51-91 FARMINGTON CODE § 51-91
47:114
ARTICLE XXX
Commencement and Duration of Benefits
§ 51-92. Normal and immediate retirement.
Normal and immediate retirement benefits shall be payable to any employee
who has applied therefor, commencing as of the first day of the month after
such employee becomes eligible for such benefits, and shall be payable on
the first day of each month thereafter during the life of such employee.
§ 51-93. Deferred retirement.
Deferred retirement benefits shall be payable to an eligible employee who
has applied therefor, commencing as of the first day of the month after the
employee attains the normal retirement date, and shall be payable on the
first day of each month thereafter during the life of such employee.
§ 51-94. Normal and early retirement.
Normal and early retirement benefits shall be continued during any period
in which a retired employee returns to active service with the Library.
During any such period of reemployment, the employee shall not be eligible
for further participation in the plan.
§ 51-95. Reduced pension.
In the event that the employee shall have elected a reduced pension under
the provisions of Article XXIX, § 51-87, guaranteed payments, if any, shall
be continued to the contingent beneficiary named by the employee, if living.
If the options in Subsection A or B of § 51-88 of Article XXIX have been
elected and if the contingent beneficiary also dies before the expiration of
the guaranteed payment, any remaining payments shall be commuted by
the Board and paid in a lump sum to the employee's estate.
§ 51-92 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 51-95
47:115

ARTICLE XXXI
Nonalienation of Benefits
§ 51-96. Encumbrance of retirement benefits restricted.
Subject to the exceptions provided below, no benefit provided hereunder
shall be subject in any manner to anticipation, alienation, sale, transfer,
assignment, pledge, encumbrance or charge; and any attempt to anticipate,
alternate, sell, transfer, assign, pledge, encumber or charge such benefit
shall be void; and no such benefit shall in any manner be liable for or subject
to the debts, contracts, liabilities, engagements or torts of any such person,
nor shall it be subject to attachment or legal process for or against such
person, and the same shall not be recognized by the Board, except to such
extent as may be required by law.
§ 51-97. Nonapplicability.
This provision shall not apply to a qualified domestic relations order, as
defined in Section 206(d)(3) of the Employee Retirement Income Security
Act of 1974, as amended. The Board shall establish a written procedure
to determine the qualified status of domestic relations orders and to
administer distributions under such qualified orders. Further, to the extent
provided under a qualified domestic relations order, a former spouse of an
employee shall be treated as the spouse or surviving spouse for all purposes
hereunder.
§ 51-96 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 51-97
47:117

ARTICLE XXXII
Termination of Plan
§ 51-98. Precedence for allocation of plan assets.
In the event of discontinuance of the plan, the assets then remaining in
the plan shall be allocated by the Board, to the extent that they shall be
sufficient, for the purpose of paying retirement benefits (the amount of
which shall be computed on the basis of credited service to the date of
discontinuance of the plan) in the following order of precedence:
A. To provide retirement benefits to employees (and/or their beneficiaries)
who shall have retired under the plan prior to its discontinuance, without
reference to the order of retirement.
B. To provide normal retirement benefits upon normal retirement to
employees who have reached their normal retirement dates on the date
of discontinuance of the plan, without reference to the order in which
they shall have reached said normal retirement dates.
C. To provide deferred retirement benefits to former employees eligible
therefor, without reference to the order in which they shall reach their
normal retirement dates, provided that said employees have elected
such deferred retirement benefits.
D. To provide for the return of their own contributions with three-percent
interest to all employees who have not received a distribution under
Subsection A, B or C above.
E. After satisfaction of the above liabilities, any remaining assets of the
plan shall be distributed pro rata, on a basis proportionate to earnings
and to total credited service at the date of discontinuance of the plan, to
employees in active employment with the Library at said date who have
not then attained the normal retirement date.
§ 51-99. Accomplishment of allocation.
Such allocation shall be accomplished through either continuance of the
plan or a new plan or purchase of annuity contracts; provided, however,
that the Board, upon finding that it is not practicable or desirable under
the groups listed above, may provide for allocation of a part of all of
the assets of the plan as cash payments of equivalent actuarial value to
any or all of such groups; and provided, further, however, that no change
shall be effected in the order of precedence and basis for allocation above
established.
§ 51-100. Location of terminated employees with rights under plan.
The Board shall make reasonable effort to locate any terminated employees
who have deferred retirement rights at the date of discontinuance of the
plan.
§ 51-101. Amendment or termination of plan.
The plan may be amended or terminated by the Town Council.
§ 51-98 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 51-102
47:119
§ 51-102. Use of income of plan restricted.
In the event of the termination of this plan, no part of the corpus or income
of the plan can be used for or diverted to purposes other than the exclusive
use of the beneficiaries and employees of the plan, nor may any part of the
plan revert to the Town.
§ 51-102 FARMINGTON CODE § 51-102
47:120
ARTICLE XXXIII
Moratorium Provisions
§ 51-103. Effective date.
This Part 3, as amended effective March 13, 2001, as it relates to employees
shall remain in full force and effect and shall be frozen through June 30,
2008.
§ 51-103 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 51-103
47:121
Chapter 53
PUBLIC BUILDINGS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 83.
§ 51-103 FARMINGTON CODE § 51-103
53:122
ARTICLE I
Construction Procedures
[Adopted 2-28-1995; amended in its entirety 5-14-2002]
§ 53-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish procedures to plan, approve and
construct public buildings in an orderly and cost-effective manner, including
giving clear direction and course of action to the appointed building
committee or designated person or persons. This article shall apply to all
pending public building projects in progress on the effective date of this
article.
§ 53-2. Statement of needs.
A. The Town department or agency initiating a request for the construction
or renovation of a public building shall submit to the Town Manager a
statement of needs which justifies the requested construction. The Town
Manager shall review the statement of needs critically and shall, when
satisfied that the statement is complete, submit the statement to the
Town Council along with a recommendation for approval or disapproval
of nonschool proposed construction.
B. The Board of Education, being responsible under C.G.S. § 10-220 for
making a study of the needs for school facilities and of a long-term
school building program, shall, as part of a statement of needs, make
recommendations to the Town Council for new school construction,
additions or renovations based upon such study.
C. Town Council approval of a statement of needs shall be required before
any further action is taken. The Town Council may hold hearings or
take any other action it deems appropriate to obtain information prior to
approving a statement of needs.
D. Each Town department or agency, including the Board of Education,
shall, at the time of submitting annual budget requests, submit an
estimate of expenditures for capital improvements for the next five
years. The Town Manager, at the time of submitting the proposed annual
budget to the Town Council, shall submit a five-year capital
improvements program with a recommendation of what, if any, project
or projects should be undertaken in the ensuing fiscal year. The Council
shall consider and act on the projects, either approving, disapproving or
approving at a revised estimate of costs.
§ 53-3. Building committee or other designated person or persons.
A. Upon approval of a statement of needs, the Town Council shall appoint
a building committee for all school buildings, including at least one
member of the Board of Education, and may appoint a building
committee for all other Town buildings.
B. If a building committee is appointed, the Town Council shall define the
scope of the responsibilities of such committee. The Town Council shall
seek to include persons experienced in design and construction (such
§ 53-1 PUBLIC BUILDINGS § 53-3
53:123
as an architect and/or construction engineer) to be building committee
members.
C. If a building committee is not appointed for Town buildings other than
schools, the Town Council shall specifically designate the person or
persons responsible for planning and supervising the construction of
such building and shall define the scope of responsibilities of such
person or persons.
D. Hereinafter, the building committee or designated person or persons
shall be referred to as the "committee."
E. The Town Manager shall provide the committee with qualified and
adequate staff support on building, financial, administrative and clerical
matters. The role and scope of staff shall be clearly defined by the Town
Manager and shall be described by the Town Manager to the committee.
The Town Manager shall stay in close touch with the committee and keep
the Town Council advised on material developments as they occur.
§ 53-4. Planning and construction process for building projects.
A. Project initiation. The Town Council shall, upon recommendation of the
Town Manager:
(1) Select a site for the construction. If a school site is involved, the
site shall be approved by the Board of Education and the State
Commissioner of Education prior to the start of construction.
(2) Develop and incorporate into the committee's charge a clear
description of the nature, size and purpose of the proposed building
based on the approved statement of needs.
B. Preliminary plan development. The committee shall:
(1) Solicit proposals from qualified architects to prepare schematic
drawings and project cost estimates, including costs of construction,
engineering, finance, legal, contingency, independent construction
monitoring and oversight, and other appropriate costs.
(2) Negotiate a contract or contracts with the selected architect. The
architectural work will be contracted for in two phases. Phase one
will consist of prereferendum services, including the preparation
of schematic drawings and cost estimates, including structural site
work, grading and drainage, presentations to Town boards and
commissions and other services and costs as determined by the
committee. Phase two services will complete the project through
Town acceptance and final payment to the contractor(s). The phase
two contract will include the architectural fees and expenses to
take the project through the design development, contract document
and administrative services phases during construction, including
the preparation of bid documents and contract documents, the
evaluation of bids and the determination of appropriate bonding,
insurance and other soft costs. The contract(s) shall provide that
the architect will not proceed beyond phase one services until the
committee has issued a notice to proceed after the approval of
funding for the entire project; and that the Town has no financial
obligation beyond phase one fees and expenses if the project funding
is not approved.
§ 53-3 FARMINGTON CODE § 53-4
53:124
(3) Obtain from the architect a certificate attesting to the architect's
errors and omissions insurance coverage that will be valid
throughout the duration of the project.
(4) Request sufficient funds from the Town Council to pay for the
architect's phase one services. Upon approval of such funding, the
committee shall execute the contract with the architect for such
services.
(5) Decide what type of owner's representative to use (if other than
the architect) such as a clerk of the works, construction manager
or general contractor. If a construction manager is to be used, the
committee shall solicit proposals from qualified firms and negotiate
services and fees for the pre- and post-referendum phases.
(6) Submit the completed schematic drawings to the Town Plan and
Zoning Commission for informal review and recommendation and
make such changes as appropriate in accordance with the contract
for architectural services.
(7) Submit the completed schematic drawings and project cost
estimates to the Town Council for approval.
(8) Upon Town Council (and Board of Education for school projects)
approval of the schematic drawings and project cost estimates,
request that the Town Council:
(a) Set a Town meeting (and referendum if necessary) for the total
project cost based on the cost estimates prepared by the
architect and/or construction manager; and
(b) Refer the project to the Town Plan and Zoning Commission for a
report under C.G.S. § 8-24.
C. Final plan development. If the project is approved at the Town meeting
(or referendum, if necessary) the committee shall:
(1) Issue a notice to proceed to the architect to complete final plans,
working drawings and specifications, bid documents and contract
documents. The committee and its consultants shall review the
design documents at each design phase to evaluate, refine and
update cost estimates and verify that the plans fulfill the purpose of
the proposed building in a reasonable manner. The committee shall
submit a copy of the final plans, working drawings, specifications,
bid documents and contract documents to an independent, qualified
engineering firm for a comprehensive review as to accuracy, clarity
and completeness. The engineering firm shall submit comments to
the committee. The committee shall direct the architect to make
such changes as it deems appropriate.
(2) Submit the final plans to the Town Plan and Zoning Commission
for site plan approval. Upon receipt of the architect's changes and
approval of the Town Plan and Zoning Commission, and approval of
the Board of Education for school projects, the committee shall put
the project out to bid and award the construction contract. The Town
Manager and a person designated by the committee shall execute
the construction contract on behalf of the Town.
(3) Meet with the architect, general contractor or construction manager
to reconcile any differences between the parties. The committee
§ 53-4 PUBLIC BUILDINGS § 53-4
53:125
shall approve the final plans, working drawings and specifications,
bid documents and contract documents.
D. Construction initiation. The committee shall:
(1) Establish an oversight team consisting of the architect, Town staff
members and/or consultants to assure regular and knowledgeable
in-the-field monitoring of construction and evaluation of change
orders and to keep the committee up-to-date on a regular basis on all
material developments. The committee shall contract for additional
independent monitoring of the construction process, if deemed
necessary.
(2) Authorize the start of construction.
(3) Monitor the construction process to include meetings with the
architect, project manager and construction contractor as necessary
to resolve any differences.
(4) Establish liaisons and/or other means of communication to keep the
Town Manager, Town Council and other interested parties up-to-date
on project developments.
(5) Consider and act promptly on change orders, making certain that
any increase in the cost involved in any change order is within the
amount appropriated for the project.
(6) Monitor the preparation by the architect of a list of items (punch
list) which are not fully completed or which require further attention
when the architect has certified that the building is substantially
complete. The committee shall accept the building as substantially
complete and make certain that the punch list items are completed
promptly and properly.
(7) Review the certification by the architect that construction has been
completed in full compliance with contract documents or review the
list of items that are not yet satisfactorily completed.
(8) Authorize the release of funds that had been withheld or designate
those funds to be withheld pending completion of any unfinished
work or for any other appropriate reason.
§ 53-5. Town Manager's responsibility for coordination of process.
Throughout the planning and construction process, the Town Manager
shall be responsible for coordinating the process and working with the
committee and making full use of the Town staff and appropriate outside
services as required. The Town Manager shall attend meetings as necessary
between the architect and general contractor or construction manager and/
or subcontractors. In the event of a conflict precluding the Town Manager's
attendance at any such meetings, the Town Manager shall designate an
alternate to attend in his/her absence and promptly after the meeting shall
confer with the alternate and be briefed on significant developments. Within
budgetary limits, the Town Manager is authorized to obtain such outside
services as he/she believes are needed.
§ 53-4 FARMINGTON CODE § 53-6
53:126
§ 53-6. Execution of contracts.
The Corporation Counsel shall review all contracts before they are entered
into by the Town or the committee and shall oversee the execution of
such contracts and compliance with appropriate bonding and insurance
requirements.
§ 53-7. Approval by State Commissioner of Education.
In the case of the construction of school buildings, the Town Council may
by resolution authorize the Board of Education to apply to the State
Commissioner of Education for a state grant-in-aid for the project. The
Board of Education and Superintendent of Schools shall be responsible for
having the State Commissioner of Education approve the plans and other
matters relating to such application and for obtaining school construction
grants from the state.
§ 53-6 PUBLIC BUILDINGS § 53-7
53:127
Chapter 55
PURCHASING
§ 55-1. Bids and quotes required. [Amended 11-16-1976; 1-25-1983;
3-24-1987; 3-15-2017]
If any purchase or contract for purchase, including a continuing order for
the purchase of the same commodity over a period of time, of supplies,
materials, equipment and other commodities required by any department,
office, agency, board or commission of the Town, except the Board of
Education, unless said Board shall designate the Town Manager as its
purchasing agent, or if any contract for public works or improvements or
for labor or any service rendered by an independent contractor involves
the expenditure of $25,000 or more, the Town Manager shall invite bids,
giving at least 15 days' public notice thereof by at least one publication in
a newspaper having an extensive circulation in the Hartford metropolitan
area. The public notice shall include a general description of commodities
to be purchased or labor or services to be rendered, where bid forms
and specifications may be obtained and the time and place for submission
of bids. For expenditures between $5,000 and $9,999 the Town Manager
shall request three verbal quotes. For expenditures between $10,000 and
$24,999, the Town Manager shall request three written quotes.
§ 55-2. Manner of requesting bids. [Amended 3-15-2017]
The Town Manager may, in addition to the notice required above, invite
bids from prospective suppliers or contractors by mail, telephone, e-mail,
posting on the Town's website or such other methods as he deems advisable.
§ 55-3. Minimum information to be sent to bidders.
The following minimum information shall be sent to all prospective bidders
receiving bid forms:
A. The time, date and place of receiving bids.
B. The quantity desired.
C. A reasonable description of the material, specifications and labor or
services to be performed.
D. 9That any variance to requested specifications shall be specifically
stated by bidder.
E. That no changes of any kind will be allowed unless specifically stated in
the bid.
F. That bids shall specify any and all warranties.
G. That bids shall state delivery date.
H. That bids are to be quoted f.o.b. Farmington, Connecticut.
9. Editor's Note: Former Subsection D, regarding manufacturer information, was repealed
3-15-2017. This ordinance also redesignated former Subsections E through O as
Subsections D through N, respectively.
§ 53-7 FARMINGTON CODE § 55-3
53:128
I. That the outside of the envelope containing the bid shall be plainly
marked with the bid number and bid title. [Amended 3-15-2017]
J. The amount and type of bid security to be submitted, if any.
K. The amount and type of performance security to be required, if any.
L. That the Town of Farmington reserves the right to accept or reject
any or all bids and to waive informalities or irregularities. [Amended
3-15-2017]
M. That the bid must be signed by an authorized person.
N. That the local vendor preference provisions of § 55-5 shall apply.
[Added 7-23-1996; amended 8-27-1996]
§ 55-4. Bid forms. [Amended 3-15-2017]
All bids shall be submitted on bid forms prepared and furnished by the Town
Manager or his/her designee.
§ 55-5. Local vendor preference. [Added 7-23-1996;10 amended
8-27-1996]
A. For all bids and quotes submitted for purchases not excluded by § 55-8
exceeding $2,500 but less than $500,000, any qualified and registered
local vendor who has submitted a bid or quote not more than 5% higher
than the lowest qualified bid or quote will be awarded the contract or
purchase order, subject to § 55-6, so long as such local vendor agrees to
provide the supplies, materials, equipment, commodities and/or services
which are the subject of such contract or purchase order at the same
price as the lowest qualified bid or quote received. In the event that
more than one local vendor submits a bid or quote not more than 5%
higher than the lowest qualified bid or quote, the award shall be to
that local vendor originally submitting the lowest qualified bid or quote.
[Amended 10-12-1999]
B. For purposes of this section, a qualified and registered local vendor is
defined as one who maintains a principal place of business located within
the Town limits of Farmington by occupying real property in which
to conduct such business or by paying ad valorem taxes on business
property to the Town of Farmington. Evidence of the maintenance of
such principal place of business may include the ownership or longterm
lease of real estate from which the principal place of business is
operated or the payment of property taxes on the personal property of
the business to be used in the performance of the bid.
C. The Town Manager shall have prepared a local vendor registration form
and shall have it made available to all local businesses. When such
form has been properly completed and filed by a local vendor with and
approved by the Town Purchasing Coordinator, such local vendor shall
be a qualified and registered local vendor in the Town for the purposes
of this section.
10.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the renumbering of former §§ 55-5 through
55-10 as §§ 55-6 through 55-11, respectively.
§ 55-3 PUBLIC BUILDINGS § 55-5
53:129
D. This section shall not apply in any situation where the preference
created by this section would violate federal and state law or any
existing contracts.
§ 55-6. Power of Town Manager; negotiation. [Amended 7-23-1996;
8-27-1996; 3-15-2017]
For contracts under $50,000, the Town Manager is empowered to award the
contract to the lowest qualified bidder or quoter, subject to the local vendor
preference provision in § 55-5, to reject all bids or to negotiate further
with some bidder or bidders as he shall deem appropriate and award the
contract on the basis of lowest price obtainable, provided that he shall never
negotiate further with a bidder whose original bid price was higher than
that of another bidder or bidders without also negotiating further with all
such bidders whose original bid prices were lower; and provided, further,
that unless the Town Manager has obtained the specific approval of the
Town Council or unless he has entered into further negotiations as set forth
above, he shall not award the contract to anyone other than the lowest
responsible bidder. If the Town Manager negotiates with bidders or quoters
as provided above, any qualified and registered local vendor submitting an
original bid or quote not more than 5% higher than the lowest qualified
bid or quote shall be awarded the contract or purchase order if such local
vendor is willing to meet the lowest negotiated price.
§ 55-7. Approval by Town Council for certain expenditures.
[Amended 3-24-1987]
All purchases or contracts which involve the expenditure of $50,000 or
more shall be approved by the Town Council.
§ 55-8. Nonapplicability to professional services. [Amended
7-23-1996; 8-27-1996; 3-15-2017]
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the purchase of surety
bonds and insurance or to contracts for professional services with
attorneys, physicians, architects, appraisers or other professionals where
the services contracted for are primarily advisory in nature.
§ 55-9. Division into parts prohibited; trade-in allowances.
[Amended 11-16-1976; 3-24-1987]
No purchase shall be divided into parts for the purpose of evading the intent
of this chapter. Trade-in allowances shall be disregarded in determining the
purchase price.
§ 55-10. Waiver of requirements.
Upon the recommendation of the Town Manager, the Town Council may,
by majority vote, waive any or all requirements of this chapter for any
particular purchase or contract.
§ 55-5 FARMINGTON CODE § 55-11
53:130
§ 55-11. Preservation of documents. [Amended 3-15-2017]
A tabulation of all bids showing the names of the bidders, amounts of the
bids and indicating in each case the successful bidder or, in the event of
further negotiation, the results of said further negotiation and the bidder
to whom the contract was awarded, together with the originals of all such
bids and other documents pertaining to the award of contracts shall be
preserved in accordance with the records retention schedule promulgated
by the State Records Retention Administrator, where they and shall be open
to public inspection.
§ 55-12. Cooperative purchasing. [Added 3-15-2017]
Whenever it is to the advantage of the Town, the Town may purchase from
bids called for by other governmental agencies or cooperative purchasing
organizations, provided that the bid process used by said other
governmental agencies or cooperative purchasing organizations conforms
substantially to the bidding requirements contained in this chapter. If a
supply, material or equipment is available under multiple cooperative bids,
then a comparison of all bids shall be made to determine which bid offers
the best advantage to the Town. The use of cooperative bids shall be subject
to the requirement of § 55-7.
Chapter 59
REGIONAL COUNCILS AND AUTHORITIES
§ 55-11 REGIONAL COUNCILS AND AUTHORITIES § 55-12
59:131

ARTICLE I
Capitol Region Council of Governments
[Adopted 6-5-1973 by Ord. No. 66]
§ 59-1. Adoption of statute. [Amended 7-28-1992]
The Town of Farmington does hereby adopt C.G.S. §§ 4-124i through 4-124p,
providing for the formation of a Capitol Region Council of Governments
within a planning region as defined or redefined by the Director of the
Office of State Planning, and does hereby join such Capitol Region Council
of Governments when and as such Council is duly established in accordance
with said statutes, upon the adoption of said statutes by not less than
60% of all municipalities within such planning region. The adoption of
such sections of the General Statutes is intended to include the provisions
of any Special Act of the 1973 General Assembly respecting additional
representation for the core city within the capitol region on a Capitol
Regional Council of Governments and a nonvoting advisory regional forum
thereunder consistent with proposed bylaws of such Capitol Regional
Council of Governments dated January 25, 1973, and endorsed by the
existing Regional Council of Governments on May 3, 1973.
§ 59-2. Filing.
The Clerk of the Council is directed to immediately prepare and file with the
Director of the Office of State Planning a certified copy of this article.
§ 59-1 REGIONAL COUNCILS AND AUTHORITIES § 59-2
59:133
Chapter 62
SIGNPOST, OFFICIAL
§ 62-1. Designation. [Amended 7-28-1992]
The signpost located in front of the Town Hall on Monteith Drive be and
hereby is designated as the official signpost of the Town of Farmington.
Chapter 68
WATER POLLUTION CONTROL AUTHORITY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers — See Ch. 156.
§ 68-1. Creation. [Amended 7-28-1992]
Pursuant to Chapter 103 of the General Statutes, there is created a
commission to be designated as the Water Pollution Control Authority for
the Town of Farmington.
§ 68-2. Membership; terms; compensation.
A. The Water Pollution Control Authority shall consist of five persons who
shall be electors of the Town of Farmington. Such members shall be
appointed by the Town Council in the following manner:
(1) One member for a term expiring September 1, 1960.
(2) One member for a term expiring September 1, 1961.
(3) One member for a term expiring September 1, 1962.
(4) One member for a term expiring September 1, 1963.
(5) One member for a term expiring September 1, 1964.
B. Upon expiration of the term of any member, the Town Council shall
appoint a member for a term of five years expiring on September 30. The
Town Council shall appoint a new member to fill the unexpired term of
any member who shall die, resign or be removed. The members of the
Authority shall serve without compensation. [Amended 2-28-1984 by
Ord. No. 82]11
§ 68-3. Officers; meetings; quorum. [Amended 2-28-1984 by Ord.
No. 82]
Promptly upon its appointment, the Water Pollution Control Authority shall
meet at the call of its Chairman and shall elect from its number a Vice
Chairman and Secretary. Within 30 days from October 1 of each year, the
11.Editor's Note: Original Section 3, which immediately followed this section and dealt with
the designation of a Chairman by Town Council until the Authority's first meeting, was
deleted 7-28-1992.
§ 59-2 FARMINGTON CODE § 68-3
62:134
Water Pollution Control Authority shall elect from its number a Chairman,
Vice Chairman and Secretary. The Authority shall fix the time and place of
its regular meetings and provide a method for calling special meetings. It
shall determine its own rules of procedure. The presence of three members
shall constitute a quorum but no resolution or vote, except a vote to adjourn
or to fix the time and place of its next meeting, shall be adopted by less than
three affirmative votes.
§ 68-4. Absences from meetings. [Amended 11-22-1977 by Ord. No.
76]
The membership of any person who is absent from three regular meetings
during any six-month period shall terminate as of the time the third such
absence occurs, unless such absences are waived by the Chairman of the
Authority because of illness or other extenuating circumstances. The
Chairman of the Authority shall notify the Town Manager promptly after the
third such absence occurs.
§ 68-5. Auxiliary services.
The Town Manager shall supply the Water Pollution Control Authority with
such clerical, appraisal and engineering assistance and with such
equipment as it shall reasonably require, and the Town Manager shall
authorize such travel expenses for members of the Authority as he may
consider necessary for the proper performance of their duties.
§ 68-6. Powers. [Amended 7-28-1992]
The Water Pollution Control Authority shall be clothed with all the powers
and shall faithfully perform all the duties imposed upon municipal water
pollution control authorities by the provisions of said Chapter 103 of the
General Statutes as the same may from time to time be amended.
Part II, General Legislation
Chapter 73
ADULT-ORIENTED ESTABLISHMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 83.
Citation hearing procedure — See Ch. 91.
Signs — See Ch. 159.
Zoning regulations — See Ch. 197.
§ 73-1. Declaration of policy.
The Town Council of the Town of Farmington, Connecticut, finds:
§ 68-3 ADULT-ORIENTED ESTABLISHMENTS § 73-1
73:135
A. The operation of adult-oriented establishments in the Town requires
special regulation and supervision by the Town to protect, preserve
and promote the health, safety and welfare of the patrons, clients or
customers and employees of such establishments, as well as the health,
safety and welfare of the Town's citizens. Further, protecting order
and morality, preserving the character and preventing the deterioration
of the Town's neighborhoods, avoiding blight, decreasing crime and
juvenile delinquency, promoting retail trade, maintaining property
values and ensuring sanitary and safe public places are desirable
objectives of the community and its leaders.
B. Statistics and studies performed by a substantial number of cities and
towns in the United States indicate that:
(1) Large numbers of persons frequent such adult-oriented
establishments, especially those which provide closed booths,
cubicles, studios and rooms for the private viewing of so-called
“adult motion pictures” and/or videotapes and/or live entertainment;
(2) Such closed booths, cubicles, studios and rooms have been used by
patrons, clients or customers of such adult-oriented establishments
for the purpose of engaging in specified sexual activities;
(3) Male and female prostitutes have been known to frequent such
establishments in order to provide sex for hire to the patrons, clients
or customers of such establishments within such booths, cubicles,
studios and rooms;
(4) Doors, curtains, blinds and/or other closures installed in or on the
entrances and/or exits of such booths, cubicles, studios and rooms
which are closed while such booths, cubicles, studios and rooms are
in use encourage patrons, clients or customers using such booths,
cubicles, studios and rooms to engage in specified sexual activities
therein with prostitutes and/or with other persons and/or by
themselves, thereby promoting and encouraging prostitution and the
commission of specified sexual activities which cause blood, semen,
urine or other bodily secretion to be deposited on the floors and/
or walls of such booths, cubicles, studios and rooms, which deposits
could prove detrimental to the health and safety of other persons
who may come into contact with such deposits;
(5) Booths, cubicles, studios and rooms which are closed while such
booths, cubicles, studios and rooms are in use often contain holes
that have been cut or smashed out of the walls or other partitioning
material. These holes permit the inhabitant of one booth to engage
in specified sexual activities with the inhabitant of the adjoining
booth, cubicle, studio or room. These so-called "glory holes" promote
and encourage specified sexual acts to occur between persons
anonymously. Anonymous sexual contact poses a higher risk of the
spread of communicable diseases, including the AIDS virus and
Hepatitis B and other sexually transmitted diseases. Further, the
existence of glory holes in booths, cubicles, studios and rooms at
adult-oriented establishments provides an increased risk that blood,
semen, urine or other bodily secretion will be deposited on the floors
and/or walls of such booths, cubicles, studios and rooms, which
§ 73-1 FARMINGTON CODE § 73-1
73:136
deposits could prove detrimental to the health and safety of other
persons who may come into contact with such deposits;
(6) Specified sexual activities often occur at unregulated adult-oriented
establishments which provide live adult entertainment. Specified
sexual activities include sexual physical contact between employees
and patrons, clients or customers of adult-oriented establishments,
and specifically include lap dancing, and/or manual or oral touching
or fondling of specified anatomical areas, whether clothed or
unclothed. Such casual sexual physical contact between strangers
may result in the transmission of communicable diseases which
would be detrimental to the health of the patrons, clients or
customers and employees of such adult-oriented establishments;
(7) The unregulated operation of adult-oriented establishments is
associated with an increase in the incidence of sex-related crimes
and also has a disruptive effect on the surrounding neighborhood
by causing excessive noise, parking problems, the presence of
discarded sexually oriented material on residential lawns and the
performance of sexual acts in public places; and
(8) The reasonable regulation and supervision of such adult-oriented
establishments tends to discourage prostitution, other sex-related
crimes, anonymous, high-risk sexual contact and/or high-risk
unsanitary sexual activity, excessive noise and property devaluation,
thereby decreasing the incidence of communicable diseases and sexrelated
crimes, and thereby promoting and protecting the health,
safety and welfare of the employees and the public who patronize
such establishments, and protecting the health, safety and property
interests of the Town and its citizens.
C. The continued unregulated operation of adult-oriented establishments is
and would be detrimental to the general welfare, health and safety of the
citizens of Farmington.
D. The Constitution and laws of the State of Connecticut grant to the
Town powers, especially police power, to enact reasonable legislation
and measures to regulate and supervise adult-oriented establishments in
order to protect the public health, safety and welfare.
E. It is not the intent of the Council, in enacting this chapter, to deny
to any person rights to speech protected by the United States and/
or State Constitutions, nor is it the intent of the Council to impose
any limitations or restrictions on the content of any communicative
materials including sexually oriented films, videotapes, books and/or
other materials. Further, by enacting this chapter, the Council does
not intend to deny or restrict the rights of any adult to obtain and/
or view any sexually oriented materials protected by the United States
and/or State Constitutions, nor does it intend to restrict or deny any
constitutionally protected rights that distributors or exhibitors of such
sexually oriented materials may have to sell, distribute or exhibit such
materials.
§ 73-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall mean:
§ 73-1 ADULT-ORIENTED ESTABLISHMENTS § 73-2
73:137
ADULT BOOKSTORE — An establishment having a substantial or significant
portion of its stock and trade in books, films, videocassettes or magazines
and other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their
emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas, as defined herein, and in
conjunction therewith has facilities for the presentation of adult
entertainment, as defined herein, and including adult-oriented films, movies
or live entertainment, for observation by patrons, clients or customers
therein.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT — Includes any exhibition of any adult-oriented
motion pictures, live performance, display or dance of any type which
has as a significant or substantial portion of such performance any actual
or simulated performance of specified sexual activities or exhibition and
viewing of specified anatomical areas, removal of articles of clothing or
appearing unclothed, pantomime, modeling or any other personal services
offered customers. It also includes any amusement machine that is regularly
used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis
on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas, as defined herein, for observation by patrons,
clients or customers thereof.
ADULT MINI MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — An enclosed building with
a capacity of less than 50 persons regularly used for presenting material
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas, as defined herein, for observation by patrons, clients or customers
therein.
ADULT MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — An enclosed building with a
capacity of 50 or more persons regularly used for presenting material
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas, as defined herein, for observation by patrons, clients or customers
therein.
ADULT-ORIENTED ESTABLISHMENT — Shall include, without limitation,
adult bookstores, adult motion-picture theaters, adult mini motion-picture
theaters and further means any premises to which the public, patrons,
clients or customers or members are invited or admitted and wherein
an entertainer provides adult entertainment, or which premises are so
physically arranged as to provide booths, cubicles, rooms, studios,
compartments or stalls separate from the common areas of the premises
for the purpose of viewing adult-oriented motion pictures or wherein an
entertainer provides adult entertainment, when such adult entertainment
is held, conducted, operated or maintained for profit, direct or indirect,
or not for profit. An adult-oriented establishment further includes, without
limitation, any adult entertainment studio or any premises that are
physically arranged and used as such, whether advertised or represented
as an adult entertainment studio, rap studio, exotic dance studio, encounter
studio, sensitivity studio, modeling studio or any other term of like import.
§ 73-2 FARMINGTON CODE § 73-2
73:138
EMPLOYEE — Any and all persons, including independent contractors, who
work in or at or render any services directly related to the operation of an
adult-oriented establishment.
ENTERTAINER — Any person who provides entertainment within an adultoriented
establishment as defined in this section, whether or not a fee is
charged or accepted for entertainment and whether or not entertainment is
provided as an employee or independent contractor.
INSPECTOR — The Director of Health, the Chief of Police, the Fire Marshal,
their agents or representatives, or any Town employee designated to make
inspections for health, fire, building safety, public safety, zoning purposes,
violations of this chapter, or for violations of other laws and ordinances of
the Town.
MINOR — Shall be deemed to refer to a person under the age of 18 years.
OPERATOR — Any person, partnership, corporation or other entity
operating, conducting or maintaining an adult-oriented establishment.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS —
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES —
Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic
region, buttock(s), female breast below a point immediately above the
top of the areola; and
A.
Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely
opaquely covered.
B.
Simulated or actual:
Showing of human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or
arousal.
(1)
Acts of masturbation, sexual intercourse, sodomy, bestiality,
necrophilia, sadomasochistic abuse, fellatio or cunnilingus;
(2)
Fondling or erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttock(s) or female breast(s);
(3)
(4) Lap dancing;
Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the
activities set forth in Subsections (1) through (4).
(5)
A.
Provided that, however, the definition of "specified sexual activities"
shall not apply to any medical publications or films or bona fide
educational publication or films; any art or photography publications
which devote 25% of the linage of each issue to articles and
advertisements dealing with subjects of art or photography; any
periodical which reports or describes current events and which, from
time to time, publishes photographs of nude or seminude persons in
connection with the dissemination of the news; publications or films
B.
§ 73-2 ADULT-ORIENTED ESTABLISHMENTS § 73-2
73:139
§ 73-3. Operating requirements for adult-oriented establishments.
A. No licensee, operator or employee of an adult-oriented establishment
shall perform or permit to be performed, offer to perform or allow
patrons, clients or customers to perform any live performance or
conduct featuring any of the specified sexual activities as defined in
§ 73-2.
B. No licensee, operator or employee of an adult-oriented establishment
shall allow or permit any minor to enter into or in any way loiter in or
around any part of such establishment.
C. Every adult-oriented establishment doing business in the Town on and
after the effective date of this chapter shall be well-lighted at all times
and be physically arranged in such a manner that the entire interior
portion of the booths, cubicles, rooms or stalls, wherein adult
entertainment is provided, shall be clearly visible from the common
areas of the premises. Visibility into such booths, cubicles, rooms or
stalls shall not be blocked or obscured by doors, curtains, partitions,
drapes or any other obstruction whatsoever. It shall be a violation of this
chapter to install enclosed booths, cubicles, rooms or stalls within adultoriented
establishments for any purpose in any way related to providing
for the secluded viewing of adult-oriented motion pictures or any other
types of adult-oriented entertainment.
D. The licensee and operator of each adult-oriented establishment shall be
responsible for and shall provide that any room or other area used for
the purpose of viewing adult-oriented motion pictures or other types
of live adult entertainment shall be well-lighted and readily accessible
at all times and shall be continuously open to view in its entirety. The
premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient
intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons, clients or customers
are permitted access at an illumination of not less than one footcandle
as measured at the floor level. It shall be the duty of the operator and its
agents to ensure that the illumination described above is maintained at
all times that any patron is present in the premises.
E. Every act or omission by an employee constituting a violation of the
provisions of this chapter shall be deemed the act or omission of the
licensee and operator as well, including any act or omission as a result of
the operator's negligent failure to supervise the employee's conduct, and
the licensee and operator shall be punishable for such act or omission
in the same manner as if the licensee and operator committed the act or
caused the omission.
F. The licensee and operator shall be responsible for the conduct of all
employees while on the premises, including parking areas and all other
portions of the property, and any act or omission of any employee
constituting a violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed
the act or omission of the licensee and operator for purposes of
which describe and report different cultures and which, from time to
time, publish or show photographs or depiction of nude or seminude
persons when describing cultures in which nudity or seminudity is
indigenous to the population.
§ 73-2 FARMINGTON CODE § 73-3
73:140
determining whether the operating license shall be revoked, suspended
or renewed and whether the licensee and operator shall be subject to
the penalties imposed by this chapter.
G. No adult-oriented establishment shall open to do business before 10:00
a.m., and no adult-oriented establishment shall remain open after 1:00
a.m.
H. No person shall be employed in any adult-oriented establishment within
three years of conviction of any of the crimes specified in § 73-5D(9) of
this chapter, unless such conviction has been submitted for appellate
review, in which case, employment shall be continued until such appeal
is sustained.
§ 73-4. License required.
A. Except as provided in Subsection D below, from and after the effective
date of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person, partnership,
corporation or other entity to engage in, conduct or carry on or permit
to be engaged in, conducted or carried on in or upon any premises in
the Town the operation of an adult-oriented establishment without first
obtaining a license to operate from the Farmington Chief of Police.
B. A license may be issued for only one adult-oriented establishment
located at a fixed and certain place. Any person, partnership, or
corporation which desires to operate more than one adult-oriented
establishment must have a license for each such establishment.
C. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any entertainer, employee,
owner or operator to knowingly work in or about or to knowingly
perform any service directly related to the operation of any unlicensed
adult-oriented establishment.
D. All existing adult-oriented establishments at the time of the passage of
this chapter must submit an application for license within 60 days of the
effective date of this chapter. If no application is filed within said sixtyday
period, then such existing adult-oriented establishment shall cease
operations, unless any such establishment has appealed the enactment
of this chapter, whereupon this chapter shall not be enforced as to such
establishment until such appeal is dismissed and judgment rendered in
favor of the Town. If an application is filed, then this chapter shall not be
enforced as to such establishment until such application is denied.
E. Each license shall be specific to a licensee and to a location and may not
be sold, assigned or transferred to any person, corporation, partnership
or other entity in any way.
§ 73-5. Application for license.
A. Upon the effective date of this chapter, the operator of any adultoriented
establishment shall be responsible for and shall acquire a
license from the Farmington Chief of Police, in accordance with this
section.
B. The operator of each adult-oriented establishment shall submit an
application in triplicate to the Town Clerk, together with an application
fee of $650, prior to the commencement of business or within 60 days of
the effective date of this chapter for any establishment already open for
§ 73-3 ADULT-ORIENTED ESTABLISHMENTS § 73-5
73:141
business. The Town Clerk shall date-stamp all copies of the application
and shall promptly deliver a copy of the application to the Chief of
Police. The application shall be made upon a form prepared by the Chief
of Police and disseminated by the Town Clerk. In instances where a
corporation or a partnership is the applicant, the application shall be
signed and filed by a person having direct control or management of
the proposed adult-oriented establishment, or by an officer, director,
majority shareholder or majority partner of the corporation or general
partner of the partnership or manager or managing member of any other
entity.
C. The applicant, within two business days of submitting an application to
the Town Clerk, shall erect and maintain for a period of not less than 14
consecutive days in a legible condition a sign not less than four feet by
four feet upon the site to be operated as an adult-oriented establishment,
which sign shall set forth the name of the proposed licensee and reflect
the filing of an application for an adult-oriented establishment. The sign
shall be posted along the front of the property in an area clearly visible
from the Town road or state highway abutting the property. After the
sign has been properly erected and maintained for 14 consecutive days,
the applicant shall provide to the Chief of Police a photograph of the sign
and a statement, under oath, attesting to compliance with the foregoing
sign requirements.
D. The applicant for a license shall furnish the following information:
(1) Name and residential address of the applicant, owner, operator,
manager and any other person having direct control or management
of the adult-oriented establishment, including all aliases, place of
employment, date of birth, social security number, driver's license
number and federal tax identification number, if any.
(2) Name and address of all employees, and any other persons directly
involved in the operation of the adult-oriented establishment,
including aliases.
(3) Written proof that the applicant is at least 18 years of age.
(4) The exact nature of the entertainment to be conducted at the adultoriented
establishment.
(5) The address of the adult-oriented establishment to be operated by
the applicant.
(6) Any adult-oriented entertainment or similar business license/permit
history of the applicant, whether such person has previously
operated in this or another municipality or state under license, or
without license, has had any such license revoked or suspended,
the reason therefor and the business entity or trade name under
which the applicant operated that was subject to the suspension or
revocation.
(7) If the application is a corporation, the application shall specify the
name of the corporation, the date and state of incorporation and the
name and address of the registered agent.
(8) A statement by the applicant that he or she is familiar with the
provisions of this chapter and is in compliance with them.
§ 73-5 FARMINGTON CODE § 73-5
73:142
(9) Any criminal convictions of the applicant, employees, operator and
other persons directly involved in the management or control of the
adult-oriented establishment, to any crime involving moral turpitude,
prostitution, obscenity or other sex-related crime or drug offense in
any jurisdiction within three years of the date of the filing of the
application. Such crimes include but are not limited to prostitution,
soliciting prostitution, promoting or permitting prostitution and
sexual assault, in Connecticut being Connecticut General Statutes
(C.G.S.) §§ 53a-82, 53a-83 and 53a-83a (prostitution, soliciting a
prostitute, soliciting a prostitute from a motor vehicle); C.G.S.
§§ 53a-85, 53a-86, 53a-87, 53a-88 and 53a-89 (promoting or
permitting prostitution); and C.G.S. §§ 53a-70, 53a-70a, 53a-70b,
53a-71, 53a-72a, 58a-72b and 53a-73a (sexual assault).
E. If a license to operate is granted, the information furnished in the
application shall be updated within 30 days of any changes. Said update
shall be filed at the office of the Town Clerk, who shall promptly forward
such update to the Chief of Police.
§ 73-6. Licensing procedure.
A. No license shall be issued unless the Chief of Police has investigated
the applicant's qualifications to be licensed. The investigation shall be
conducted only to confirm the qualifications of the applicant and to
inspect the premises for compliance with all laws and regulations. The
results of the investigation shall be put in writing and filed with the
Town Clerk and mailed to the applicant within 60 days after the date
the application was filed. Additionally, the premises of the adult-oriented
establishment shall be inspected for compliance with the provisions of
this chapter and all local and state codes and regulations including
but not limited to health, fire, building and zoning regulations. Said
inspections shall be completed and a report issued to the Chief of Police
within 30 days of the filing of the application, and shall be included with
the investigation results of the Chief of Police.
B. The Chief of Police shall issue to the applicant a license to operate an
adult-oriented establishment within 75 days from the date of the filing of
an application if all the requirements for an adult-oriented establishment
described in this chapter are met, unless he finds that:
(1) The operation as proposed by the applicant, if permitted, would not
have complied with all applicable laws and regulations, including but
not limited to the building, health, housing, zoning and fire codes
of the Town. If the premises are not in compliance, the applicant
shall be advised of the reasons in writing and what, if any, measures
the applicant can take to bring the premises into compliance for a
license to issue.
(2) The applicant or any other person who will be directly engaged in
the management and operation of an adult-oriented establishment
has been convicted in this or any other state of any of the crimes
specified in § 73-5D(9), except those specified in Subsection B(3)
below, within three years of the date of the filing of the application.
§ 73-5 ADULT-ORIENTED ESTABLISHMENTS § 73-6
73:143
(3) The applicant or any other person who will be directly engaged in
the management and operation of an adult-oriented establishment
has been convicted of any obscenity offense in violation of C.G.S.
§§ 53a-194, 53a-196a, 53a-196b and/or 53a-196c within two years of
the date of the filing of the application.
(4) The applicant has submitted a false statement or representation or
misleading information on the application.
(5) The applicant previously violated this chapter within five years
immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application.
C. Whenever an application is denied, the Chief of Police shall notify the
applicant in writing within 75 days of the date of the application, stating
the reasons for such denial.
D. When an application is denied solely for reasons stated in § 73-6B(1), and
such violation is correctable, the applicant shall be given an additional
30 days from the date of such notification of denial to bring the premises
into compliance. Upon verification by inspection that the correction has
been made within 30 days, which shall be determined no later than three
business days after receipt of written notice of corrections from the
applicant to the Chief of Police, a license shall be issued to the applicant
so long as no new violations or other disqualifying factors have occurred
within those 30 days.
E. The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name and residence
address for the applicant to whom it is granted, the expiration date,
the address of the adult-oriented establishment, and the department
or public official and telephone number to report any violation of this
chapter.
F. The license shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the
entrance to the adult-oriented establishment so that it may be easily
read at any time.
§ 73-7. Expiration and renewal of license.
A. Each license issued to a qualified applicant shall expire one year from
the date it is issued, unless it is renewed upon application of the licensee
accompanied by payment of a renewal fee of $400. Such application and
application fee shall be submitted by the licensee to the Town Clerk at
least 60 days before the expiration date, but not more than 90 days.
Provided that the application is filed within 60 days of its expiration
date and the application fee paid, the license shall be renewed for
the same licensee at the same location by the Chief of Police, unless
the licensee's file contains uncorrected violations of this chapter or
uncorrected violations of health, fire or safety codes and regulations, of
which the licensee has received written notice. A renewed license shall
be mailed to the licensee by certified mail prior to the expiration date of
the previous license. No establishment shall continue operations without
a license, except in accordance with the provisions of § 73-7B.
B. In the event that there are uncorrected violations of this chapter or
uncorrected violations of health, fire or safety codes and regulations,
of which the renewal applicant has received written notice, the license
renewal shall be delayed for a maximum of 30 days in order for all
§ 73-6 FARMINGTON CODE § 73-7
73:144
corrections to be completed and inspections done to determine
compliance. If such corrections of violations are not made by the
applicant within the 30 days beyond the expiration date, no license
renewal will be issued. A notice of nonrenewal shall be mailed by the
Chief of Police to the licensee by certified mail within five days after the
extended, thirty-day period, stating the reasons for the nonrenewal.
C. Notwithstanding the provisions in Subsection B above, in no instance
shall a renewal be issued to a licensee that has had two or more
violations of § 73-3A of this chapter to which the licensee has received
written notice, or one or more uncorrected violations of this chapter
pending for over 60 days. A written notice of such nonrenewal shall be
mailed by the Chief of Police to the licensee by certified mail prior to the
expiration date of the license sought to be renewed, stating the reasons
for the nonrenewal/revocation.
D. Should a license not be renewed for any violation provided herein, no
license shall issue for the same licensee for five years.
§ 73-8. Suspension and revocation of license.
A. The Chief of Police or his authorized representative may suspend a
license for a period not to exceed 30 days upon his determination that a
licensee, operator or employee has violated any part of this chapter. Said
suspension shall be issued in writing mailed by certified mail, return
receipt requested, to the licensee at the address of the establishment
or at the home of the licensee or served by process server at the usual
place of abode of the licensee or at the address of the establishment. If
a suspension issues for a correctable violation, said suspension shall be
terminated upon verification by inspection that the correction has been
made, which shall be determined no later than three business days after
receipt of written notice of corrections from the licensee to the Chief of
Police.
B. The Chief of Police or his authorized representative shall revoke any
license where any of the following occur:
(1) It is discovered that false or misleading information or data was
given on any application or material facts were omitted from any
application for licensure.
(2) Any cost or fee required to be paid by this chapter is not paid or is
paid with a bank check drawn on an account with insufficient funds
and returned to the Town.
(3) A licensee is no longer qualified due to conviction of any crime
specified in § 73-5D(9).
(4) A licensee has had two or more violations of § 73-3A, C, D, or H of
this chapter to which the licensee has received written notice.
(5) A licensee has one or more uncorrected violations of this chapter
pending for over 60 days.
(6) Failure of the licensee to correct any violation within 30 days for
which the licensee's license was suspended pursuant to § 73-8A.
(7) The license or any interest therein is transferred in any way.
C. Once revoked no license shall issue for the same licensee for five years.
§ 73-7 ADULT-ORIENTED ESTABLISHMENTS § 73-8
73:145
D. At least 10 days prior to the revocation of any license, the Chief of Police
shall send by certified mail written notice of the reasons underlying such
revocation. Such notice shall notify the licensee of the opportunity to
make written application for a hearing before the Chief of Police and
the Director of Health, at which time the licensee may present evidence
bearing upon the question. In such cases, the reasons shall be specific
and in writing. If the licensee makes written application for a hearing
within five days of receipt of the revocation notice, a hearing shall be
scheduled to take place no later than 15 days from the date of the
application for such hearing. Immediately after such hearing, the Chief
of Police and the Director of Health shall enter their vote to either
sustain or overrule the revocation against the licensee. The revocation
will be deemed overruled where the vote is evenly divided. Within five
days after such hearing, the Chief of Police shall issue a final written
notice of revocation or a notice of dismissal of revocation to the licensee
by certified mail. All operations of the adult-oriented establishment shall
be maintained, pending the final decision issued by the Chief of Police.
§ 73-9. Appeal.
A. Within five days of receipt of notification of a denial, suspension or
nonrenewal of a license, the applicant/licensee may submit a written
application to the Town Clerk requesting a hearing before the Chief
of Police and the Director of Health. At such hearing the applicant/
licensee shall have the opportunity to present evidence bearing upon
the question. If the applicant/licensee makes application for a hearing
within five days of notification of a denial, suspension or nonrenewal,
a hearing shall be scheduled to take place no later than 15 days from
date of the application for such hearing. Immediately after such hearing,
the Chief of Police and the Director of Health shall enter their vote to
either sustain or overrule the denial, suspension or nonrenewal. The
denial, suspension or nonrenewal will be deemed overruled where the
vote is evenly divided. Within five days after such hearing, the Chief of
Police shall issue written notice of a final decision, and issue any license
or renewal of license where applicable. All operations of the adultoriented
establishment shall be maintained, pending the final decision
being issued by the Chief of Police.
B. Any denial, nonrenewal, suspension or revocation of a license that is
sustained in a written decision after a hearing as provided for in
Subsection A above and § 73-8D, shall be appealable to the superior
court within 15 days of written notice thereof by any person aggrieved
in accordance with the procedure established for zoning appeals by
the Connecticut General Statutes in § 8-8, as amended. Any denial of
renewal, suspension or revocation shall be stayed during the appeal
unless otherwise ordered by the superior court.
§ 73-10. Penalties for offenses.
A. Every person, partnership or corporation, whether acting as an
individual, owner, operator, licensee or employee of an adult-oriented
establishment, who operates, maintains or conducts an adult-oriented
§ 73-8 FARMINGTON CODE § 73-10
73:146
establishment without first obtaining a license and paying the applicable
fee to the Town, or who violates any of the provisions of this chapter,
shall be fined a definite sum not exceeding $100 for each such violation
and be subject to criminal prosecution under the laws of the State of
Connecticut.
B. Each violation of this chapter shall be considered a separate offense,
and any violation continuing more than one day shall be considered a
separate offense.
C. This chapter shall not preclude any additional enforcement action taken
by any appropriate Town, state or federal official conducted pursuant
to any applicable ordinance, regulation and/or law of the Town of
Farmington and/or State of Connecticut, and/or the United States of
America.
D. The hearing procedure for any citations issued for violations of this
chapter shall be the procedure set forth in Chapter 91 of the Town of
Farmington.
§ 73-11. Enforcement.
In addition to any fines or penalties imposed herein, this chapter may be
enforced by injunctive procedure in the superior court.
§ 73-12. Severability.
Should any court of competent jurisdiction declare any section, clause or
provision of this chapter to be unconstitutional, such decision shall affect
only such section, clause or provision so declared unconstitutional and shall
not affect any other section, clause or provision of this chapter.
§ 73-13. Gender; number; construction.
In construing this chapter, masculine or neuter pronouns shall be
substituted for those of feminine form and vice versa, and the plural of the
singular and singular of the plural shall be substituted in any case in which
the context may require.
Chapter 75
ALARM SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Citation hearing procedure — See Ch. 91. Noise — See Ch. 135.
§ 75-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the installation and use of burglar,
fire, medical and any other alarms or emergency signaling devices within
the Town of Farmington.
§ 73-10 ALARM SYSTEMS § 75-2
75:147
§ 75-2. Applicability.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to any person, other than the
Town of Farmington, who uses, operates or owns any alarm system that
automatically summons the police, fire, medical or ambulance personnel or
other Town agency in response to an alarm signal.
§ 75-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALARM BUSINESS — Any business that installs, maintains, alters, repairs,
replaces or services alarm systems located within the Town of Farmington.
ALARM SYSTEM — An assembly of equipment and devices or a single
device designed to detect and signal an unauthorized intrusion, fire or other
similar emergency at the protected premises. This term, however, shall
apply only to such systems that automatically summon police, fire, medical,
ambulance or other Town emergency vehicles or personnel.[Amended
7-28-1992]
ALARM USER — Any person who owns or operates an alarm system located
within the Town of Farmington.
AUTOMATIC DIALING DEVICE — A device that transmits a prerecorded
message over telephone lines.
BILLING CYCLE — A one-year period of time to coincide with the Town of
Farmington fiscal year, i.e., July 1 to June 30.[Added 12-10-2002]
FALSE ALARM — Any alarm signal necessitating the response of Town
emergency vehicles or personnel that is actuated in any fashion, including a
malfunction of the alarm system or other equipment, where no emergency
situation exists.
PERSON — An individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation or
organization of any nature.
§ 75-4. Connection to telephone lines restricted.
No automatic dialing device or alarm system shall be connected to or use
any telephone lines assigned to any agency of the Town of Farmington,
including the 911 emergency line, except those lines authorized by the
Police Chief.12
§ 75-5. False alarm charges.13
A. A charge shall be imposed upon an alarm user, payable to the Town
of Farmington, for each false alarm generated as described below:
[Amended 12-10-2002]
12.Editor's Note: Original Sections 4.2 and 4.3, which immediately followed this section and
dealt with penalties for violation of original Section 4.1, were deleted 7-28-1992.
13.Former § 75-5. Waiver of penalties, was repealed 12-10-2002. This ordinance also
renumbered former §§ 75-7 and 75-8 as 75-6 and 75-7, respectively.
§ 75-2 FARMINGTON CODE § 75-5
75:148
(1) False alarms of any type, burglar, fire or medical, will be charged at
the same rate.
(2) The procedure for false alarm charges outlined in § 75-5A(3) will
reset on the first day of each billing cycle.
(3) In each billing cycle the first three false alarms will not be
chargeable. The next four false alarms will be billed at $25 for each
false alarm. Any subsequent false alarms during the billing cycle will
be billed at $100.
B. If an alarm user notifies the Police Chief or his agent one hour prior
to any service, test, repair or adjustment of an alarm system that may
activate a false alarm, no such charge shall be imposed.
C. The Police Chief, with the approval of the Town Manager, may waive
any of the charges imposed by Subsection A of this section. The Police
Chief must state the reason for such waiver in writing and duly signed
by him.14
§ 75-6. Penalties for offenses. [Added 7-28-1992]
Except as otherwise provided, any alarm user or alarm business that
violates any provision of this chapter shall be subject to a penalty not to
exceed $100.
§ 75-7. Enforcement. [Added 3-28-1995]
This chapter has been specifically designated for enforcement by citations
issued by designated municipal officers or employees, and the citation
hearing procedure established by Chapter 91 of the Farmington Code shall
be followed.
Chapter 76
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Consumption of alcohol on Town-owned
property — See Ch. 148.
14.Editor's Note: Original Section 6, which immediately followed this section and dealt with
existing alarm systems, was deleted 7-28-1992.
§ 75-5 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 75-7
76:149

ARTICLE I
Possession by Underage Persons
[Adopted 2-12-2002]
§ 76-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to address the issue that the unregulated
possession of alcoholic liquor by persons under the age of 21is detrimental
to the general welfare, health and safety of the residents of the Town of
Farmington, and especially its youth.
§ 76-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR — Shall have the same meaning as the same term is
defined in Title 30, Section 30-1 of the Connecticut General Statutes.
HOST — To organize a gathering of two or more persons or to allow
the premises under one's control to be used with one's knowledge for
a gathering of two or more persons for personal, social or business
interaction.
MINOR — The same meaning as the same term is defined in Title 30,
Section 30-1 of the Connecticut General Statutes.
§ 76-3. Possession restricted.
No minor shall possess any container of alcoholic liquors, whether opened
or unopened, within the Town of Farmington, except when accompanied
by or in the presence of his or her parent, guardian or spouse who has
attained the age of 21. This restriction shall apply to both public and private
property.
§ 76-4. Hosting events. [Amended 6-25-2002]
No person shall host an event or gathering at which the person knows or
reasonably believes that alcoholic liquor will be consumed by or dispensed
to any minor unless said minor is accompanied by or in the presence of
his or her parent, guardian, or spouse who has attained the age of 21.
This restriction shall apply to any event or gathering within the Town of
Farmington, whether conducted on public or private property.
§ 76-5. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 6-25-2002]
A. Any person violating any provision of this article shall be subject to a fine
of $100.
B. Exceptions: The provisions of §§ 76-3 and 76-4 of this article shall not
apply to the following:
(1) A minor who possesses alcoholic liquor on the order of a practicing
physician or any person who sells, ships, delivers or gives any
alcoholic liquors to a minor on the order of a practicing physician.
§ 76-1 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 76-5
76:151
(2) A person over the age of eighteen who is an employee or permit
holder under Section 30-90a of the Connecticut General Statutes
and who possesses alcoholic liquor in the course of such person's
employment or business or in the course of a sale, shipment or
delivery of alcoholic liquor made to a person over age 18 who is an
employee or permit holder under Section 30-90a of the Connecticut
General Statutes and where such sale, shipment or delivery is made
in the course of such person's employment or business.
§ 76-5 FARMINGTON CODE § 76-5
76:152
Chapter 78
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 135. Dogs on Town-owned property — See Ch. 148.
§ 76-5 ANIMALS § 76-5
78:153

ARTICLE I
Dogs
[Adopted 10-26-1993]
§ 78-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to regulate the keeping of dogs and prohibit
the roaming at large of dogs and other animals in the streets and public
places of the Town and to prevent cruelty to dogs and other animals,
pursuant to C.G.S. Section 7-148(c)(7)(D)(i) and (ii), and to prescribe
penalties and enforcement procedures for violation of local and state
regulations pertaining to dogs and other animals as set forth in C.G.S.
Article 435, as amended, C.G.S. Secs. 7-152c and 7-148(c) (10) and this
article.
§ 78-2. Prohibited acts.
It shall be a violation of this article for any owner or keeper of a dog:
A. To allow such dog to roam at large upon the land of another and not
under control of the owner or keeper or the agent of the owner or
keeper, or to allow such dog to roam at large on any portion of any public
highway and not attended by and under control of such owner or keeper
or his agent; the unauthorized presence of any dog on the land of any
person other than the owner or keeper of such dog or on any portion of a
public highway, when such dog is not attended by and under the control
of such owner or keeper, shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of
the provisions of this article.
B. To obstruct or attempt to obstruct the canine control officer or warden
engaged in the discharge of such person's duties.
C. To perpetrate any act of cruelty upon any dog or other animal.
D. Not to have a tag or plate on a collar around the neck or on a harness on
the body of such dog.
E. Not to have complied with any order or regulation relating to rabies
applicable to such dog.
F. To abandon or neglect or cruelly treat any such dog.
G. Not to have such dog licensed in the Town Clerk's office as required by
state law.
H. To allow such dog to inflict damage or harm to human beings, domestic
animals or property.
I. To allow such dog to go on a highway and growl, snap, bite or otherwise
annoy any person or domestic animal lawfully using such highway or
chase or interfere with any motor vehicle so using such highway.
J. To permit such dog to become a nuisance by reason of vicious disposition
or excessive barking or any other disturbance or by permitting such
barking or other disturbance when such is a source of annoyance to any
sick person residing in the immediate vicinity.
K. To crop or cut or cause to be cropped or cut off the whole or any part of
the ear of a dog unless such person is a registered veterinarian surgeon.
L. Not to clean up or dispose of immediately any feces or other waste
matter discharged by a dog on public property, including highways and
§ 78-1 ANIMALS § 78-2
78:155
sidewalks, or on any private property not owned or controlled by the
owner, agent or keeper of the dog.
§ 78-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the above provisions shall be fined not less than
$25 nor more than $100. The Town canine control officer or warden shall
issue citations for violations of any provisions set forth above. All moneys
received shall be remitted to the Office of the Tax Collector.
§ 78-4. Hearing procedure for citations.
A. The Town Manager shall appoint one or more citation hearing officers,
who shall be other than police officers or employees or persons who
issue citations, to conduct the hearings authorized by this section.
B. Within 12 months from the expiration of the final period for the
uncontested payment of fines, penalties, costs or fees for any citation
issued under this article, the Town shall send notice to the owner or
keeper of the dog. Such notice shall inform said owner or keeper of the
following:
(1) The allegations against said owner or keeper and the amount of the
fines, penalties, costs or fees due.
(2) That said owner or keeper may contest his liability before a citation
hearing officer by delivering in person or by mail written notice
within 10 days of the date of the notice.
(3) That if the owner or keeper does not demand such a hearing, an
assessment and judgment shall be entered against said person.
(4) That such judgment may issue without further notice.
C. If the owner or keeper who is sent notice pursuant to Subsection B
above wishes to admit liability for any alleged violation, said person may,
without requesting a hearing, pay the full amount of the fines, penalties,
costs or fees in person or by mail to an official designated by the Town.
Any owner or keeper who does not deliver or mail written demand
for a hearing within 10 days of the date of the first notice provided
in Subsection B above shall be deemed to have admitted liability, and
the designated municipal official shall certify such person's failure to
respond to the hearing officer. The hearing officer shall thereupon enter
and assess the fines, penalties, costs or fees provided for by law and shall
follow the procedures set forth below.
D. Any owner or keeper who requests a hearing shall be given written
notice of the date, time and place for the hearing. Such hearing shall
be held not less than 15 days nor more than 30 days from the date
of the mailing of the notice, provided that the hearing officer shall
grant upon good cause shown any reasonable request by any interested
party for postponement or continuance. An original or certified copy of
the initial notice of violation issued by the Town official shall be filed
and retained by the Town. The presence of the issuing official shall be
required at the hearing if such owner or keeper so requests. An owner
or keeper wishing to contest his/her liability shall appear at the hearing
and may present evidence in his/her behalf. A designated Town official,
other than the hearing officer, may present evidence on behalf of the
§ 78-2 FARMINGTON CODE § 78-4
78:156
Town. If such owner or keeper fails to appear, the hearing officer may
enter an assessment by default against him/her upon a finding of proper
notice and liability. The hearing officer may accept from such owner
or keeper copies of police reports, investigatory and citation reports
and other official documents by mail and may determine thereby that
the appearance of such person is not necessary. The hearing officer
shall conduct the hearing in the order and form and with such methods
of proof as the hearing officer deems fair and appropriate. The rules
regarding the admissibility of evidence shall not be strictly applied,
but all testimony shall be given under oath or affirmation. The hearing
officer shall announce his decision at the end of the hearing. If the
hearing officer determines that the owner or keeper is not liable, the
hearing officer shall dismiss the matter and enter his determination in
writing accordingly. If the hearing officer determines that the person
is liable for the violation, the hearing officer shall forthwith enter and
assess the fines, penalties, costs or fees against such owner or, keeper
as provided by this article and applicable law.
E. If any assessment entered by the hearing officer is not paid on the date
of its entry, the hearing officer shall send by first class mail a notice of
the assessment to the person found liable and shall file, not less than
30 days nor more than 12 months after such mailing, a certified copy
of the notice of assessment with the Clerk of the Superior Court for the
Hartford/New Britain judicial district, together with an entry fee of $8.
The certified copy of the notice of assessment shall constitute a record
of assessment. Within such twelve-month period, multiple assessments
against the same person may be accrued and filed as one record of
assessment. The Clerk of the Superior Court shall enter judgment in the
amount of such record of assessment and court costs of $8 against such
person in favor of the Town. The hearing officer's assessment, when so
entered as a judgment, shall have the effect of a civil money judgment,
and a levy of execution of such judgment may issue without further
notice to such person.
F. The owner or keeper against whom an assessment has been entered
pursuant to this article is entitled to judicial review by way of appeal.
An appeal shall be instituted within 30 days of the mailing of notice
of such assessment by filing a petition to reopen assessment, together
with an entry fee in an amount equal to the entry for a small claims
case pursuant to C.G.S. Section 52-259 in the Superior Court for the
geographical area in which the Town is located, which shall entitle said
owner or keeper to a hearing in accordance with the rules of the judges
of the superior court.
§ 78-4 ANIMALS § 78-4
78:157
Chapter 83
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building Code Board of Appeals – See Ch. 5
Construction of public buildings – See Ch. 53
Demolition of buildings – See Ch. 86
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 87.
Blighted buildings — See Ch. 88.
Fees — See Ch. 98.
Historic areas — See Ch. 111.
Housing standards — See Ch. 118.
Subdivision regulations — See Ch. 172.
Zoning regulations — See Ch. 197.
§ 78-4 FARMINGTON CODE § 78-4
78:158
ARTICLE I
Permits for Buildings in Unapproved Subdivisions
[Adopted 11-29-1951 by Ord. No. 15]
§ 83-1. Issuance of building permits.
No building permit shall be issued for the erection of any building or
structure in an unapproved subdivision or on a lot abutting an unaccepted
highway or street; provided, however, that this article shall not prevent the
issuance of a building permit for the construction of a building or structure
on a lot a plan for which, at the time of the adoption of this article, was
on record in the office of the Town Clerk and which abutted an accepted
highway or street or a highway or street which was actually in use for
vehicular travel or for the construction of farm or accessory buildings which
are not in violation of the zoning regulations of the Town.15
15.Editor's Note: See Ch. 197, Zoning Regulations.
§ 83-1 ANIMALS § 83-1
78:159

ARTICLE II
Building Code
[Adopted 2-27-1962 by Ord. No. 42]
§ 83-2. Withholding of building permits due to delinquent taxes and
charges [Added 2-9-201616]
A. If, upon applying for a building application, it is determined by the
Tax Collector or his/her designee that delinquent Town taxes, charges,
interest or lien fees are owed on any property for which an application
is made, the Tax Collector shall notify the Building Official in writing to
deny such application until the delinquent Town charges are paid in full.
B. Notwithstanding § 83-2A, if the Building Official receives a denial of
a building application from the Tax Collector, the Building Official or
designee may grant the requested building application without
satisfaction of payment of Town charges if the Building Official certifies,
in writing, as part of the file, that an emergency exists affecting the
health or safety of the occupants of a building upon which property the
building application is sought.
C. For the purposes of this section, "delinquent" shall have the meaning
found in § 12-146 of the General Statutes.
§ 83-3. Adoption of state standards. [Amended 7-18-1992]
In accordance with C.G.S. § 29-253, the State Building Code of the State
of Connecticut, including all amendments thereto, is hereby adopted as the
Building Code for the Town of Farmington.
16.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also renumbered former § 83-2, Adoption of state standards,
as § 83-3.
§ 83-2 ANIMALS § 83-3
78:161
Chapter 86
BUILDINGS, DEMOLITION OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building Code — See Ch. 83, Art. II. Building permit fees — See Ch. 98.
§ 86-1. Purpose. [Amended 2-26-2002]
The purpose of this chapter is to establish the process under which building
permits for demolition will be issued and, in particular, to provide a means,
when the proposed demolition involves a building more than 75 years old,
by which a delay in the issuance of a demolition permit up to a period of 90
days may be effected.
§ 86-2. Permit required. [Amended 2-26-2002]
No person shall demolish any building, structure or part thereof without
obtaining a building permit for demolition from the Building Official of the
Town. No person shall be eligible to receive a building permit for demolition
unless that person complies with the provisions of C.G.S. § 29-406 by
providing to the Building Official written evidence:
A. Of financial responsibility in the form of a certificate of insurance
specifying demolition purposes and providing liability coverage for
bodily injury of at least $100,000 per person with an aggregate of at
least $300,000 and for property damage of at least 50,000 per accident
with an aggregate of at least $100,000; each such certificate shall be
accompanied by a hold-harmless agreement under which the Town and
its agents shall be saved harmless from any claim or claims arising out of
the negligence of the applicant or his agents or employees in the course
of the demolition operations.
B. A certificate of notice executed by all public utilities having service
connections within the premises proposed to be demolished, stating that
such utilities have severed such connections and service.
C. That the applicant is a holder of a current valid certificate of registration
issued under the provisions of C.G.S. § 29-402 unless he falls within the
exceptions of C.G.S. § 29-406.
§ 86-3. Safeguards for certain old buildings. [Amended 2-26-2002]
If the building, structure or part thereof to be demolished is at least 500
square feet in size and 75 or more years old, the following additional
process shall be followed with respect to issuance of a building permit for
demolition:
A. The Building Official shall arrange to have a legal notice of such building
permits for demolition application published in a daily or weekly
newspaper having a substantial circulation within the Town, which
notice shall be published within 15 days following the filing of the
§ 83-3 FARMINGTON CODE § 86-3
86:162
building permit for demolition application. Such a legal notice shall
include:
(1) That a building permit for demolition application has been filed for
the demolition of a building, structure or part thereof which is 75 or
more years old.
(2) The location of the property to be demolished.
(3) The name of the owner of said property.
(4) The date of the filing of the building permit for demolition
application.
(5) That any objections to the proposed demolition shall be submitted
in writing to the Town's Building Official within a period of 30 days
following the date of the publication of the legal notice.
(6) That if no objections are filed within said thirty-day period, the
building permit for demolition may be issued.
B. The Building Official, within 15 days following the filing of the building
permit for demolition application, shall send, by first class mail, a copy
of the legal notice required under Subsection A above to the following
persons:
(1) Property owners abutting the premises on which the building to be
demolished is located.
(2) President, Farmington Historical Society.
(3) Farmington Town Historian.
(4) President, Farmington Land Trust.
(5) President, Unionville Museum.
(6) Chairman, Farmington Historic District Commission.
(7) Commissioner, Connecticut Historical Commission.
§ 86-4. Procedure for obtaining delay. [Amended 2-26-2002]
If a written objection stating the nature of the objection is filed with the
Town Building Official within 30 days following publication of the legal
notice provided for above, the Building Official shall delay issuance of the
building permit for demolition for a total period of 90 days from the date of
receipt of the application. At the end of said ninety-day period, the Building
Official, if all requirements for a building permit for demolition have been
met, may issue a building permit for demolition.
§ 86-5. Fees. [Amended 2-26-2002]
A. The fee for a building permit for demolition application shall be based on
the cost of the demolition and shall be in the same amount as a fee for a
building permit as set forth in Chapter 98, § 98-1S.
B. If the demolition involves a building, structure or part thereof which is
75 or more years old, the fee, in addition to that set forth in Subsection
A, shall include the cost of the publication of the legal notice and the cost
of an affidavit of publication, and all legal costs incurred.
§ 86-6. Interpretation of provisions.
This chapter is intended to supplement and not to limit any requirements
now or hereafter imposed by the Connecticut General Statutes and
§ 86-3 BUILDINGS, DEMOLITION OF § 86-6
86:163
regulations adopted thereunder or any authority now or hereafter granted
to the Town Building Official by the Connecticut Basic Building Code17 with
respect to the issuance of a demolition permit.
Chapter 87
BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Citation hearing procedure — See Ch. 91. Subdivision regulations — See Ch. 172.
§ 87-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote public safety and convenience
by providing a street numbering and naming system whereby addresses
may be identified with ease and speed essential to the quick response
of emergency services, such as for fire fighting or police and emergency
medical care.
§ 87-2. Naming or changing names of streets.
Under normal circumstances, all names of streets, public or private, shall
be approved by the Town Plan and Zoning Commission pursuant to Section
4.05.04 of the Town's Subdivision Regulations.18 If any public street not
coming within the Subdivision Regulations is to be named or if the name
of any existing public street is to be changed, such naming or change of
name shall require the approval of the Town Council on recommendation of
the Town Engineer. If any private street not coming within the Subdivision
Regulations is to be named or if the name of any existing private street is to
be changed, such naming or change of name shall require the approval of
the Town Engineer. Whenever the Town has approved a name of a street or
a change in the name of a street, the Town Engineer shall promptly notify by
mail the owners of all properties on such street, or their agents. The Town
Engineer shall maintain maps showing names approved for each street in
the Town, and such maps and records shall be open for public inspection.
§ 87-3. Street name signs.
For each street requiring a name pursuant to § 87-2 above, there shall
be street name signs. For streets arising from subdivision approvals, the
Town Plan and Zoning Commission, pursuant to Section 4.05.06 of the
Town's Subdivision Regulations,19 shall regulate such signs. For streets not
regulated by the Town Plan and Zoning Commission, the Town Engineer
shall regulate and require the construction and maintenance of such street
17.Editor's Note: See Ch. 83, Building Construction, Art. II.
18.Editor's Note: See Ch. 172, Subdivision Regulations.
19.Editor's Note: See Ch. 172, Subdivision Regulations.
§ 86-6 FARMINGTON CODE § 87-3
87:164
name signs. All names of street signs shall be consistent in size and style,
and the names shall be legible from the intersecting street or highway.
Name of street signs required for private streets shall be provided and
maintained by the owners of such street and shall be installed within 60
days of receipt of notice from the Town Engineer of the approval of the
street name or any change thereof.
§ 87-4. Assignment of street numbers; maps and records.
The Town Engineer shall assign street numbers to all buildings, parts
of buildings and house lots fronting on any street, public or private, or
highway within the Town and may change such numbers if necessary to
have a more orderly numbering system. When new streets are laid out, the
Town Engineer shall promptly assign numbers to each lot on said street.
Whenever the Town Engineer has assigned a street number to a property,
the Town Engineer shall promptly notify by mail the owners of the property
affected, or their agents, and shall also notify the occupants of any building
or part thereof to which a number has been assigned. The Town Engineer
shall maintain maps showing the street numbers assigned to each property,
and such maps and records shall be open for public inspection.
§ 87-5. Affixing of street numbers.
Each owner, agent or occupant shall affix to said building or part thereof, or
to some object appurtenant thereto, the street number or numbers assigned
by the Town Engineer. All numbers shall be affixed so as to be legible from
the street or highway. Numbers shall be affixed within 60 days of receipt of
notice from the Town Engineer.
§ 87-6. Penalties for offenses.
Each owner, agent or occupant of any building or part thereof who fails to
affix to the appropriate building the number assigned by the Town Engineer
within 60 days of receipt of notice of such assignment, and each owner of
any private street who either displays a street name sign without approval
of the Town Engineer or who fails to provide a street name sign within 60
days of receipt of notice of the approval of such sign:
A. Shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished
by a fine of not more than $100 for each offense, and each day thereafter
of failure to comply with the direction of the Town Engineer shall
constitute a separate and distinct offense; or
B. Shall be subject to a penalty of $100 for each such violation subject
to the hearing procedure for citations set forth in C.G.S. § 7-152c.
[Amended 7-28-1992]
§ 87-7. Enforcement. [Added 3-28-1995]
This chapter has been specifically designated for enforcement by citations
issued by designated municipal officers or employees, and the citation
§ 87-3 BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF § 87-7
87:165
hearing procedure established by Chapter 91 of the Farmington Code shall
be followed.
Chapter 88
BUILDINGS, BLIGHTED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 83.
Demolition of buildings — See Ch. 86.
Citation hearing procedure — See Ch. 91.
Housing standards — See Ch. 118.
Zoning regulations — See Ch. 197.
§ 88-1. Purpose.
It is hereby found and declared that there exists within the Town of
Farmington a number of taxable and tax-exempt real properties which
contain vacant blighted buildings. It is further found that the existence of
these vacant blighted buildings adversely affects property values within the
Town and threatens the health, safety and general welfare of its residents.
§ 88-2. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement
of this chapter:
BLIGHTED PREMISES — Any vacant building or structure, or any vacant
part of a structure that is a separate unit, or a vacant parcel of land, and in
which at least one of the additional following conditions exists:
The Building Official determines that existing conditions pose a serious
threat to the health and safety of persons in the Town.
A.
It is not being maintained and contributes to housing decay, as
evidenced by the existence of one or more of the following conditions:
(1) Missing or boarded windows or doors;
(2) Collapsing or missing walls, roof or floor;
Exterior walls which contain holes, breaks, loose or rotting
materials or which are not properly surface coated to prevent
deterioration;
(3)
(4) Foundation walls which contain open cracks and breaks;
Overhang extensions, including but not limited to canopies,
marquees, signs, awnings, stairways, fire escapes, standpipes and
exhaust ducts which contain rust or other decay;
(5)
B.
§ 87-7 FARMINGTON CODE § 88-2
88:166
BUILDING CITATION HEARING OFFICER — An individual(s) appointed by
the Town Manager to conduct hearings authorized by Chapter 91.
BUILDING OFFICIAL — Such individual as is designated by the Town
Manager to administer the state building code and to enforce building
ordinances.
LEGAL OCCUPANCY — Occupancy in accordance with state building, state
fire, local zoning, local housing and all other pertinent codes.
NEIGHBORHOOD — An area of the Town comprised of all premises or
parcels of land any part of which is within a radius of 1,000 feet of any part
of another parcel or lot within the Town.
OWNER — Any person, firm, institution, partnership, corporation,
foundation, entity or authority who or which holds title to real property or
any mortgage or other secured or equitable interest in such property, as
appears in the Farmington land records.
PROXIMATE PROPERTY — Any premises or parcel of land or part thereof
within 1,000 feet of a blighted premises.
VACANT — A continuous period of 60 days or longer during which a
building or structure or part thereof is not legally occupied by human
beings.
VACANT PARCEL — A parcel of land with no structure(s) thereon.
Chimneys and similar appurtenances which are in a state of
disrepair;
(6)
(7) Insect screens which contain tears or ragged edges;
(8) Vermin infestation;
Garbage, trash or abandoned vehicles on the premises (unless the
premises is a junkyard licensed by the State of Connecticut);
(9)
(10)Overgrown grass or weeds at least one foot in height; or
(11)Graffiti.
Illegal activities are conducted at the premises, as documented in
Police Department records.
C.
It is a fire hazard as determined by the Fire Marshal or as documented
in Fire Department records.
D.
It is a factor creating a substantial and unreasonable interference
with the use and enjoyment of other premises within the surrounding
area as documented by neighborhood complaints, police reports or the
cancellation of insurance on proximate properties.
E.
§ 88-2 BUILDINGS, BLIGHTED § 88-3
88:167
§ 88-3. Prohibition against creating or maintaining blighted
premises.
No owner of real property, taxable or tax-exempt, within the Town of
Farmington shall cause or allow blighted premises to be created, nor shall
any owner allow the continued existence of blighted premises.
§ 88-4. Certification of list of blighted premises.
A. Immediately following enactment of this chapter, the Town Manager
shall request that all Town department heads report any property of
which they are aware which appears to be blighted. Such reports shall
be submitted within 30 days of the Town Manager's request.
B. The Town Manager shall use this information and any other available
information to complete a list of blighted properties within 60 days. In
the first year following enactment of this chapter, the Town Manager
may levy fines against blighted properties as described in § 88-5A hereof
prior to legislative approval of the blighted property list. In subsequent
years, this process will be initiated on or before January 15 of that year,
and fines may only be levied, or other actions deemed appropriate taken,
pursuant to legislative approval of a blighted property list, or additions
or deletions thereto.
C. Within 60 days after receipt, the Town Manager shall present to the
Town Council said list. The Town Council shall approve, disapprove or
modify said list. In the event that the Town Council chooses not to
approve, disapprove or modify the list within 75 days from the date it
receives said list, then said list will be deemed to have been approved.
D. The Town Manager may request the addition of any premises to or
deletion from the blighted property list for consideration by the Town
Council.
E. Any individual or any civic organization or municipal agency affected by
the action or inaction of an owner of property subject to the provisions of
this chapter may file, in writing, a complaint of violation of this chapter
with the Town Manager which sets forth the address of the property and
facts concerning the condition of such property. If the Town Manager
has reason to believe that an owner has violated the provisions of this
chapter, he shall request the addition of the subject property to the
blighted properties list for consideration by the Town Council.
§ 88-5. Enforcement and hearings with property owners.
A. Once said list of blighted properties, or any additions thereto, has been
approved by the Town Council, the Town Manager, or his designee,
shall undertake regular inspections for the purpose of documenting
continuous blight and shall issue a citation and impose a penalty of not
more than $100 for each day that the building or structure or unit, or
part thereof, or parcel of land is in violation of this chapter. Each day
that the building or structure or unit, or part thereof, or a parcel of land
is in violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense.
B. At any time within 12 months from the expiration of the final period for
the uncontested payment of fines, penalties, costs or fees for any citation
issued for an alleged violation of this chapter, the Town Manager shall
§ 88-3 FARMINGTON CODE § 88-5
88:168
send notice, via certified mail, to the person cited. Such notice shall
inform the person cited of the allegations against him and the amount
of the fines, penalties, costs or fees due; that he may contest his liability
before a Building Citation Hearing Officer by delivering in person or by
mail written notice within 10 days of the date thereof; that if he does
not demand such a hearing, assessment and judgment shall be entered
against him and any unpaid fine shall constitute a lien upon the subject
real estate against which the fine was imposed as set forth in Subsection
F of this section; and that such judgment shall attach without further
notice.
C. If the person who is sent notice pursuant to Subsection B of this section
wishes to admit liability for any alleged violation, he may, without
requesting a hearing, pay the full amount of the fines, penalties, costs
or fees admitted to in person or by mail to an official designated by the
Town Manager. Such payment shall be inadmissible in any proceeding,
civil or criminal, to establish the conduct of such person or other person
making the payment. Any person who does not deliver or mail written
demand for a hearing within 10 days of the date of the first notice
provided for in Subsection B of this section shall be deemed to have
admitted liability, and the designated municipal official shall certify such
person's failure to respond to the Hearing Officer. The Hearing Officer
shall thereupon enter and assess the fines provided for within this
chapter and shall follow the procedures set forth in Subsection F of this
section.
D. Any person who requests a hearing shall be given written notice, via
certified mail, of the date, time and place for the hearing. Such hearing
shall be held not less than 15 days nor more than 30 days from the
date of the mailing of notice of hearing, provided that the Hearing
Officer shall grant upon good cause shown any reasonable request by
any interested party for postponement or continuance. An original or
certified copy of the initial notice of violation issued by the Town
Manager, or his designee, shall be filed and retained by the municipality,
and shall be deemed to be a business record within the scope of Section
52-180 of the Connecticut General Statutes and evidence of the facts
contained therein. The presence of the Town Manager, or his designee,
shall be required at the hearing if such person so requests. A person
wishing to contest his liability shall appear at the hearing and may
present evidence in his behalf. A designated municipal official, other
than the Hearing Officer, may present evidence on behalf of the
municipality. If such person fails to appear, the Hearing Officer may
enter an assessment by default against him upon a finding of proper
notice and liability under this chapter. The Hearing Officer may accept
from such person copies of police reports, investigatory and citation
reports and other official documents by mail and may determine thereby
that the appearance of such person is unnecessary. The Hearing Officer
shall conduct the hearing in the order and form and with such methods
of proof as he deems fair and appropriate. The rules regarding the
admissibility of evidence shall not be strictly applied, but all testimony
shall be given under oath or affirmation.
§ 88-5 BUILDINGS, BLIGHTED § 88-5
88:169
E. The Hearing Officer shall announce his decision at the end of the
hearing. If he determines that the person is not liable, he shall dismiss
the matter and enter his determination, in writing, accordingly. If the
person demonstrates that he intends to rehabilitate or demolish the
blighted structure, by the submission of documentation such as
construction plans, permits and the availability of funds to pay for such
work, satisfactory to the Hearing Officer, then the Hearing Officer shall
stay the matter and enter his determination, in writing, accordingly. Said
stay shall be expressly conditioned upon the rehabilitation or demolition
of the blighted structure within three months. If the conditions of the
stay have not been met within three months, the Hearing Officer shall
enter and assess the fines, penalties, costs or fees against such person
as provided by this chapter retroactive to the date of the hearing. If the
Hearing Officer determines that the person is liable for the violation, he
shall forthwith enter and assess the fines, penalties, costs or fees against
such person as provided by this chapter.
F. If such assessment is not paid on the date of its entry, any unpaid
fine shall constitute a lien upon the real estate against which the fine
was imposed from the original date of such fine. Each such lien may
be continued, recorded and released in the manner provided by the
Connecticut General Statutes for continuing, recording and releasing
property tax liens. Each such lien shall take precedence over all other
liens filed after the effective date of this chapter and encumbrances,
except taxes, and may be enforced in the same manner as property tax
liens.
§ 88-6. Administrative responsibility.
The Assessor may reduce the assessment of any building that has been
rehabilitated in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The
assessment shall be adjusted after the building is rehabilitated. The
adjusted assessment shall reflect the value of the structure prior to
rehabilitation. The adjusted assessment shall be applicable for a period not
to exceed three years.
§ 88-5 FARMINGTON CODE § 88-6
88:170
Chapter 91
CITATION HEARING PROCEDURE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarm systems — See Ch. 75.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 87.
Food-processing and food-service
establishments — See Ch. 106.
Housing standards — See Ch. 118.
Noise — See Ch. 135.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 144.
Septic systems — See Ch. 152.
Sewers — See Ch. 156.
Signs — See Ch. 159.
Solid waste — See Ch. 165.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 169.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 182.
Junked vehicles — See Ch. 186.
Motorized vehicles — See Ch. 189.
Water — See Ch. 193.
§ 91-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish a citation hearing procedure in
accordance with C.G.S. §§ 7-148(c)(10)(A), 7-152b and 7-152c to be followed
in all instances when citations are issued by Town of Farmington municipal
officials.
§ 91-2. Hearing procedure.
A. Regulations and ordinances of the Town may be enforced by citations
issued by designated municipal officers or employees, provided that
the regulation and ordinances have been designed specifically by the
Town for enforcement by citation in the same manner in which they
were adopted, and the designated municipal officer or employee issues a
written warning providing notice of the specific violation before issuing
the citation.
B. The Town manager shall appoint one or more citation hearing officers,
who shall be other than police officers or employees or persons who
issue citations, to conduct the hearings authorized by this section.
C. After a citation has been issued and the fine or penalty has not been
paid, the Town shall send notice to the alleged violator promptly (and
no later than 12 months after the expiration of the final period for the
uncontested payment of fines, penalties, costs or fees for any citation
issued under any ordinance of the Town for an alleged violation). Such
notice shall inform the violator and any other persons cited of the
following:
(1) The allegations against the violator and other persons cited and the
amount of the fines, penalties, costs or fees due.
(2) That the alleged violator or other person cited may contest his
liability by delivering in person or by mail written notice within 10
§ 88-6 BUILDINGS, BLIGHTED § 91-2
88:171
days of the date of the original notice to said violator that he desires
to contest his liability before a citation hearing officer.
(3) That if the alleged violator does not demand such a hearing, an
assessment and judgment shall be entered against him.
(4) That such judgment may issue without further notice.
D. If the alleged violator or other person to whom notice has been sent
pursuant to Subsection C above wishes to admit liability for any alleged
violation, he may, without requesting a hearing, pay the full amount of
the fines, penalties, costs or fees in person or by mail to the official
designated by the Town. Any alleged violator or other person who does
not deliver or mail a written demand for a hearing within 10 days of
the date of the first notice provided in Subsection C above shall be
deemed to have admitted liability, and the designated municipal official
shall certify such person's failure to respond to the hearing officer. The
hearing officer shall thereupon enter and assess the fines, penalties,
costs or fees provided for by law and shall follow the procedures set forth
in Subsection E below.
E. Any person who requests a hearing shall be given written notice of the
date, time and place for the hearing. Such hearing shall be held not less
than 15 days nor more than 30 days from the date of the mailing of such
notice, provided that the hearing officer shall grant, upon good cause
shown, any reasonable request by an interested party for postponement
or continuance. An original or certified copy of the initial notice of
violation issued by a police officer or other issuing officer shall be filed
and retained by the Town, shall be deemed to be a business record
within the scope of C.G.S. § 52-180 and evidence of the facts contained
therein. The presence of the police officer or issuing officer shall be
required at the hearing if such person so requests. The alleged violator
or other person wishing to contest liability shall appear at the hearing
and may present evidence in his behalf. A designated Town official, other
than the hearing officer, may present evidence on behalf of the Town.
If the alleged violator fails to appear, the hearing officer may enter
an assessment by default against him upon a finding of proper notice
and liability under the applicable ordinance. The hearing officer may
accept from such alleged violator copies of police reports, motor vehicle
department documents and other official documents by mail and may
determine thereby that the appearance of such person is unnecessary.
The hearing officer shall conduct the hearing in the order and form and
with such methods of proof as he deems fair and appropriate. The rules
regarding the admissibility of evidence shall not be strictly applied, but
all testimony shall be given under oath or affirmation. If the offense
consists of a motor vehicle parking violation, proof of the registration
number of the motor vehicle involved shall be prima facie evidence
in all proceedings that the owner of such vehicle was the operator
thereof, provided that in the case of a leased or rented motor vehicle,
such proof shall be prima facie evidence in any proceeding that the
lessee was the operator thereof. The hearing officer shall announce his
decision at the end of the hearing. If he determines that the alleged
violator or other person is not liable, he shall dismiss the matter and
§ 91-2 FARMINGTON CODE § 91-2
88:172
enter his determination in writing accordingly. If he determines that the
person is liable for the violation, he shall forthwith enter and assess the
fines, penalties, costs or fees against such person as provided by the
ordinance.
F. If such assessment is not paid on the date of its entry, the hearing officer
shall send by first-class mail a notice of the assessment to the person
found liable and shall file, not less than 30 days nor more than 12 months
after such mailing, a certified copy of the notice of assessment with
the Clerk of the superior court for the geographical area in which the
Town is located, together with an entry fee of $8. The certified copy of
the notice of assessment shall constitute a record of assessment. Within
such twelve-month period, assessments against the same person may
be accrued and filed as one record of assessment. The Clerk of the
court shall enter judgment in the amount of such record of assessment
and court costs of $8 against such person in favor of the Town.
Notwithstanding any other provision of the General Statutes, the
hearing officer's assessment, when so entered as a judgment, shall have
the effect of a civil money judgment and a levy of execution on such
judgment may issue without further notice to such person.
G. The person against whom an assessment has been entered pursuant to
this section is entitled to judicial review by way of appeal. An appeal
shall be instituted within 30 days of the mailing of notice of such
assessment by filing a petition to reopen assessment, together with an
entry fee in an amount equal to the entry fee for a small claims case
pursuant to C.G.S. § 52-259, in the superior court for the geographical
area in which the Town if located, which shall entitle such person to a
hearing in accordance with the rules of the judges of the superior court.
§ 91-3. Issuance of written warning.
In those instances where there is time to do so and where a continuing
violation is not causing immediate or significant harm, a written warning
providing notice of the specific violation shall be sent prior to issuing the
citation.
§ 91-4. Amount of fine, penalty, cost or fee.
The fine, penalty, cost or fee imposed under this chapter for any single
violation shall not exceed the amount of $100, unless otherwise specifically
provided by the General Statutes.
§ 91-5. Disposition of money received.
All moneys received pursuant to the procedure set forth above shall be
remitted to the office of the Town Tax Collector.
§ 91-6. Applicability; amended chapters. [Amended 2-26-2008.]
Each of the following chapters is amended to add the following section:
§ 91-2 BUILDINGS, BLIGHTED § 91-6
88:173
§ ___-__. Enforcement.
This chapter has been specifically designated for enforcement by citations
issued by designated municipal officers or employees, and the citation
hearing procedure established by Chapter 91 of the Farmington Code shall
be followed.
Chapter/
Article Title
Number of
Section to be Added
22 Enforcement of Zoning
Regulations, Inland Wetland
Regulations, and Aquifer
Protection Area Regulations for
Level A Mapped Areas
§ 22-4
75 Alarm Systems § 75-8
87 Buildings, Numbering of § 87-7
106 Food-Processing and Food-
Service Establishments
§ 106-12
118 Housing Standards § 118-71
135 Noise § 135-9
144 Peddling and Soliciting § 144-15
152 Septic Systems § 152-27
156 Sewers § 156-44
159 Signs § 159-6
165, Art. II Licensing of Collectors § 165-12.1
165, Art. III Recycling § 165-22F
169, Art. II Excavations and Obstructions § 169-13.1
169, Art. IV Access to Town-Maintained
Roads
§ 169-17.1
169, Art. VI Snow and Ice Removal § 169-30
182 Vehicles and Traffic § 182-10.1
186 Vehicles, Junked § 186-6
189 Vehicles, Motorized § 189-5
193, Art. III Water § 193-12
§ 91-6 FARMINGTON CODE § 91-6
88:174
Chapter 98
FEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 83.
Food-processing establishments — See Ch.
106.
Inland wetlands and watercourses — See Ch.
125.
Septic systems — See Ch. 152.
Subdivision regulations — See Ch. 172.
Zoning regulations — See Ch. 197.
§ 98-1. Fees established. [Amended 9-28-1993; 5-25-1999;
4-8-2003; 6-9-2015]
The following schedule of fees for the processing of applications by Town
agencies and for the use of the Town's Geographic Information System (GIS)
is established to be effective on and after December 1, 1993:
NOTE: Subsections A through P are subject to an additional mandated $60
State of Connecticut Department of Energy and Environmental Protection
(DEEP) fee. [2015]
A. Zone change:
(1) Thirty-five dollars per acre.
(2) One hundred fifty dollars minimum fee.
B. Special permit for multifamily residential use (three or more units):
(1) Fifty dollars per unit.
(2) One hundred fifty dollars minimum fee.
C. Site plan (commercial/industrial):
(1) Thirty-five dollars per acre plus $35 per 1,000 square feet of building
space.
(2) One hundred fifty dollars minimum fee.
D. Site plan for additions and renovations (commercial/industrial):
(1) Thirty-five dollars per 1,000 square feet of building space.
(2) One hundred fifty dollars minimum fee.
E. Modification of prior approval: $150.
F. Special permit:
(1) Residential special permit: $150.
(2) Commercial special permit: base fee of $200 plus $35 per 1,000 square
feet of building space.
G. Modifications of special permit or special exception: $150.
H. Change in text of Zoning or Subdivision Regulations: $250.
I. Signs: $50.
J. Subdivisions and resubdivisions:
(1) Two hundred dollars per lot fronting on existing street.
(2) Two hundred fifty dollars per lot fronting on proposed street.
K. Variance: $150.
L. Use variance: $150.
§ 91-6 BUILDINGS, BLIGHTED § 98-1
88:175
M. Appeal from decision of Zoning Enforcement Officer or Building Official:
$150.
N. Regulated activity in a wetland or upland review area requiring public
hearing: $150 plus $5 per wetland acre, plus $75.
O. Change in wetland boundary: $150 plus $5 per wetland acre.
P. Modification of prior wetland approval: $150.
Q. Building permit: $15 per each $1,000 of building costs or portion thereof.
R. Work started without a permit fee: The fee for any permit required or sought
after the fact [that is, for which the activity has already been initiated or
completed prior to seeking the required permit(s)] shall be two times the
fee(s) required herein. These fees shall be in addition to any fine(s) as may
be properly imposed by the Building Official or Hearing Officer or Court.
S. Certifications.
(1) Certificate of Occupancy: $15.
(2) Certificate of Approval: $5.
T. Permit to excavate:
(1) Within right-of-way: $50.
(2) Within roadway: $100.
U. Permit to obstruct traffic: $100.
V. Health and sanitation permits and services: The Farmington Valley Health
District sets its own fee schedule annually, which can be found at
www.fvhd.org.
W. Geographic Information System data.
(1) Programming time: $75 per hour, minimum charge of $75.
X. Schedule of fees in conjunction with aquifer protection area regulations for
Level A mapped areas. 20
Size of Facility
Small
(less than 1
acre)
Medium
(1 acre to 5
acres)
Large
(greater than
5 acres)
Registration
Industrial 300 400 500
Commercial 300 400 500
Other 200 300 400
Permits
Industrial 500 750 1,000
Commercial 500 750 1,000
Other 400 600 800
Materials
management
plan (MMP)
review
200 300 400
§ 98-1 FARMINGTON CODE § 98-1
88:176
Size of Facility
Small
(less than 1
acre)
Medium
(1 acre to 5
acres)
Large
(greater than
5 acres)
Stormwater
management
plan (SMP)
review
300 400 500
Public hearing 250 250 250
Facility
inspection/
monitoring
150 250 350
Regulation
petition
250 250 250
Transfer of
registration or
permit
50 50 50
§ 98-2. Exceptions. [Amended 4-8-2003]
Fees shall only be waived for projects on Town-owned land or as prohibited
for other governmental agencies.
§ 98-3. Refunds. [Amended 6-9-2015]
In the event that an application is withdrawn at the request of an applicant,
the application fee shall be refunded in a sum according to the following
conditions:
A. The application fees for subdivisions and resubdivisions, special permits,
zone changes, variances, special exceptions and significant wetland
activities shall be fully refunded where an application is withdrawn
within one week of the date of submission, except that portion of the fee
already spent on the cost of the legal advertisement.
B. No portion of a fee shall be refunded where an application is withdrawn
on or after the date of the scheduled public hearing.
§ 98-4. Costs of special studies or consultations. [Amended
3-26-2002; 6-9-2015]
Certain applications for extraordinarily large or otherwise significant
projects pose environmental, traffic and/or other issues beyond the
expertise of the Town Plan and Zoning Commission's staff to evaluate
and make appropriate recommendations. In such instances, which occur
20.Editor's Note: This fee schedule, added 2-26-2008, was not part of the 6-9-2015 fees
amendment. Consult municipal records for possible changes to these fees.
§ 98-1 BUILDINGS, BLIGHTED § 98-4
88:177
only infrequently, if the Commission, after reviewing the matter with its
staff, reasonably concludes that outside, independent studies and/or
consultations are necessary for the Commission to decide the issues before
it, the Commission may require an applicant, as a condition of processing its
application, to pay for the costs of such studies or consultations. The total
amount of such costs which an applicant shall be required to pay shall be
reasonable. The Commission shall seek, to the extent practicable, to identify
the need for such studies or consultations prior to the commencement of the
public hearing process; provided, however, that the Commission may also
make such a determination during the hearing process. The Commission
shall notify the applicant of its determination that such studies or
consultations are needed as soon as practicable following such
determination. The Commission shall select, at its sole discretion, the
persons or entities who are to perform such studies or consultations, and
the Commission shall direct the performance of such studies or
consultations. The Commission may require the applicant to post a cash
bond secured by a passbook savings account, or any other form of security
satisfactory to the Town Manager, in an amount reasonably calculated to
reflect the anticipated actual cost of such studies or consultations. Any
portion of such bond or other security which is not exhausted shall be
returned or released to the applicant. The provisions of this section shall
also apply to applications to the Farmington Inland Wetlands and
Watercourses Agency.
§ 98-5. Changes.21
Changes in the above fees may be made by resolution adopted by the
Town Council or by the Farmington Valley Health District, whichever is
applicable, and such changes shall be filed in the office of the Town Clerk.
Chapter 101
FIRE HYDRANTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 29. Emergency water use — See Ch. 193, Art. II.
§ 101-1. Powers of Town Council.
The Town Council may provide for the operation, maintenance and
installation of fire hydrants in the Town or in any part or parts thereof.
21.Editor's Note: Former § 98-5, Hearing transcript, was repealed 6-9-2015 and former § 98-6
was renumbered as § 98-5.
§ 98-4 FARMINGTON CODE § 101-2
101:178
§ 101-2. Rules and regulations.
The Council may establish rules and regulations necessary to effectively
carry out the purpose of this chapter and may designate the Town Manager
to act in its behalf and for the Town in order to carry out the provisions of
this chapter.
Chapter 106
FOOD-PROCESSING AND FOOD-SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Citation hearing procedure — See Ch. 91. Fees — See Ch. 98.
§ 106-1. Statutory authority.
The following chapter is adopted pursuant to C.G.S. §§ 7-148, 7-194 and
19a-206 through 19a-211 and Chapter 417, as amended, and Section
19-13-B42 and Appendix thereto of regulations promulgated by the
Connecticut Department of Health Services, as amended, and Sections
19-207-1 through 19-207-8 and Section 19-204a-1 through 19-204a-18 of
regulations promulgated by the Connecticut Department of Consumer
Protection, as amended.
§ 106-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate, through a program of licensing,
food-processing and food-service establishments in order to safeguard the
health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the Town of Farmington and
the general public.
§ 106-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AUTHORIZED AGENT — The Farmington Valley District Department of
Health (Farmington Valley Health District or FVHD).[Amended
7-28-1992]22
FOOD-PROCESSING ESTABLISHMENT — Any commercial establishment,
excluding seasonal fruit and vegetable stands, in which food is processed,
prepared, packaged or distributed for human consumption.
FOOD-SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT — Any fixed or mobile restaurant,
industrial feeding establishment, private or public organization or
institution having a catering kitchen, commissary, snack bar or similar place
22.Editor's Note: The definition of Director of Public Health was deleted 7-28-1992.
§ 101-2 FOOD-PROCESSING AND FOOD-SERVICE § 106-3
106:179
where food or drink is prepared for sale or for service on the premises
or elsewhere, and any other eating or drinking establishment or operation
where food is served or provided to the public, with or without charge,
on a regularly recurring basis. It is intended that the term "food-service
establishment" shall not include nonprofit organizations, such as churches
and fraternal and civic clubs, which serve or sell food only on an occasional
and not on a regularly recurring basis.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation or partnership and includes the
plural.
TEMPORARY FOOD-SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT — Any food-service
establishment which operates at a fixed location for a temporary period of
time, not to exceed 14 consecutive days, in connection with a fair, carnival,
circus, public exhibition or similar transitory gathering.
TOWN — The Town of Farmington.
YEAR — The fiscal year ending June 30 of each year or any part thereof.
§ 106-4. Licensing requirements.
A. On and after July 1, 1984, no person shall operate a food-processing
establishment, a food-service establishment or a temporary food-service
establishment who does not have a valid license issued to him/her by
the FVHD. A license shall be issued to and permitted to continue in
effect for only those persons who comply with the requirements of
this chapter, the Public Health Code and regulations promulgated by
the Department of Health Services and the Department of Consumer
Protection of the State of Connecticut, as they may be amended. A
valid license shall be posted conspicuously in every food-service, foodprocessing
or temporary food-service establishment. Temporary licenses
may be issued for a period of time not to exceed 14 consecutive days.
Licenses may not be transferred.
B. Any person desiring to operate a food-service, food-processing or
temporary food-service establishment shall make written application
for a license on forms provided by the FVHD. Such application shall
include the name and address of each applicant, the person(s) on the
premises responsible for the operation to whom communication may be
given which will be binding on the applicant, the location and nature
of the proposed establishment and the signature of each applicant or
its principal officer. If the application is for a temporary food-service
establishment, it shall include the dates of the proposed operation. The
appropriate license fee shall accompany the application.
C. Prior to approval of an application for a license, the FVHD shall inspect
the proposed establishment to determine compliance with the
requirements of Subsection A of this section.
D. The FVHD shall issue a license to the applicant only if the inspection
reveals that the proposed establishment complies with the requirements
of Subsection A of this section.
E. All licenses shall expire at 12:00 midnight on June 30 of each year.
Licensees desiring renewal of such licenses shall file an application with
§ 106-3 FARMINGTON CODE § 106-4
106:180
the FVHD on or before April 1 of each year along with the appropriate
license fee.
F. The requirements of the Public Health Code and regulations
promulgated by the Department of Health Services and the Department
of Consumer Protection of the State of Connecticut, as they may be
amended, are adopted as the requirements of this chapter.
§ 106-5. Suspension of license.
A. The FVHD may suspend any license to operate a food-service, foodprocessing
or temporary food-service establishment if the licensee does
not comply with the requirements of Subsection A of § 106-4 of this
chapter. If the FVHD finds an unsanitary condition or other conditions
in the operation which, in his judgment, constitute an immediate and
substantial hazard to public health, he may immediately issue a written
notice to the licensee or person responsible citing such conditions,
specifying the corrective action to be taken and specifying the time
period within which such action shall be taken. If correction is not
made in the stated time allowed, the FVHD shall issue a written order
suspending the license. If deemed necessary, the FVHD may, upon
finding a condition which constitutes an immediate and substantial
hazard to public health, suspend the license immediately by so notifying
the person in charge in writing. Upon suspension of a license, all
operations shall immediately cease.
B. Notice shall be binding on the applicant or licensee if it is in writing and
delivered to a person on the premises then operating the establishment
or sent or directed to the applicant, the responsible person or the person
on the premises in charge of the establishment or sent by registered or
certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of the
licensee.
C. Whenever a license is suspended, the licensee, responsible person or
person in charge may, within 48 hours, file a written request for
reconsideration (appeal) with the FVHD. If no such request is filed
within 48 hours, the suspension continues in effect. If such a request is
filed, the FVHD shall thereupon immediately examine the basis for the
suspension and may vacate, modify or affirm such suspension.
D. A licensee whose license has been suspended may file with the FVHD
a written request for reinstatement of the license. Within five days
following receipt of a written request, which shall include a statement
signed by said licensee that, in his opinion, the conditions causing the
suspension have been corrected, the FVHD shall make a reinspection
of the premises of the licensee. If the licensee is complying with the
requirements of Subsection A of § 106-4 of this chapter, the license shall
be reinstated.
E. A licensee who is aggrieved by any action of the FVHD may, within
48 hours after the rendering of such decision or order, appeal to the
Commissioner of Health of the State of Connecticut. Such appeal shall
not stay the order of the FVHD.
§ 106-6. Revocation of license.
§ 106-4 FOOD-PROCESSING AND FOOD-SERVICE § 106-6
106:181
A. The FVHD may revoke a license for serious or repeated violations of
any of the requirements of Subsection A of § 106-4 of this chapter or
for interference with the FVHD in the performance of his duties. Prior
to revocation, the FVHD shall notify the licensee, responsible person
or person in charge, in writing, of the reasons for which the license is
subject to revocation and that the license shall be revoked at the end
of 14 days following service of such notice, unless a written request for
reconsideration is filed with the FVHD by the licensee within seven days
following the date of sending the notice of revocation. If no request for
reconsideration is filed within seven days, the revocation of the license
becomes final. If a request for reconsideration is filed, the FVHD shall
thereupon immediately examine the basis for the revocation and may
vacate, modify or affirm such revocation.
B. After a period of 30 days from the date of revocation, a written
application may be made for the issuance of a new license, as provided
in § 106-4 of this chapter, and payment of the annual fee made.
C. A licensee who is aggrieved by any action of the FVHD may, within
48 hours after the rendering of such decision or order, appeal to the
Commissioner of Health for the State of Connecticut. Such appeal shall
not stay the order of the FVHD.
§ 106-7. Fees.
The annual license fee shall be established by the Town Council.
§ 106-8. Submission of plans.
Whenever a food-service or food-processing establishment is constructed
or renovated, and whenever an existing structure is altered for use as
a food-service establishment, properly prepared plans and specifications
for such construction, renovation or alteration shall be submitted to the
FVHD for review and approval before construction, renovation or alteration
is begun. The plans and specifications shall indicate the proposed layout,
arrangement and construction of work areas and the type and model of
proposed fixed equipment and facilities. The FVHD shall approve the plans
and specifications if they meet the requirements of Subsection A of § 106-4
of this chapter. No establishment shall be constructed, renovated or altered
except in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the FVHD.
Prior to a license being issued to or continued for an establishment which
has been constructed, renovated or altered, the FVHD shall inspect the
premises for compliance with such approved plans and specifications.
§ 106-9. Sale of food from other jurisdictions.
Food from food-service or food-processing establishments located outside
the Town of Farmington may be sold within the Town of Farmington if such
establishments conform to the provisions of Subsection A of § 106-4 of this
chapter or to substantially equivalent provisions. To determine the extent
of compliance with such provisions, the FVHD may accept reports from
§ 106-6 FARMINGTON CODE § 106-9
106:182
responsible authorities in other jurisdictions where such establishments are
located.
§ 106-10. Inspections.
The FVHD and/or his/her authorized agents, after proper identification,
shall be permitted to enter, at any reasonable time, any food-service or
food-processing establishment for the purpose of making inspections to
determine qualification for license and compliance with this chapter. They
shall be permitted to examine the records of the establishment to obtain
information pertaining to food and supplies purchased, received or used,
persons employed, equipment being used and plans for construction,
renovation or alteration, but not including financial records.
§ 106-11. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of Subsection A of § 106-4
of this chapter shall be punished by a fine of not more than $100. In addition
thereto, such persons may be enjoined from continuing such violations.
Each day upon which such a violation occurs shall constitute a separate
violation.
§ 106-12. Enforcement. [Added 3-28-1995]
This chapter has been specifically designated for enforcement by citations
issued by designated municipal officers or employees, and the citation
hearing procedure established by Chapter 91 of the Farmington Code shall
be followed.
Chapter 111
HISTORIC AREAS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Demolition of buildings — See Ch. 86. Zoning regulations — See Ch. 197.
§ 106-9 FOOD-PROCESSING AND FOOD-SERVICE § 106-12
106:183

ARTICLE I
Historic District; Historic Properties
[Adopted 4-27-1965 by Ord. No. 47; amended 7-27-1982; 6-27-1989]
§ 111-1. Establishment. [Amended 7-28-1992]
In order to promote the educational, cultural, economic and general welfare
of the Town of Farmington and the public through the preservation and
protection of the distinctive characteristics of buildings and places
associated with the history of or indicative of a period or style of
architecture of the Town, state or nation, the Farmington Historic District,
as described in Exhibit A and as shown on the map, Exhibit B, annexed
hereto,23 is established pursuant to C.G.S. §§ 7-147a to 7-147k, inclusive, as
amended.
§ 111-2. Historic District Commission established. [Amended
7-28-1992; 3-9-2004]
The Farmington Historic District Commission (hereinafter referred to as the
"Commission") shall consist of five regular members and three alternate
members, who shall be electors of the Town holding no salaried municipal
office. It shall be the purpose of the Commission to perform the duties
and functions of an historic district commission and historic properties
commission as provided in C.G.S. §§ 7-147a to 7-147y, inclusive, as
amended, and this article.
§ 111-3. Organization of Commission.
A. Commission members shall be appointed by the Town Council and shall
serve for a term of five years, except that an appointment to fill an
unexpired term shall be for the duration of such unexpired term only.
The term of appointment of at least one member shall expire each year,
and their successors shall be appointed in like manner for terms of five
years.
B. At all times at least three regular members and two alternate members
of the Commission shall be residents from within the Farmington
Historic District herein established. If a regular member of the
Commission is absent or has a conflict of interest, the Chairman of the
Commission shall designate an alternate to so act, choosing alternates
in rotation so that they shall act as nearly an equal number of times
as possible. If any alternate is not available in accordance with such
rotation, such fact shall be recorded in the minutes of the meeting.
C. The Commission shall elect annually a Chairman, a Vice Chairman and
a Clerk from its own number. Each regular member shall continue
in office until his/her successor is duly appointed. All members shall
serve without compensation. Any regular or alternate member may be
appointed for another term or terms.
D. The membership of any person who is absent from three regular
meetings during any six-month period shall terminate as of the time
23.Editor's Note: Exhibits A and B are on file in the Clerk's office.
§ 111-1 FOOD-PROCESSING AND FOOD-SERVICE § 111-3
106:185
the third such absence occurs, unless such absences are waived by the
Chairman of such Commission because of illness or other extenuating
circumstances. The Chairman of the Commission shall notify the Town
Manager promptly after the third such absence occurs. [Added
7-28-1992]
E. The term of each member shall expire on September 30 of the year that
is currently provided in this chapter for the expiration of the term of
each member, and the term of a successor member shall commence on
October 1. [Added 7-28-1992]
§ 111-4. Rules and regulations; records.
A. The Commission shall adopt rules of procedure not inconsistent with
the provisions of C.G.S. §§ 7-147a to 7-147y, inclusive, as amended. The
Commission may adopt regulations not inconsistent with its enabling act
to provide guidance to property owners as to the factors to be considered
in preparing an application for a certificate of appropriateness.
[Amended 3-9-2004]
B. The Commission shall also keep a permanent record of its resolutions,
transactions and determinations and of the vote of each member
participating therein.
§ 111-5. Powers and duties. [Amended 7-28-1992; 3-9-2004]
The Commission shall be vested with all the powers and shall faithfully
perform all duties imposed upon historic district commissions and historic
properties commissions in C.G.S. §§ 7-147a to 7-147y, inclusive, as
amended.
§ 111-6. Meetings; quorum.
The Commission shall fix the time and place of its regular meetings and
provide a method for calling special meetings. The presence of four
members shall constitute a quorum, and no resolution or vote, except a vote
to adjourn or fix the time and place of its next meeting, shall be adopted by
less than three affirmative votes.
§ 111-7. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALTERED — Changed, modified, rebuilt, removed, demolished, restored,
razed, moved or reconstructed.
BUILDING — A combination of materials forming a shelter for persons,
animals or property.
ERECTED — Constructed, built, installed or enlarged.
EXTERIOR ARCHITECTURAL FEATURES — Such portion of the exterior of
a structure or building as is open to view from a public street, way or place.
§ 111-3 FARMINGTON CODE § 111-7
106:186
HISTORIC PROPERTY — Any individual building, structure, object or site
that is significant in the history, architecture, archaeology and culture
of the Town, state or nation and the real property used in connection
therewith.[Added 3-9-2004]
STRUCTURE — Any combination of materials, other than a building, which
is affixed to the land, and shall include but not be limited to signs, fences
and walls.
§ 111-8. Certificate of appropriateness. [Amended 3-9-2004]
A. No building or structure shall be erected or altered within the Historic
District or within the boundaries of an historic property until after
an application for a certificate of appropriateness as to exterior
architectural features has been submitted to and approved by the
Commission.
B. No building permit for erection of a building or structure or for
alteration of an exterior architectural feature within the Historic District
or within the boundaries of an historic property and no demolition
permit for demolition or removal of a building or structure within the
Historic District or within the boundaries of an historic property shall
be issued by the Town or any department, agency or official thereof
until a certificate of appropriateness has been issued. A certificate of
appropriateness shall be required whether or not a building permit is
required.
C. The Commission may request such plans, elevations, specifications,
material and other information, including, in the case of demolition or
removal, a statement of the proposed condition and appearance of the
property after such demolition or removal, as may be reasonably deemed
necessary by the Commission to enable it to make a determination
on the application. The style, material, size and location of outdoor
advertising signs and bill posters within the Historic District or within
the boundaries of an historic property shall also be under the control of
such Commission. The provisions of this section shall not be construed
to extend to the color of paint used on the exterior of any building or
structure.
D. No area within the Historic District or within the boundaries of an
historic property shall be used for industrial, commercial, business,
home industry or occupational parking, whether or not such area is
zoned for such use, until after an application for a certificate of
appropriateness as to parking has been submitted to the Commission
and approved by said Commission. The provisions of this section shall
apply to the enlargement or alteration of any such parking area in
existence on October 1, 1973.
§ 111-9. Application for certificate; hearing; approval.
A. The Commission shall hold a public hearing upon each application for
a certificate of appropriateness, unless the Commission determines that
such application involves items not subject to approval by it. The
Commission shall fix a reasonable time and place for such hearing.
Notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be given by publication
§ 111-7 FOOD-PROCESSING AND FOOD-SERVICE § 111-9
106:187
in the form of a legal advertisement appearing in a newspaper having
a substantial circulation in the municipality at least twice, at intervals
of not less than two days, the first not more than 15 days nor less
than 10 days and the last not less than two days before such hearing.
For all applications, the Planning Department shall mail notice of the
public hearing no later than 10 days before such hearing by certified
mail, return receipt, to all owners of property which are abutting any
boundary of the property or are directly across from any street or
roadway which is abutting any boundary of the property which is the
subject of the application. The names and addresses used shall be those
as recorded in the office of the Town Assessor on the date the application
is filed. In the case where a property requiring notice has been submitted
to common-interest ownership, such as a condominium, the required
notice need only be sent to the homeowners' association. In addition,
the applicant shall post a notification sign provided by the Planning
Department on the property at least seven days prior to the date of the
public hearing. [Amended 7-28-1992; 12-11-2001]
B. Within not more than 65 days after the filing of an application as
required by C.G.S. § 7-147d or 7-147s, as amended, the Commission shall
pass upon such application and shall give written notice of its decision
to the applicant. When a certificate of appropriateness is denied, the
Commission shall place upon its records and in the notice to the
applicant the reasons for its determination. In the notice to the applicant
the Commission may make recommendations relative to design,
arrangement, texture, material and similar features. The Commission
may issue a certificate of appropriateness with stipulations. Evidence
of approval, as referred to in C.G.S. § 7-147d or 7-147s, shall be by
certificate of appropriateness issued by the Commission. Failure of the
Commission to act within said 65 days shall constitute approval and no
other evidence of approval shall be needed. [Amended 3-9-2004]
§ 111-10. Considerations in determining appropriateness.
A. If the Commission determines that the proposed erection, alteration
or parking will be appropriate, it shall issue a certificate of
appropriateness. In passing on appropriateness as to exterior
architectural features, buildings or structures, the Commission shall
consider, in addition to other pertinent factors, the type and style of
exterior windows, doors, light fixtures, signs, aboveground utility
structures, mechanical appurtenances and the type and texture of
building materials. In passing upon appropriateness as to exterior
architectural features, the Commission shall also consider, in addition
to any other pertinent factors, the historical and architectural value and
significance, architectural style and pertinent features of other buildings
and structures in the immediate neighborhood. No application for a
certificate of appropriateness for an exterior architectural feature, such
as a solar energy system, designed for the utilization of renewable
resources shall be denied, unless the Commission finds that the feature
cannot be installed without substantially impairing the historic character
and appearance of the district. A certificate of appropriateness for such
§ 111-9 FARMINGTON CODE § 111-10
106:188
a feature may include stipulations requiring design modifications and
limitations on the location of the feature which do not significantly
impair its effectiveness. In passing upon appropriateness as to parking,
the Commission shall take into consideration the size of such parking
area, the visibility of cars parked therein, the closeness of such area
to adjacent buildings and other similar factors. In passing upon the
appropriateness of alterations to earthworks or sites of historic or
archaeological importance, the Commission shall consider, in addition
to any other pertinent factors, their value and significance, size, design,
arrangement, texture and materials. [Amended 3-9-2004]
B. In its deliberations, the Commission shall act only for the purpose of
controlling the erection or alteration of buildings, structures or parking
which are incongruous with the historic or architectural aspects of the
district. The Commission shall not consider interior arrangement or
use. However, the Commission may recommend adaptive reuse of any
buildings or structures within the district compatible with the historic
architectural aspects of the district.
§ 111-11. Variances and modifications. [Amended 3-9-2004]
Where, by reason of topographical conditions, district borderline situations
or because of other unusual circumstances solely with respect to a certain
parcel of land and not affecting generally the district in which it is situated,
the strict application of any provision of C.G.S. §§ 7-147a to 7-147y,
inclusive, as amended, would result in exceptional practical difficulty or
undue hardship upon the owner of any specific property, the Commission,
in passing upon applications, shall have the power to vary or modify strict
adherence to said sections or to interpret the meaning of said sections
so as to relieve such difficulty or hardship, provided that such variance,
modification or interpretation shall remain in harmony with the general
purpose and intent of said sections so that the general character of the
district shall be conserved and substantial justice done or, as to an historic
property, the historic and architectural aspects of the historic property
conserved. In granting variations the Commission may impose such
reasonable and additional stipulations and conditions as will, in its
judgment, better fulfill the purposes of said sections. In addition to the filing
required by Subsection (b) of C.G.S. § 7-147e or 7-147v, the Commission
shall, for each variation granted, place upon its records and in the notice to
the applicant the reason for its determinations.
§ 111-12. Institution of court action; penalties for offenses.
[Amended 3-9-2004]
A. If any provision of C.G.S. §§ 7-147a to 7-147y, inclusive, as amended,
or any action taken or ruling made by the Historic District Commission
pursuant to the provisions of said sections or of any regulation or
ordinance adopted under said sections has been violated, the
Commission may, in addition to other remedies, institute an action in
the Superior Court for the judicial district wherein such violation exists,
which Court shall have jurisdiction to restrain such violation and to
issue orders directing that the violation be corrected or removed. Such
§ 111-10 FOOD-PROCESSING AND FOOD-SERVICE § 111-12
106:189
order may direct the removal of any building, structure or exterior
architectural feature erected in violation of said sections or any bylaw
or ordinance adopted under said sections or the substantial restoration
of any building, structure or exterior architectural feature altered or
demolished in violation of said sections or any regulation or ordinance
adopted under said sections. Regulations and orders of the Commission
issued pursuant to said sections or to any regulation or ordinance
adopted under said sections shall be enforced by the Zoning
Enforcement Officer or Building Official or by such other person as
may be designated by ordinance who may be authorized to inspect and
examine any building, structure, place or premises and to require, in
writing, the remedying of any condition found to exist therein or thereon
in violation of any provision of the regulations or orders made under
the authority of said sections or of any regulation or ordinance adopted
under said sections.
B. The owner or agency of any building, structure or place where a violation
of any provision of C.G.S. §§ 7-147a to 7-147y, inclusive, or of any
regulation or ordinance adopted under said sections has been committed
or exists or the lessees or tenants of an entire building, entire structure
or place where such violation has been committed or exists or the owner,
agent, lessee or tenant of any part of the building, structure or place
in which such violation has been committed or exists or the agent,
architect, builder, contractor or any other person who commits, takes
part or assists in any such violation or who maintains any building,
structure or place in which any such violation exists shall be fined not
less than $10 nor more than $100 for each day that such violation
continues; but if the offense is willful, the person convicted thereof
shall be fined not less than $100 nor more than $250 for each day
that such violation continues. The Superior Court for the judicial district
wherein such violation continues or exists shall have jurisdiction of
all such offenses, subject to appeal as in other cases. Each day that
a violation continues to exist shall constitute a separate offense. All
costs, fees and expenses in connection with actions under this section
may, in the discretion of the Court, be assessed as damages against
the violator, which, together with reasonable attorney's fees, may be
awarded to the Historic District Commission which brought such action.
Any funds collected as fines pursuant to this section shall be used by
the Commission to restore the affected buildings, structures or places to
their condition prior to the violation wherever possible and any excess
shall be paid to the municipality in which the district or historic property
is situated.
§ 111-13. Appeals.
Any person or persons severally or jointly aggrieved by any decision of the
Historic District Commission or of any officer thereof may, within 15 days
from the date when such decision was rendered, take an appeal to the
Superior Court for the judicial district of Hartford/New Britain at Hartford,
which appeal shall be made returnable to such Court in the same manner
as that prescribed for other civil actions brought to such Court. Notice of
§ 111-12 FARMINGTON CODE § 111-13
106:190
such appeal shall be given by leaving a true and attested copy thereof in
the hands of or at the usual place of abode of the Chairman or Clerk of the
Commission within 12 days before the return day to which such appeal has
been taken. Procedure upon such appeal shall be the same as that defined
in C.G.S. § 8-8, as amended.
§ 111-14. Ordinary maintenance; demolition. [Amended 3-9-2004]
A. Nothing in C.G.S. §§ 7-147a to 7-147y, inclusive, as amended, shall be
construed to prevent the ordinary maintenance or repair of any exterior
architectural feature in the Historic District or on an historic property
which does not involve a change in the appearance or design thereof
or to prevent the erection or alteration of any such feature which the
Building Official or a similar agent certifies is required by the public
safety because of a condition which is unsafe or dangerous due to
deterioration or to prevent the erection or alteration of any such feature
under a permit issued by a Building Official or similar agent prior to the
effective date of establishment of such district.
B. If a building in the Historic District or on an historic property is to be
demolished, no demolition shall occur for 90 days from the issuance of a
demolition permit if during such time the Historic District Commission or
the Connecticut Historical Commission is attempting to find a purchaser
who will retain or remove such building or who will present some other
reasonable alternative to demolition. During such ninety-day period,
the Town may abate all real property taxes. At the conclusion of such
ninety-day period, the demolition permit shall become effective and the
demolition may occur. Nothing in this section shall be construed to
mandate that the owner of such property sell such property or building.
§ 111-15. Boundaries. [Amended 3-9-2004; 2-26-2008; 2-13-2012]
The boundaries of the Farmington Historic District shall be shown on a map
captioned "The Town of Farmington Official Historic District and Historic
Property Map," approved by the Town Council February 13, 2012, effective
date March 22, 2012, and on a legal description attached hereto and
incorporated and made part of this article.24
§ 111-16. Auxiliary services.
The facilities and services of the Farmington Town Planner, his staff and
office shall be available to the Commission as it may reasonably require. The
Commission shall otherwise operate within the amount of the appropriation
provided in the Town budget each year.
§ 111-17. Town-owned property.
This article shall not apply to property owned by the Town of Farmington so
long as the Town of Farmington owns such property.
24.Editor's Note: The map and legal description are on file in the Clerk's office.
§ 111-13 FOOD-PROCESSING AND FOOD-SERVICE § 111-17
106:191

ARTICLE II
Villages of Unionville and Farmington
[Adopted 3-28-1989 by Ord. No. 89]
§ 111-18. Findings.
The Villages of Unionville and Farmington have a unique place in
Connecticut history going back to the 17th and 18th centuries, and the
atmosphere and character of the Villages of Unionville and Farmington,
including neighborhood enjoyment, public health and safety, are being
threatened by a proposal to widen portions of state highway Route 4 which
is the main east-west thoroughfare in said two villages.
§ 111-19. Precautions to be taken.
The Town of Farmington, through its legislative and administrative bodies
and officials and its boards and commissions, shall take every precaution
and action, including, if necessary, the revocation of any prior actions,
to prevent the widening of any portion of Route 4 within the Villages of
Unionville and Farmington and shall instead utilize traffic control devices
and other innovations which do not involve any significant change in the
size or character of Route 4 or other main roadways within the Villages of
Unionville and Farmington.
§ 111-18 FOOD-PROCESSING AND FOOD-SERVICE § 111-19
106:193

ARTICLE III
Unionville Historic District and Historic Properties
[Adopted 8-5-2008]
§ 111-20. Establishment. [Amended 10-12-2010]
To promote the educational, cultural, economic and general welfare of
the public through the preservation and protection of the distinctive
characteristics of buildings and places associated with the history of or
indicative of a period of style of architecture of the Unionville section of the
Town of Farmington, State of Connecticut and the United States of America
and through the development of appropriate settings for such buildings and
places, there is hereby established a set of historic districts in Unionville as
well as a number of historic properties both of which are more particularly
bounded and described as follows:
A. The Cottage Street Historic District runs along Cottage Street,
encompassing contiguous buildings numbered 42, 43, 45, and 48. At the
north end of the street, the district encompasses Lion's Park (lot #8A)
and north and south of that, Suburban Park (lot #45), the canal bed
(lot #62) and Brook's Common (lot #6C). From the western boundaries
of Lion's Park and Suburban Park, the district runs further west to
encompass Hillside Cemetery (lot #99), Tunxis Hose Firehouse (lot #3),
and the lot at the corner of Farmington Avenue and Lovely Street (lot
#2). The district ends at Route 177 (Lovely Street).
B. The Avenue Historic District encompasses the northern property line of
1774 Farmington Avenue, the western property lines of 1774 and 1773
Farmington Avenue, along the northern bank of the Farmington River
and the eastern property lines of 1773 and 1774 Farmington Avenue.
C. The Merriman Street Historic District runs along Merriman Street, the
eastern property line of 38 Merriman Street, the southern property lines
of 38 and 30 Merriman Street and the western property line of 30
Merriman Street.
D. The Lovely-Main Historic District runs along Lovely Street, the northern
property line of 99 Lovely Street, the western property line of 120 Main
Street, along Main Street, the eastern property line of 120 Main Street
and the southerly property line of 99 Lovely Street.
E. The Main Street West Historic District runs along Main Street, the
western property line of 206 Main Street, the northern property lines of
206 and 198 Main Street and then along Bidwell Square.
F. The Clover Pinney Park Historic District runs along Elm Street, the
northern property line of 20-22 Maple Avenue, the eastern property
line of 20-22 Maple Avenue, the eastern and southern property lines of
Clover Pinney Park, the southern and western property lines of 28 Elm
Street, the western property line of 52-56 Maple Avenue, the northern
property line of 52-56 Maple Avenue, the northern property line of 42-44
Maple Avenue, the eastern property line of 42-44 Maple Avenue, the
southern property line of 38 Maple Avenue, the western property line of
20 Elm Street, the northern property line of 20 Elm Street and closing
on Elm Street. [Amended 2-10-2015; 9-11-2018]
§ 111-20 FOOD-PROCESSING AND FOOD-SERVICE § 111-20
106:195
G. The School Street Historic District runs along the eastern, northern and
western property lines of 10 School Street, the westerly property line
of 23 School Street, the southerly property line of 23, and 15 School
Street, and the easterly property line of 15 School Street.
H. The Farmington River Historic District runs along the northern property
line of 1761 Farmington Avenue, 1755 Farmington Avenue and Yodkins-
Morin Park, the eastern property line of Yodkins-Morin Park, the
southern property line of Yodkins-Morin Park, 1755 Farmington Avenue
and 1761 Farmington Avenue, bordering the Farmington River, and
the western property line of 1761 Farmington Avenue. [Added
2-10-201525; 9-11-2018]
I. 1685 Farmington Avenue.
J. 1781 Farmington Avenue.
K. 54-56 Maple Avenue.
L. 11 Progress Avenue.
M. 71 Lovely Street.
N. 60 Main Street.
O. 169 Lovely Street. [Added 2-10-2015]
P. 10 Walnut Street. [Added 2-10-2015]
Q. 230 Main Street. [Added 9-11-2018]
§ 111-21. Interpretation.
Terms within this chapter are to be defined in accordance with General
Statutes of the State of Connecticut, § 7-147a et seq.
§ 111-22. Historic District and Properties Commission;
establishment and organization.
A. The Unionville Historic District and Properties Commission is hereby
established, which shall consist of five (5) members and three (3)
alternate members, all of whom shall be electors of the Second District
of the Town of Farmington holding no salaried town office. The members
of said Commission shall be appointed by the Town Council. The regular
members shall be appointed in such a manner that the term of at least
one (1) member shall expire each year, with their successors to be
appointed in like manner for terms of five (5) years. Alternate members
shall be appointed for terms of three (3) years. The Town Council
members are further empowered to make appointments to fill vacancies,
which appointments shall be for the duration of the vacated unexpired
term. At least one member of the Commission shall be a resident within
the Historic District, if any persons residing in the Historic District are
willing to serve.
B. Within a period of thirty (30) days after the appointment of the original
members of the Commission and annually thereafter, the regular
members shall meet and elect a Chairman, Vice Chairman and Clerk
from among the membership. Alternate members shall not participate in
any election of officers of the Commission. In all other matters, in case of
25.Editor’s Note: With the addition of this subsection, former Subsections H, I, J, K, L and M
were redesignated as Subsections I, J, K, L, M and N, respectively.
§ 111-20 FARMINGTON CODE § 111-22
106:196
an inability to act because of absence, sickness or disqualification on the
part of any member of the Commission, that Commissioner's place shall
be taken by an alternate member designated by the Chairman, choosing
alternates in rotation so that they shall act as nearly an equal number
of times as possible. All members shall serve without compensation.
The Commission shall adopt rules of procedure not inconsistent with
the provisions of the General Statutes of the State of Connecticut and
may, subject to appropriation, employ clerical or technical assistance or
consultants and may accept money gifts and expend the same for such
purposes.
§ 111-23. Powers and duties.
The Unionville Historic District and Properties Commission shall have
powers and perform such functions and shall be subject to such limitations
as shall, from time to time, be provided by General Statutes of the State of
Connecticut, § 7-147a et seq.
§ 111-24. Meetings; quorum.
The Commission shall fix the time and place of its regular meetings and
provide a method for calling special meetings. The presence of four
members shall constitute a quorum, and no resolution or vote, except a vote
to adjourn or fix the time and place of its next meeting, shall be adopted by
less than three affirmative votes.
§ 111-25. Certificate of appropriateness; application; hearing.
A. No building or structure shall be erected or altered within the Historic
District or within the boundaries of an historic property until after
an application for a certificate of appropriateness as to exterior
architectural features has been submitted to and approved by the
Commission.
B. No building permit for erection of a building or structure or for
alteration of an exterior architectural feature within the Historic District
or within the boundaries of an historic property and no demolition
permit for demolition or removal of a building or structure within the
Historic District or within the boundaries of an historic property shall
be issued by the Town or any department, agency or official thereof
until a certificate of appropriateness has been issued. A certificate of
appropriateness shall be required whether or not a building permit is
required.
C. The Commission may request such plans, elevations, specifications,
material and other information, including, in the case of demolition or
removal, a statement of the proposed condition and appearance of the
property after such demolition or removal, as may be reasonably deemed
necessary by the Commission to enable it to make a determination
on the application. The style, material, size and location of outdoor
advertising signs and billposters within the Historic District or within
the boundaries of an historic property shall also be under the control of
such Commission. The provisions of this section shall not be construed
§ 111-22 FOOD-PROCESSING AND FOOD-SERVICE § 111-25
106:197
to extend to the color of paint used on the exterior of any building or
structure.
D. No area within the Historic District or within the boundaries of an
historic property shall be used for industrial, commercial, business,
home industry or occupational parking, whether or not such area is
zoned for such use, until after an application for a certificate of
appropriateness as to parking has been submitted to the Commission
and approved by said Commission. The provisions of this section shall
apply to the enlargement or alteration of any such parking area in
existence on October 1, 1973.
E. The Commission shall hold a public hearing upon each application for
a certificate of appropriateness, unless the Commission determines that
such application involves items not subject to approval by it. The
Commission shall fix a reasonable time and place for such hearing.
Notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be given by publication
in the form of a legal advertisement appearing in a newspaper having
a substantial circulation in the municipality not more than fifteen (15)
days nor less than five (5) days before such hearing. For all applications,
the Planning Department shall mail notice of the public hearing no later
than ten (10) days before such hearing by certified mail, return receipt,
to all owners of property abutting any boundary of the property which
is the subject of the application. The names and addresses used shall
be those as recorded in the office of the Town Assessor on the date the
application is filed. In the case where a property requiring notice has
been submitted to common-interest ownership, such as a condominium,
the required notice need only be sent to the homeowners' association.
In addition, the applicant shall post a notification sign provided by the
Planning Department on the property at least seven days prior to the
date of the public hearing.
F. Within not more than 65 days after the filing of an application as
required by C.G.S. § 7-147d or 7-147s, as amended, the Commission shall
pass upon such application and shall give written notice of its decision
to the applicant. When a certificate of appropriateness is denied, the
Commission shall place upon its records and in the notice to the
applicant the reasons for its determination. In the notice to the
applicant, the Commission may make recommendations relative to
design, arrangement, texture, material and similar features. The
Commission may issue a certificate of appropriateness with stipulations.
Evidence of approval, as referred to in C.G.S. § 7-147d or 7-147s, shall
be by certificate of appropriateness issued by the Commission. Failure of
the Commission to act within said 65 days shall constitute approval, and
no other evidence of approval shall be needed.
§ 111-26. Considerations in determining appropriateness.
A. If the Commission determines that the proposed erection, alteration
or parking will be appropriate, it shall issue a certificate of
appropriateness. In passing on appropriateness as to exterior
architectural features, buildings or structures, the Commission shall
consider, in addition to other pertinent factors, the type and style of
§ 111-25 FARMINGTON CODE § 111-26
106:198
exterior windows, doors, light fixtures, signs, aboveground utility
structures, mechanical appurtenances and the type and texture of
building materials. In passing upon appropriateness as to exterior
architectural features, the Commission shall also consider, in addition
to any other pertinent factors, the historical and architectural value and
significance, architectural style and pertinent features of other buildings
and structures in the immediate neighborhood. No application for a
certificate of appropriateness for an exterior architectural feature, such
as a solar energy system, designed for the utilization of renewable
resources shall be denied, unless the Commission finds that the feature
cannot be installed without substantially impairing the historic character
and appearance of the district. A certificate of appropriateness for such
a feature may include stipulations requiring design modifications and
limitations on the location of the feature, which do not significantly
impair its effectiveness. In passing upon appropriateness as to parking,
the Commission shall take into consideration the size of such parking
area, the visibility of cars parked therein, the closeness of such area
to adjacent buildings and other similar factors. In passing upon the
appropriateness of alterations to earthworks or sites of historic or
archaeological importance, the Commission shall consider, in addition
to any other pertinent factors, their value and significance, size, design,
arrangement, texture and materials.
B. In its deliberations, the Commission shall act only for the purpose of
controlling the erection or alteration of buildings, structures or parking
which are incongruous with the historic or architectural aspects of the
district. The Commission shall not consider interior arrangement or
use. However, the Commission may recommend adaptive reuse of any
buildings or structures within the district compatible with the historic
architectural aspects of the district.
§ 111-27. Variances and modifications.
Where, by reason of topographical conditions, district borderline situations
or because of other unusual circumstances solely with respect to a certain
parcel of land and not affecting generally the district in which it is situated,
the strict application of any provision of C.G.S. §§ 7-147a to 7-147y,
inclusive, as amended, would result in exceptional practical difficulty or
undue hardship upon the owner of any specific property, the Commission,
in passing upon applications, shall have the power to vary or modify strict
adherence to said sections or to interpret the meaning of said sections
so as to relieve such difficulty or hardship, provided that such variance,
modification or interpretation shall remain in harmony with the general
purpose and intent of said sections so that the general character of the
district shall be conserved and substantial justice done or, as to an historic
property, the historic and architectural aspects of the historic property
conserved. In granting variations, the Commission may impose such
reasonable and additional stipulations and conditions as will, in its
judgment, better fulfill the purposes of said sections. In addition to the filing
required by Subsection (b) of C.G.S. § 7-147e or 7-147v, the Commission
§ 111-26 FOOD-PROCESSING AND FOOD-SERVICE § 111-27
106:199
shall, for each variation granted, place upon its records and in the notice to
the applicant the reason for its determinations.
§ 111-28. Institution of court action; penalties for offenses.
A. If any provision of C.G.S. §§ 7-147a to 7-147y, inclusive, as amended,
or any action taken or ruling made by the Historic District Commission
pursuant to the provisions of said sections or of any regulation or
ordinance adopted under said sections has been violated, the
Commission may, in addition to other remedies, institute an action in
the Superior Court for the judicial district wherein such violation exists,
which Court shall have jurisdiction to restrain such violation and to
issue orders directing that the violation be corrected or removed. Such
order may direct the removal of any building, structure or exterior
architectural feature erected in violation of said sections or any bylaw
or ordinance adopted under said sections or the substantial restoration
of any building, structure or exterior architectural feature altered or
demolished in violation of said sections or any regulation or ordinance
adopted under said sections. Regulations and orders of the Commission
issued pursuant to said sections or to any regulation or ordinance
adopted under said sections shall be enforced by the Zoning
Enforcement Officer or Building Official or by such other person as
may be designated by ordinance who may be authorized to inspect and
examine any building, structure, place or premises and to require, in
writing, the remedying of any condition found to exist therein or thereon
in violation of any provision of the regulations or orders made under
the authority of said sections or of any regulation or ordinance adopted
under said sections.
B. The owner or agency of any building, structure or place where a violation
of any provision of C.G.S. §§ 7-147a to 7-147y, inclusive, or of any
regulation or ordinance adopted under said sections has been committed
or exists or the lessees or tenants of an entire building, entire structure
or place where such violation has been committed or exists or the
owner, agent, lessee or tenant of any part of the building, structure
or place in which such violation has been committed or exists or the
agent, architect, builder, contractor or any other person who commits,
takes part in or assists in any such violation or who maintains any
building, structure or place in which any such violation exists shall be
fined not less than $10 nor more than $100 for each day that such
violation continues, but if the offense is willful, the person convicted
thereof shall be fined not less than $100 nor more than $250 for each
day that such violation continues. The Superior Court for the judicial
district wherein such violation continues or exists shall have jurisdiction
of all such offenses, subject to appeal as in other cases. Each day that
a violation continues to exist shall constitute a separate offense. All
costs, fees and expenses in connection with actions under this section
may, in the discretion of the Court, be assessed as damages against
the violator, which, together with reasonable attorney's fees, may be
awarded to the Historic District Commission, which brought such action.
Any funds collected as fines pursuant to this section shall be used by
§ 111-27 FARMINGTON CODE § 111-28
106:200
the Commission to restore the affected buildings, structures or places to
their condition prior to the violation wherever possible, and any excess
shall be paid to the municipality in which the district or historic property
is situated.
§ 111-29. Appeals.
Any person or persons severally or jointly aggrieved by any decision of the
Historic District Commission or of any officer thereof may, within 15 days
from the date when such decision was rendered, take an appeal to the
Superior Court for the judicial district of Hartford/New Britain at Hartford,
which appeal shall be made returnable to such Court in the same manner
as that prescribed for other civil actions brought to such Court. Notice of
such appeal shall be given by leaving a true and attested copy thereof in
the hands of or at the usual place of abode of the Chairman or Clerk of the
Commission within 12 days before the return day to which such appeal has
been taken. Procedure upon such appeal shall be the same as that defined
in C.G.S. § 8-8, as amended.
§ 111-30. Ordinary maintenance; demolition.
A. Nothing in C.G.S. §§ 7-147a to 7-147y, inclusive, as amended, shall be
construed to prevent the ordinary maintenance or repair of any exterior
architectural feature in the Historic District or on an historic property
which does not involve a change in the appearance or design thereof
or to prevent the erection or alteration of any such feature which the
Building Official or a similar agent certifies is required by the public
safety because of a condition which is unsafe or dangerous due to
deterioration or to prevent the erection or alteration of any such feature
under a permit issued by a Building Official or similar agent prior to the
effective date of establishment of such district.
B. If a building in the Historic District or on an historic property is to be
demolished, no demolition shall occur for 90 days from the issuance of a
demolition permit if during such time the Historic District Commission or
the Connecticut Historical Commission is attempting to find a purchaser
who will retain or remove such building or who will present some other
reasonable alternative to demolition. During such ninety-day period,
the Town may abate all real property taxes. At the conclusion of such
ninety-day period, the demolition permit shall become effective, and
the demolition may occur. Nothing in this section shall be construed to
mandate that the owner of such property sell such property or building.
§ 111-31. Boundaries. [Amended 10-12-2010; 2-10-2015;
9-11-2018]
The boundaries of the Unionville Historic Districts and historic properties
shall be shown on a map captioned "Proposed Unionville Historic Districts
and Historic Properties, Farmington, Connecticut," dated April, 2018.
§ 111-28 FOOD-PROCESSING AND FOOD-SERVICE § 111-31
106:201
Chapter 118
HOUSING STANDARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Housing agencies — See Ch. 31.
Building Code — See Ch. 83, Art. II.
Blighted buildings — See Ch. 88.
Citation hearing procedure — See Ch. 91.
Sanitation — See Ch. 152.
Garbage disposal — See Ch. 165, Art. I.
Zoning regulations — See Ch. 197.
§ 111-31 FARMINGTON CODE § 111-31
106:202
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 118-1. Purpose. [Amended 2-13-2019]
The purpose of this Housing Code is to ensure safe, sanitary and decent
housing within the Town of Farmington, thereby fulfilling the Town's
responsibility for providing for the health, safety and welfare of its
inhabitants. The Housing Code, together with the Zoning Regulations, the
Building Code26, and Connecticut Public Health Code, are basic elements of
a comprehensive program for protecting residential neighborhoods.
§ 118-2. Scope. [Amended 2-13-2019]
The Housing Code establishes minimum standards for the condition and
facilities of rental dwellings or other dwelling structures. It requires, among
other things, a kitchen sink, a complete bathroom unit, hot and cold running
water and either central-heating or space-heating equipment of a
prescribed capacity. It includes minimum standards in electrical service,
window space and ventilation and the general upkeep and structural
condition of the dwelling. It prescribes responsibilities of owners and
occupants for maintaining the premises in a clean and sanitary condition.
§ 118-3. Administration. [Amended 7-28-1992; 2-13-2019]
The Farmington Valley Health District and/or Public Works Department
shall administer the Housing Code. The applicable department is authorized
to inspect all rental dwelling or other dwelling structures and to order
any repairs or additional facilities necessary to meet code standards. The
applicable department is authorized to condemn dwellings that are unfit
for human habitation and, in that situation, the owner of the condemned
building must comply with the minimum standards or cease using said
building for dwelling purposes. An appeal from a decision of the FVHD
or Public Works Department may be taken to the Code Enforcement
Committee.
§ 118-4. Definitions and word usage.
A. The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and
enforcement of this chapter:
BASEMENT — A portion of a building located partly underground but
having less than 1/2 of its clear floor-to-ceiling height below the average
grade of the adjoining ground.
BUILDING OFFICIAL — The legally designated Building Official of the
Town of Farmington or his designated assistant.
CELLAR — A portion of a building located partly or wholly underground
and having 1/2 or more than 1/2 of its clear floor-to-ceiling height below
the average grade of the adjoining ground.
26.Editor's Note: See Ch. 197, Zoning Regulations, and Ch. 83, Building Construction, Art. II.
§ 118-1 FOOD-PROCESSING AND FOOD-SERVICE § 118-4
106:203
DWELLING — Any building which is used or intended to be used, in
whole or in part, for living or sleeping by human occupants, provided
that temporary housing, as hereinafter defined, shall not be regarded
as a dwelling. The term specifically refers to owner-occupied.[Amended
2-13-2019]
DWELLING UNIT — Any room or group of rooms located within a
dwelling and forming a single habitable unit, with facilities which are
used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating.
EXTERMINATION — The control and elimination of insects, rodents
or other pests by eliminating their harborage places, by removing or
making inaccessible materials that may serve as their food, by poisoning,
spraying, fumigating or trapping or by any other recognized and legal
pest elimination methods approved by the FVHD and the State
Department of Health Services.[Amended 7-28-1992]
FARMINGTON VALLEY DISTRICT DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH
(FARMINGTON VALLEY HEALTH DEPARTMENT OR FVHD) — The
legally designated health authority of the Town of
Farmington.[Amended 7-28-1992]
FIRE MARSHAL — The legally designated Fire Marshal of the Town of
Farmington or his designated assistant.
GARBAGE — The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
HABITABLE ROOM — A room or enclosed floor space used or intended
to be used for living, sleeping, cooking or eating purposes, excluding
bathrooms, water closet compartments, laundries, pantries, foyers,
hallways, closets, recreation rooms (but not excluding living rooms),
private workshops or hobby rooms and storage spaces.
INFESTATION — The presence, within or around a dwelling, of any
insects, rodents or other pests.
MULTIPLE DWELLING — Any dwelling containing more than two
dwelling units.
OCCUPANT — Any person living, sleeping, cooking or eating in or having
actual possession of a dwelling unit or rooming unit.
OPERATOR — Any person who has charge, care or control of a building
or part thereof in which dwelling units or rooming units are let.
OWNER — Any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others:
Shall have legal title to any dwelling or dwelling unit, with or
without accompanying actual possession thereof; or
(1)
Shall have charge, care or control of any dwelling or dwelling unit,
as owner or agent of the owner or as executor, executrix,
administrator, administratrix, trustee or guardian of the estate of
the owner. Any such person thus representing the actual owner shall
(2)
§ 118-4 FARMINGTON CODE § 118-4
106:204
PERSON — Includes any individual, firm, corporation, association or
partnership.
PLUMBING — Includes all of the following supplied facilities and
equipment: gas pipes, gas-burning equipment, water pipes, garbagedisposal
units, waste pipes, water closets, sinks, installed dishwashers,
lavatories, bathtubs, shower baths, installed clothes-washing machines,
catch basins, drains, vents and any other similar supplied fixtures,
together with all connections to water, sewer or gas lines.
RENTAL DWELLING — Any building which is used or intended to be
used, in whole or in part, for living or sleeping by human occupants,
provided that temporary housing, as hereinafter defined, shall not be
regarded as a dwelling. This term specifically refers to tenant-occupied
units.[Added 2-13-2019]
ROOMING HOUSE — Any dwelling, or that part of any dwelling,
containing one or more rooming units in which space is let by the
owner or operator to more than three persons who are not the husband
or wife, son or daughter, mother or father or sister or brother of the
owner or operator, provided that hospitals, homes for the aged and other
institutions licensed by the State Department of Health Services shall
not be regarded as rooming houses or as subject to the provisions of this
chapter.[Amended 7-28-1992]
ROOMING UNIT — Any room or group of rooms forming a single
habitable unit used or intended to be used for living and sleeping but not
for cooking or eating purposes.
RUBBISH — Combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except
garbage, and the term shall include the residue from the burning of
wood, coke or other combustible material, paper, rags, cartons, boxes,
wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans,
metals, mineral matter, glass, crockery and dust or other items as
specified by the FVHD.
SUPPLIED — Paid for, furnished or provided by or under the control of
the owner or operator.
TEMPORARY HOUSING — Any tent, trailer or similar structure which is
used for human shelter.
TOWN ENGINEER — The legally designated Town Engineer of the Town
of Farmington or his designated assistant.
B. Meaning of certain words. Whenever the words "dwelling," "dwelling
unit," "rooming house," "rooming unit," and "premises" are used in this
chapter, they shall be construed as though they were followed by the
words "or any part thereof." Whenever the masculine pronoun is used it
shall also mean the feminine pronoun.
be bound to comply with the provisions of this chapter and of rules
and regulations adopted pursuant thereto to the same extent as if he
were the owner.
§ 118-4 FOOD-PROCESSING AND FOOD-SERVICE § 118-4
106:205

ARTICLE II
Enforcement
§ 118-5. Inspections. [Amended 2-13-2019]
The FVHD and/or Public Works Department is hereby authorized and
directed to make inspections to determine the condition of rental dwellings,
dwelling units, rooming units and premises located within this Town of
Farmington in order that he may perform its duty of safeguarding the health
and safety of the occupants of dwellings and of the general public. For
the purpose of making such inspections, the FVHD and/or Public Works
Department is hereby authorized to enter, examine and survey, at all
reasonable times, all dwellings, dwelling units, rooming units and premises
based on a registered complaint and/or concern. The owner or occupant
of every rental dwelling, dwelling unit and rooming unit or the person in
charge thereof shall give the FVHD free access to such rental dwelling,
dwelling unit or rooming unit and its premises, at all reasonable times, for
the purpose of such inspection, examination and survey. Each occupant of
a rental dwelling or dwelling unit shall give the owner thereof or his agent
or employee access to any part of such dwelling or dwelling unit or its
premises, at all reasonable times, for the purpose of making such repairs
and/or alterations as are necessary to effect compliance with the provisions
of this chapter or any lawful order issued pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter.
§ 118-6. Code Enforcement Committee. [Amended 2-13-2019]
There is hereby created a Code Enforcement Committee, which shall consist
of the Building Official, who shall serve as Chairman, the Fire Marshal, who
shall serve as Secretary, and the Town Engineer, Town Social Worker and
Farmington Valley Health District. Said Committee shall be responsible for
coordinating the code enforcement program of the Town, with particular
reference to the urban renewal and general planning objectives established
by the Town of Farmington. Any member of the Committee may designate
an official of his department to represent him at meetings of the Committee.
§ 118-7. Notice of violation. [Amended 2-13-2019]
Whenever the FVHD and/or Public Works Department determines that there
are reasonable grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any
provision of this chapter, it shall give notice of such alleged violation to the
person or persons responsible therefor, as hereinafter provided. Such notice
shall:
A. Be in writing.
B. Include a statement of the reason why it is being issued.
C. Allow a reasonable time for the performance or any act it requires.
D. Be served upon the owner or his agent or the occupant, as the case may
require, provided that such notice shall be deemed to be properly served
upon such owner or agent or upon such occupant:
§ 118-5 FOOD-PROCESSING AND FOOD-SERVICE § 118-7
106:207
(1) If a copy thereof is served upon him personally or if a copy thereof is
sent by certified mail to his last known address;
(2) If a copy thereof is posted in a conspicuous place in or about the
dwelling affected by the notice; or
(3) If he is served with such notice by any other method authorized or
required under the laws of this state.
E. Contain an outline of remedial action which, if taken, will effect
compliance with the provisions of this chapter and with rules and
regulations adopted pursuant thereto.
§ 118-8. Hearing.
A. Any person affected by any notice which has been issued in connection
with the enforcement of any provision of this chapter may request and
shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the Code Enforcement
Committee created in § 118-6 of this chapter, provided that such person
shall file in the office of the Chairman of the Code Enforcement
Committee (Building Official) a written petition requesting such hearing
and setting forth a brief statement of the grounds for such within 10 days
after the day the notice was served. Upon receipt of such petition, the
Chairman of the Code Enforcement Committee shall set a time and place
for such hearing and shall give the petitioner five days' written notice
thereof. [Amended 2-13-2019]
B. At such hearing the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to be heard
and to show why such notice should be modified, extended or withdrawn
or a variance granted.
C. The hearing shall be commenced not later than 60 days after the day
on which the petition was filed, provided that, upon application of the
petitioner, said Committee may postpone the date of the hearing for
a reasonable time beyond such sixty-day period if in its judgment the
petitioner has submitted a good and sufficient reason for such
postponement, but in no event shall said hearing be postponed longer
than 60 additional days.
§ 118-9. Extension or variance.
Such hearing shall be had before the entire membership of the Code
Enforcement Committee. Said Committee, by a majority vote, shall sustain,
modify or withdraw the notice. It may also grant an extension or variance in
accordance with the following conditions:
A. The time for performance of any act required by the notice may be
extended for not more than 18 months, subject to appropriate conditions
and where the Committee makes specific findings of fact based on
evidence relating to the particular case:
(1) That there are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships in the
way of carrying out the strict letter of any provisions of this chapter;
and
(2) That such extension is in harmony with the general purpose and
intent of this chapter in securing the public health, safety and
general welfare.
§ 118-7 FARMINGTON CODE § 118-9
106:208
B. A variance may be granted in a specific case and from a specific
provision of this chapter, subject to appropriate conditions and where
the Committee makes specific findings of fact based on evidence relating
to the particular case:
(1) That there are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships in the
way of carrying out the strict letter of the provision;
(2) That the effect of the application of the provisions would be arbitrary
in the specific case;
(3) That an extension would not constitute an appropriate remedy for
these practical difficulties, unnecessary hardships or arbitrary effect;
and [Amended 7-28-1992]
(4) That such variance is in harmony with the general purpose and
intent of this chapter in securing the public health, safety and
general welfare.
§ 118-10. Orders. [Amended 2-13-2019]
If the notice is sustained, modified or extended, it shall become an order as
so sustained, modified or extended. Any notice served pursuant to § 118-7
of this chapter shall automatically become an order if a written petition for
a hearing is not filed in the office of the Chairman of the Code Enforcement
Committee within 10 days after such notice is served.
§ 118-11. Records; appeals.
The proceedings at such hearings, including the findings and decision of
the Code Enforcement Committee, shall be summarized, reduced to writing
and entered as a matter of public record in the office of the Town Manager
and open to reasonable public inspection. Such record shall also include
a copy of every notice or order issued in connection with the matter.
Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Code Enforcement Committee
may seek relief therefrom in any court of competent jurisdiction within 15
days from the date of the sending of notice of the decision of the Code
Enforcement Committee, in accordance with the provisions of the General
Statutes of Connecticut as they relate to the taking of appeals from Zoning
Commissions and Zoning Boards of Appeals.
§ 118-9 FOOD-PROCESSING AND FOOD-SERVICE § 118-11
106:209

ARTICLE III
Minimum Standards for Basic Equipment and Facilities
§ 118-12. Compliance required.
No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let to another for occupancy
any dwelling or dwelling unit, for the purpose of living, sleeping, cooking or
eating therein, which does not comply with the following requirements.
§ 118-13. Kitchen. [Amended 7-28-1992]
Every dwelling unit shall contain a room or space for the storage,
preparation and cooking of food, which shall include space for a stove
or other cooking facilities and space for dry food storage and space for
refrigerated food storage and shall include a kitchen sink installed. The sink
shall be in good working condition and properly connected to a hot and cold
running water system under pressure and shall be installed and maintained
in a manner prescribed by ordinances, rules and regulations of the Town of
Farmington.
§ 118-14. Bathroom.
Every dwelling unit shall be equipped with a complete bathroom fixture
group consisting of a flush water closet, lavatory basin and bathtub or
shower in good working condition and installed and maintained in a manner
prescribed by ordinances, rules and regulations of the Town of Farmington.
Said fixture group shall be properly connected to an approved sewer system
and to an approved hot and cold running water system under pressure,
except that the flush water closet shall be connected to an approved sewer
system and to an approved cold running water system under pressure.
The flush water closet, lavatory basin and bathtub or shower need not be
installed in the same room, but said room or rooms shall afford privacy to a
person within said room or rooms.
§ 118-15. Garbage and rubbish storage and disposal.
Every dwelling unit shall be supplied with adequate rubbish storage
facilities and with adequate garbage disposal facilities or garbage storage
containers whose type and location are approved by the FVHD. It shall be
the responsibility of the owner to supply such facilities or containers for
all dwelling units in a multiple dwelling. In all other cases it shall be the
responsibility of the occupants to furnish such facilities or containers.
§ 118-16. Water-heating facilities. [Amended 2-13-2019]
The water-heating facilities necessary to provide the hot water required
under §§ 118-13, 118-14, 118-52 and 118-59 shall be properly installed and
connected to the hot-water lines required under those sections, shall be
maintained in safe and good working condition and shall be capable of
heating water to such a temperature as to permit an adequate amount of
water to be drawn at every required kitchen sink, lavatory, basin, bathtub
§ 118-12 FOOD-PROCESSING AND FOOD-SERVICE § 118-16
106:211
or shower at a temperature of not less than 115º F. Such supplied waterheating
facilities shall be capable of meeting the requirements of this
section when the dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house or rooming unit
heating facilities required under the provisions of § 118-23 are not in
operation.
§ 118-17. Means of egress.
Every dwelling unit shall have safe, unobstructed means of egress leading
to safe and open space at ground level as required by the statutes,
ordinances and regulations of the State of Connecticut and the Town of
Farmington.
§ 118-16 FARMINGTON CODE § 118-17
106:212
ARTICLE IV
Minimum Standards for Light, Ventilation and Heating
§ 118-18. Compliance required.
No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let to another for occupancy
any dwelling or dwelling unit, for the purpose of living therein, which does
not comply with the following requirements.
§ 118-19. Minimum total window area.
Every habitable room shall have at least one window facing directly to
the outdoors. The minimum aggregate glass area of windows for habitable
rooms shall be not less than 1/10 of the floor area of the room served by
them. Whenever walls or other portions of structures face the window of
any habitable room and such light-obstructing structures are located less
than three feet from the window and extend to a level above that of the
ceiling of the room, such window shall not be included as contributing to
the required minimum total window area.
§ 118-20. Openable window area. [Amended 2-13-2019]
Every habitable room shall have at least one window which can easily be
opened or such other device as will adequately ventilate the room. The total
of the openable window area in every habitable room shall be equal to at
least 45% of the minimum aggregate glass area of the window as required
in § 118-19, except where there is supplied some other device affording
adequate ventilation and approved by the Public Works Department.
§ 118-21. Bathrooms and water closet compartments.
Every bathroom and water closet compartment shall comply with the light
and ventilation requirements for habitable rooms contained in §§ 118-19
and 118-20, except where the bathroom or water closet compartment is
adequately ventilated by a ventilation system which is kept in continuous or
automatic operation and approved by the FVHD.
§ 118-22. Electrical service.
Every dwelling unit and all public and common areas shall be supplied with
electric service, outlets and fixtures which shall be properly installed, shall
be maintained in good and safe working condition and shall be connected to
the source of electric power in a manner prescribed by the ordinances, rules
and regulations of the Town of Farmington. The capacity of such services
and the number of outlets and fixtures shall be as follows:
A. Every habitable room shall have an electric service and outlets and/or
fixtures capable of providing at least three watts per square foot of floor
area.
B. Every habitable room shall have at least one floor- or wall-type electric
convenience outlet for each 60 square feet or fraction thereof of floor
area, and in no case less than two such outlets.
§ 118-18 FOOD-PROCESSING AND FOOD-SERVICE § 118-22
106:213
C. Every water closet compartment, bathroom, laundry room, furnace room
and public hall shall contain at least one supplied ceiling- or wall-type
electric light fixture.
§ 118-23. Heating facilities. [Amended 2-13-2019]
Every dwelling or dwelling unit shall be supplied with heating facilities
which are properly installed, are maintained in safe and good working
condition and are capable of safely and adequately heating all habitable
rooms, bathrooms and water closet compartments located therein to a
temperature of at least 65º F., at a distance three feet above floor level,
when the outdoor temperature is below 0º F. Either central- or spaceheating
facilities may be used, but must meet the following requirements:
A. Every central-heating unit and/or central hot-water-heating unit shall:
(1) Have every heat duct, steam pipe and/or hot-water pipe free of leaks
and functioning properly to provide an adequate amount of heat and/
or hot water to the intended place of delivery.
(2) Be provided with seals between sections of hot-air furnaces to
prevent the escape of noxious gases into heat ducts.
(3) If employing electricity, be connected to an electric circuit of
adequate capacity in an approved manner.
(4) Be provided with automatic or safety devices and be installed and
operated in the manner required by the statutes, ordinances and
regulations of the State of Connecticut and the Town of Farmington.
B. Every space-heating unit and/or unit hot-water facility shall:
(1) Not use gasoline as fuel.
(2) Not be of the portable type if using solid, liquid or gaseous fuel.
(3) If employing a flame, be connected to a flue or vent in the manner
required by the statutes, ordinances and regulations of the State of
Connecticut and the Town of Farmington.
(4) If employing solid or liquid fuels, have a fire-resistant panel beneath
it.
(5) Be located at least two feet away from any wall or be equipped
in an approved manner with insulation sufficient to prevent the
overhanging of any wall.
(6) If employing gaseous fuel, be equipped with other than a rubber tube
or armored rubber tube connector.
(7) If employing electricity, be connected to an electric circuit of
adequate capacity in an approved manner.
(8) Be installed and operated in the manner required by the statutes,
ordinances and regulations of the State of Connecticut and the Town
of Farmington.
§ 118-24. Lighting in common areas.
Every common hallway and stairway in every multiple dwelling shall be
adequately lighted with lighting facilities sufficient to provide a light
intensity of at least one lumen at the floor or stair tread level at all times.
Every common hallway and stairway in structures devoted solely to
dwelling occupancy and containing not more than four dwelling units may
§ 118-22 FARMINGTON CODE § 118-24
106:214
be supplied with conveniently located switches controlling an adequate
lighting system which may be turned on when needed instead of full-time
lighting.
§ 118-25. Screening. [Amended 2-13-2019]
During that portion of each year when the FVHD deems it necessary for
protection against mosquitoes, flies and other insects, every door opening
directly from a rental dwelling to outdoor space shall have supplied screens
and a self-closing device.
§ 118-26. Basement windows.
Every basement or cellar window used or intended to be used for ventilation
and every other opening to a basement which might provide an entry for
rodents or other pests shall be supplied with a screen or such other device
as will effectively prevent their entrance.
§ 118-24 FOOD-PROCESSING AND FOOD-SERVICE § 118-26
106:215

ARTICLE V
General Maintenance Requirements
§ 118-27. Compliance required. [Amended 2-13-2019]
No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let to another for occupancy
any rental dwelling or dwelling unit, for the purpose of living therein, which
does not comply with the following requirements.
§ 118-28. Foundations, ceilings and roofs.
Every foundation, floor, wall, ceiling and roof shall be reasonably
weathertight, watertight and rodentproof, shall be capable of affording
privacy and shall be kept in good repair.
§ 118-29. Windows and exterior doors.
Every window, exterior door and basement hatchway shall be reasonably
weathertight, watertight and rodentproof and shall be kept in sound
working condition and good repair.
§ 118-30. Stairways and porches.
Every inside and outside stair, every porch and every appurtenance thereto
shall be maintained and kept in sound condition and good repair.
§ 118-31. Plumbing fixtures.
Every plumbing fixture and water and waste pipe shall be properly installed
and maintained in good sanitary working condition, free from defects, leaks
and obstructions.
§ 118-32. Floor surfaces.
Every water closet compartment, floor surface and bathroom floor surface
shall be constructed and maintained so as to be reasonably impervious to
water and so as to permit such floor to be easily kept in a clean and sanitary
condition.
§ 118-33. Conveyance of rainwater. [Amended 2-13-2019]
All rainwater shall be so drained and conveyed from every roof so as not to
cause dampness in the walls, ceilings or floors of any habitable room or of
any bathroom or water closet compartment. All gutters must be maintained
to shed water away from the building.
§ 118-34. General construction and installation requirements.
Every supplied facility, piece of equipment or utility which is required under
this chapter shall be so constructed or installed that it will function safely
and effectively and shall be maintained in satisfactory working condition.
§ 118-27 FOOD-PROCESSING AND FOOD-SERVICE § 118-35
106:217
§ 118-35. Discontinuance of services.
No owner, operator or occupant shall cause any service, facility, equipment
or utility which is required under this chapter to be removed from or shut
off from or discontinued for any occupied dwelling let or occupied by him,
except for such temporary interruption as may be necessary while actual
repairs or alterations are in process or during temporary emergencies when
discontinuance of service is approved by the FVHD.
§ 118-36. Units to be fit for human occupancy.
No owner shall occupy or let to any other occupant any vacant dwelling unit
unless it is clean, sanitary and fit for human occupancy.
§ 118-35 FARMINGTON CODE § 118-36
106:218
ARTICLE VI
Minimum Space, Use and Location Requirements
§ 118-37. Compliance required. [Amended 2-13-2019]
No person shall occupy or let to another for occupancy any rental dwelling
or dwelling unit, for the purpose of living therein, which does not comply
with the following requirements.
§ 118-38. Sleeping areas.
Every room occupied for sleeping purposes by one occupant shall contain
at least 70 square feet of usable floor area, and every room occupied for
sleeping purposes by more than one occupant shall contain at least 50
additional square feet of usable floor area for each additional occupant
thereof.
§ 118-39. Ceiling height.
Ceiling height shall conform to the standards as required by the statutes,
ordinances and regulations of the State of Connecticut and the Town of
Farmington.
§ 118-40. Cellar space.
No cellar space shall be used as a habitable room or dwelling unit.
§ 118-41. Basement space.
No basement space shall be used as a habitable room or dwelling unit
unless, in addition to the other provisions of this chapter:
A. The floor and walls are impervious to leakage of underground and
surface runoff water and insulated against dampness; and
B. The minimum aggregate glass area of windows as required under
§ 118-19 is located entirely above the grade of the ground adjoining such
window area.
§ 118-42. Floor space; calculation. [Amended 2-13-2019]
Every rental dwelling unit shall contain at least 150 square feet of floor
space for the first occupant thereof and at least 100 additional square feet
of floor space for every additional occupant thereof, the floor space to be
calculated on the basis of the total habitable room area.
§ 118-37 FOOD-PROCESSING AND FOOD-SERVICE § 118-42
106:219

ARTICLE VII
Responsibilities of Owners and Occupants
§ 118-43. Additional nature of responsibilities.
The following responsibilities of owners and occupants are in addition to
those specified elsewhere throughout this chapter.
§ 118-44. Maintenance of shared or common areas.
Every owner of a dwelling containing two or more dwelling units shall be
responsible for maintaining in a clean and sanitary condition the shared or
common areas of the dwelling and premises thereof.
§ 118-45. Maintenance of unit by occupant.
Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall keep in a clean and
sanitary condition that part of the dwelling, dwelling unit and premises
thereof which he occupies and controls.
§ 118-46. Rubbish disposal.
Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall dispose of all his rubbish
in a clean and sanitary manner by placing it in the rubbish containers
required by § 118-15 of this chapter.
§ 118-47. Garbage disposal.
Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall dispose of all his garbage
and any other organic waste which might be food for rodents in a clean and
sanitary manner by placing it in the garbage disposal facilities or garbage
storage containers required by § 118-15 of this chapter.
§ 118-48. Hanging of screens. [Amended 2-13-2019]
It shall be the responsibility of the owner to hang all screens for all rental
dwelling units in a dwelling containing more than two dwelling units and for
all dwelling units located on premises where more than two dwelling units
share the same premises.
§ 118-49. Extermination of pests.
Every occupant of a dwelling containing a single dwelling unit shall be
responsible for the extermination of any insects, rodents or other pests
therein or on the premises and every occupant of a dwelling unit in a
dwelling containing more than one dwelling unit shall be responsible for
such extermination whenever his dwelling unit is the only dwelling unit
within the dwelling that is infested. Notwithstanding the foregoing
provisions of this section, whenever infestation is caused by failure of
the owner to maintain a dwelling in a ratproof or reasonably insectproof
condition, extermination shall be the responsibility of the owner. Whenever
§ 118-43 FOOD-PROCESSING AND FOOD-SERVICE § 118-49
106:221
infestation exists in two or more of the dwelling units in any dwelling or in
the shared or common parts of any dwelling containing two or more units,
extermination thereof shall be the responsibility of the owner.
§ 118-50. Plumbing fixtures.
Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall keep all plumbing fixtures therein in
a clean and sanitary condition and shall be responsible for the exercise of
reasonable care in the proper use and operation thereof.
§ 118-49 FARMINGTON CODE § 118-50
106:222
ARTICLE VIII
Rooming Houses
§ 118-51. Compliance required.
No person shall operate a rooming house or shall occupy or let to another
for occupancy any rooming unit in any rooming house, except in compliance
with the provisions of every section of this chapter, except the provisions of
Articles III and VII.
§ 118-52. Bathroom facilities. [Amended 2-13-2019]
At least one flush toilet, sink and bathtub or shower, properly connected
to potable water and sewer system approved by the FVHD and/or Public
Works Department and in good working condition, shall be supplied for
each five persons or fraction thereof residing within a rooming house,
including members of the operator's family wherever they share the use of
said facilities, provided that, in a rooming house where rooms are let only to
males, flush urinals may be substituted for not more than 1/2 the required
number of water closets. All such facilities shall be located with the dwelling
so as to be reasonably accessible from a common hall or passageway to
all persons sharing such facilities. Every lavatory basin and bathtub or
shower shall be supplied with hot water at all times in accordance with
the provisions of § 118-16. No such facilities shall be located in a basement
except by written approval of the FVHD.
§ 118-53. Changing of linen.
The operator of every rooming house shall change supplies, bed linen and
towels therein at least once a week and prior to the letting of any room to
any occupant. The operator shall be responsible for the maintenance of all
supplied bedding in a clean and sanitary manner.
§ 118-54. Minimum usable floor area.
Every room occupied for sleeping purposes by one person shall contain
at least 70 square feet of usable floor area and every room occupied for
sleeping purposes by more than one person shall contain at least 50 square
feet of usable floor area for each additional occupant thereof.
§ 118-55. Means of egress.
Every rooming unit shall have safe, unobstructed means of egress leading to
safe and open space at ground level, as required by the statutes, ordinances
and regulations of this State of Connecticut and the Town of Farmington.
§ 118-56. Sanitary maintenance.
The operator of every rooming house shall be responsible for the sanitary
maintenance of all walls, floors and ceilings and for maintenance of a
sanitary condition in every other part of the rooming house. He shall be
§ 118-51 FOOD-PROCESSING AND FOOD-SERVICE § 118-56
106:223
further responsible for the sanitary maintenance of the entire premises
where the entire structure or building is leased or occupied by the operator.
§ 118-57. Applicability to hotels and motels.
Every provision of this chapter which applies to rooming houses shall also
apply to hotels and/or motels, except as provided in § 118-58 and except to
the extent that any such provision may be found in conflict with the laws of
this state or with the lawful regulations of any state board or agency.
§ 118-58. Restrictions on eating of meals.
No meals may be prepared or eaten in a rooming house, other than in a
dwelling unit contained therein, unless such meals are prepared and eaten
in communal kitchens and dining rooms conforming to the standards of
§§ 118-59 and 118-60, except that this section shall not apply to the eating
of meals in establishments which are operating a valid restaurant business
and which have the rooming house and restaurant operations integrated as
a single business enterprise.
§ 118-59. Communal kitchens.
A communal kitchen shall comply with the following standards:
A. It shall contain at least 60 square feet of floor area in every case and at
least 100 square feet if meals are both prepared and eaten therein.
B. If occupants are permitted to eat meals therein, it shall be supplied with
one dining chair and two lineal feet of dining table space, in addition
to the surface area for food preparation required under Subsection F
below, for each occupant of the rooming house permitted to eat in
the kitchen, the surface of each dining table to be smooth and easily
cleanable.
C. It shall contain at least one supplied kitchen sink, 3 bay or dishmachine
of an approved type which shall be supplied with hot water at all times
in accordance with the provisions of § 118-16. [Amended 2-13-2019]
D. It shall contain at least one supplied kitchen gas stove or electric stove,
every such stove to have at least two top burners and an oven.
E. It shall contain one supplied electric or gas refrigerator with an
adequate food storage capacity.
F. It shall contain one or more supplied tables or other facilities having
a total surface area for food preparation of not less than six square
feet, the surface of each table or other facility to be suitable for the
preparation of food, smooth and easily cleanable.
G. It shall contain at least one supplied cabinet of adequate size for and
suitable for the storage of food and eating and cooking utensils.
H. It shall be supplied by the operator with the rubbish storage facilities
and the garbage disposal or storage facilities specified by § 118-15.
I. It shall be located within a room accessible to the occupant of each
rooming unit sharing the use of such kitchen without going outside of
the dwelling and without going through a dwelling unit or rooming unit
of another occupant.
§ 118-56 FARMINGTON CODE § 118-60
106:224
§ 118-60. Communal dining rooms.
Where a communal kitchen does not conform to the provisions of § 118-59
relating to the eating of meals therein, meals shall be eaten in a communal
dining room that complies with the following standards:
A. It shall contain at least 70 square feet of floor area.
B. It shall be supplied with one dining chair and two lineal feet of dining
table space for each occupant of the rooming house permitted to eat in
the dining room, the surface of each dining table to be smooth and easily
cleanable.
C. It shall be located on the same floor of the rooming house as the
communal kitchen in which the meals are prepared and shall be as
nearly adjacent to the communal kitchen as is practicable.
D. It shall be located within a room accessible to the occupant of each
rooming unit sharing such dining room without going outside of the
dwelling and without going through a dwelling unit or rooming unit of
another occupant.
§ 118-61. Posting of no-cooking signs.
The operator of any rooming house shall post in every rooming unit a sign
on which shall be written or printed in letters not less than 3/8 inch in
height the following words: "No cooking permitted in this room," and such
sign shall remain so posted at all times the room is occupied.
§ 118-60 FOOD-PROCESSING AND FOOD-SERVICE § 118-61
106:225

ARTICLE IX
Unfit Dwellings
§ 118-62. Compliance with procedure required.
The designation of dwellings or dwelling units as unfit for human habitation
and the procedure for the condemnation and placarding of such unfit
dwellings or dwelling units shall be carried out in compliance with the
following requirements.
§ 118-63. Defects constituting unfit dwelling. [Amended 2-13-2019]
Any dwellings or dwelling units which shall be found to have any of the
following defects shall be condemned as unfit for human habitation and
shall be so designated and placarded by the FVHD and/or Public Works
Department:
A. One which is so damaged, decayed, dilapidated, unsanitary, unsafe or
vermin-infested that it creates a serious hazard to the health or safety of
the occupants or of the public.
B. One which lacks illumination, ventilation or sanitation facilities adequate
to protect the health or safety of the occupants or of the public as
prescribed by the provisions of this chapter.
C. One which because of its general condition or location is unsanitary or
otherwise dangerous to the health or safety of the occupants or of the
public.
§ 118-64. Vacation of placarded building. [Amended 2-13-2019]
Any dwelling or dwelling unit condemned as unfit for human habitation and
so designated and placarded by the FVHD and/or Public Works Department
shall be vacated within a reasonable time as ordered by the FVHD.
§ 118-65. Removal of placard. [Amended 2-13-2019]
No dwelling or dwelling unit which has been condemned and placarded
as unfit for human habitation shall again be used for human habitation
until written approval is secured from and such placard is removed by the
FVHD and/or Public Works Department. The FVHD and/or Public Works
Department shall remove such placard whenever the defect or defects
upon which the condemnation and placarding action were based has been
eliminated.
§ 118-66. Defacing or illegal removal of placard.
No person shall deface or remove the placard from any dwelling or dwelling
unit which has been condemned as unfit for human habitation and
placarded as such, except as provided in § 116-65.
§ 118-62 FOOD-PROCESSING AND FOOD-SERVICE § 118-67
106:227
§ 118-67. Hearing.
Any person affected by any notice or order relating to the condemning and
placarding of a dwelling or dwelling unit as unfit for human habitation may
request, in writing, and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the
Code Enforcement Committee under the procedure provided by §§ 118-6
through 118-11.
§ 118-67 FARMINGTON CODE § 118-67
106:228
ARTICLE X
Property Conditions
[Added 2-13-201927]
§ 118-68. Vegetation.
The growth and maintenance of all landscaping on any premises, including,
but not limited to, shrubs, hedges, weeds, trees, grass and plants, shall
comply with the standards as outlined below:
Grass, weeds and/or vegetation shall comply with the following standard:
(1) No owner or occupant of any premises shall permit grass, weeds, or
vegetation to grow to a height greater than one foot on any premises
with a building or a dwelling, throughout property line and up to the
curbline, unless such weeds or similar vegetation is planted as a crop
to be harvested or for ornamental purposes;
Shrubs, hedges, and/or trees shall comply with the following standards:
(1) Not block or interfere with the use of any public sidewalk and/or public
or private street or right-of-way or obstruct the sighting of any road
sign or sight lines.
(2) Not obstruct utility lines or other cables to and around the premises.
§ 118-69. Accumulation of debris on property.
The owner or occupant of any premises shall be responsible for maintaining
such parcel of land in a clean and sanitary condition and free from garbage,
rubbish, or other refuse, and limit the accumulation of debris throughout
the property. "Debris" shall mean material which is incapable of
immediately performing the function for which it was designed, including,
but not limited to, abandoned, discarded, or unused objects; junk comprised
of equipment such as parts of automobiles, furniture, appliances, cans,
boxes, scrap metal, tires, batteries, containers, and garbage. This definition
shall not be applicable to premises that are a junkyard licensed by the State
of Connecticut.
§ 118-70. Enforcement.
The Town’s Enforcement Officer or agent is authorized to issue an order
to a violator of these regulations. If such violation has not been remedied
within 10 days of the date of issuance of the order, or schedule set forth
therein, the Enforcement Officer, or such other Town official or employee
designated by the Town Manager to issue citations, unless such time has
been extended for good cause by the Enforcement Officer, shall issue a
citation to the violator.
27.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the renumbering of former Art. X as Art.
XI.
§ 118-68 FOOD-PROCESSING AND FOOD-SERVICE § 118-70
106:229

ARTICLE XI
Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 118-71. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 7-28-1992; 2-13-2019]
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be subject to a
citation of not more than $100, and each day's failure to comply with any
such provision shall constitute a separate violation.
§ 118-72. Conflicts with other laws. [Amended 2-13-2019]
In any case where a provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict
with a provision of any zoning, building, fire, safety, public health or other
ordinance or code of the Town of Farmington or the Connecticut Public
Health Code, the provisions which establishes the higher standard for
the promotion and protection of the health and safety of the people shall
prevail.
§ 118-73. Permit required to create certain dwelling units.
No dwelling unit or rooming unit shall be created within an existing
structure or converted, remodeled or altered so as to create an additional
dwelling unit or rooming unit unless the Building Official has issued a
written permit certifying that the plans and specifications for such work
indicate that the provisions of this chapter will be complied with.
§ 118-74. Enforcement. [Added 3-28-1995]
This chapter has been specifically designated for enforcement by citations
issued by designated municipal officers or employees, and the citation
hearing procedure established by Chapter 91 of the Farmington Code shall
be followed.
§ 118-71 FOOD-PROCESSING AND FOOD-SERVICE § 118-74
106:231
Chapter 125
INLAND WETLANDS AND WATERCOURSES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Inland Wetlands and Watercourses
Agency — See Ch. 38.
Fees — See Ch. 98.
Subdivision regulations — See Ch. 172.
Zoning regulations — See Ch. 197.
Chapter 126
AQUIFER PROTECTION AGENCY
§ 126-1. Purpose.
A. Whereas Section 22a-354o of the Connecticut General Statutes provides
that each municipality in which an aquifer protection area is located
shall authorize by ordinance an existing board or commission to act as
an aquifer protection agency; and
B. Whereas it has been determined that it is in the best interest of the Town
of Farmington to designate the Town Plan and Zoning Commission as the
Town's aquifer protection agency;
C. Now therefore be it ordained by the Town of Farmington as follows.
§ 126-2. Designation and membership.
A. In accordance with the provisions of Connecticut General Statutes
§ 22a-354a et seq., the Town Plan and Zoning Commission is hereby
designated as the Aquifer Protection Agency (hereinafter the "Agency")
of the Town of Farmington. The staff of the Planning Department shall
serve as the staff of the Agency.
B. Members of the Town Plan and Zoning Commission shall serve
coexisting terms on the Agency. The membership requirements of the
Agency shall be the same as those of the Town Plan and Zoning
Commission, including but not limited to the number of members, terms,
method of selection and removal of members, and filling of vacancies.
C. At least one member of the Agency or staff of the Agency shall complete
the course in technical training formulated by the Commissioner of
Environmental Protection of the State of Connecticut, pursuant to
Connecticut General Statutes § 22a-354v.
§ 126-3. Regulations to be adopted.
The Agency shall adopt regulations in accordance with Connecticut General
Statutes § 22a-354p and R.C.S.A. § 22a-354i-3. Said regulations shall
provide for:
A. The manner in which boundaries of aquifer protection areas shall be
established and amended or changed.
B. Procedures for the regulation of activity within said areas.
§ 118-74 FARMINGTON CODE § 126-3
125:232
C. The form for an application to conduct regulated activities within said
areas.
D. Notice and publication requirements.
E. Criteria and procedures for the review of the applications.
F. Administration and enforcement.
§ 126-4. Inventory of land use.
A. In order to carry out the purposes of the aquifer protection program, the
Agency will conduct an inventory of land use within said areas to assess
potential contamination sources.
B. Not later than three months after approval by the Commissioner of
the Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection of Level B
mapping of aquifers, the Agency will inventory land uses overlying the
mapped zone of contribution and recharge areas of such aquifers in
accordance with guidelines established by the Commissioner pursuant
to Connecticut General Statutes § 22a-354f. Such inventory shall be
completed not more than one year after authorization of the Agency.
[Connecticut General Statutes § 22a-354e]
Chapter 135
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarm systems — See Ch. 75.
Barking of dogs — See Ch. 78, Art. I.
Citation hearing procedure — See Ch. 91.
§ 135-1. Legislative findings; purpose.
A. The making and creation of unreasonably loud, unnecessary or
disturbing noises within the limits of the Town of Farmington is a
condition which has existed for some time and the extent and volume of
such is increasing.
B. The making, creation or maintenance of such unreasonably loud,
unnecessary or disturbing noises affects and is a detriment to the public
health, comfort, convenience, safety, welfare, peace and quiet of persons
within the Town of Farmington.
C. The need for noise regulation is a matter of legislative determination
and public policy, and this chapter is adopted in pursuance of and
for the purpose of securing and promoting the public health, comfort,
convenience, safety, welfare, peace and quiet of the Town of Farmington
and the people therein.
D. Nothing in any portion of these regulations shall be construed in any
manner as authorizing or legalizing the creation or maintenance of a
nuisance. Compliance with these regulations is not a bar to a claim of a
nuisance by any person. This regulation shall not limit or supersede any
zoning approval and/or condition of approval for any such property.
§ 126-3 NOISE § 135-2
135:233
§ 135-2. Unreasonably loud noises prohibited.
No person shall, within the limits of the Town, create or cause to be created
any unreasonably loud, unnecessary or disturbing noise. A noise shall be
deemed to be unreasonably loud and a violation of this chapter under the
following circumstances:
A. Any sound radiated for continuous or recurrent periods regardless of the
source from any premises which produces sound-pressure levels at any
point on the property line of said premises in excess of the A scale limits
measured in decibels, as found in this chapter, except all motor vehicles
and motorcycles operating within the limits of the Town of Farmington
on public and/or private highways, streets, drives, boulevards, lanes
and avenues generally open to the public and/or located on private
property shall be subject to the noise standards and decibel levels as
set forth in the regulations of the State of Connecticut Department of
Motor Vehicles, § 14-80a entitled "Maximum Permissible Noise Levels
For Vehicles."
B. In those individual cases where the background noise levels exceed
the standards contained herein, a source shall be considered to cause
excessive noise if the noise emitted by such source exceeds the
background noise levels by five dBA, provided that no source subject
to this chapter shall emit noise in excess of 80 dBA, at any time, and
provided that this subsection shall not be interpreted as decreasing the
noise level standards of this chapter.
§ 135-3. Measurement.
A. The use of the property shall determine the scale limits to be applied.
If the property use or its intended use cannot be determined, the
designation on the Current Zoning Map of the Town of Farmington shall
apply.
B. The microphone used to measure the loudness of a noise shall be placed
at a point on the property line of the emitter closest to the receptor
and/or at the property line of any neighboring property (that may or
may not be contiguous) with a more restrictive decibel allowance. In
cases where the emitter is located on jointly owned property, such as
condominiums, industrial parks, etc., the microphone shall be placed at
a 50-foot distance from the noise source. In all cases the microphone
shall be no closer than five feet from any wall and not less than three
feet above the ground. Sound pressure levels shall be measured with a
sound-level meter having an A-weighted measuring scale.
C. In measuring sound-pressure levels for the purpose of enforcing this
chapter, an allowance of two decibels shall be made.
§ 135-4. Definitions.
When used in this chapter, the terms below shall have the following
meanings:
AMBIENT NOISE — Noise of a measurable intensity, which exists at a
point as a result of a combination of many distant sources individually
§ 135-2 FARMINGTON CODE § 135-4
135:234
indistinguishable. In statistical terms, it is the level which is exceeded 90%
of the time (L90) in which the measurement is taken.
BUSINESS USE — Properties where the primary use of the property is
business-orientated to include but not limited to retail store, personal
service shop, business office, medical office, bank, convenience store, fastfood
restaurant, restaurant, shop, studio and sample room, hotel, motel,
theater, laundry, newspaper and print shop, radio and television
broadcasting studio, funeral home, health club, sports facility, club and
fraternal organizations, banquet hall, day-care center, animal hospital and
the sale, service, storage and repair of motor vehicles excluding auto body
work. When the primary use or the intended use of the property cannot be
determined, or when the property is vacant, the property designation B1,
BR, UC or PR on the current Zoning Map for the Town of Farmington shall
apply.
BUSINESS ZONE — Zones B1, Br, UC or PR designated in the current
Zoning Regulations and on the current Zoning Map of the Town of
Farmington.
CHIEF OF POLICE — The duly appointed Chief of Police of the Town of
Farmington or his or her designee.
CONSTRUCTION — The assembly, erection, substantial repair, alteration,
demolition, or site preparation for public or private rights-of-way, buildings
or structures, utilities or property.
CONSTRUCTION EQUIPMENT — Any equipment or device operated in
construction or demolition work.
DAYTIME HOURS — The hours between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m., Monday
through Saturday; and the hours between 9:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. on
Sunday and legal holidays.
DECIBEL — A logarithmic unit of measurement for sound, the symbol for
which is dB.
DEMOLITION — Any dismantling, intentional destruction or removal of
structures, utilities, public or private right-of-way surfaces or similar
property.
EMERGENCY — Any occurrence or set of circumstances involving imminent
bodily harm or property damage, which requires immediate action.
EMERGENCY EQUIPMENT — Equipment on property used to prevent or
minimize effects from an emergency and/or condition that may be
hazardous, including, but not limited to, snow removal, damaged tree
removal, downed power lines and/or excavation to repair broken waterlines,
sewer lines and power lines and/or the use of equipment to generate power
in the event of power outages.
EMERGENCY VEHICLE — Any motor vehicle that has a sound warning
device, such as sirens and bells, which can lawfully be used when
responding to an emergency.
§ 135-4 NOISE § 135-4
135:235
EMERGENCY WORK — Work made necessary to restore property to a safe
condition following an emergency, or work required to protect persons or
property from exposure to imminent danger.
EXCESSIVE NOISE — Any sound, the intensity of which exceeds the
standards set forth in this chapter.
INTRUSION ALARM — A device with an audible signal which, when
activated, indicates intrusion by an unauthorized person.
INDUSTRIAL USE — Properties where the primary use of the property is
industrial. Such uses include, but are not limited to, laundry, warehousing,
distribution center, bakery, manufacturing, fabricating, processing, and
assembly, trucking company, concrete batching operation, research and
testing laboratory, yard for coal, lumber, and building materials,
wholesaling establishments. NOTE: If the use of the property or its intended
use cannot be determined or if the property is vacant, the property's
designation on the current Planning and Zoning Map CR, C1 and EE for the
Town of Farmington shall apply.
INDUSTRIAL ZONE — Zones CR, C1 and EE designated in the current
Zoning Regulations and on the Zoning Map of the Town of Farmington.
MOTOR VEHICLE — A vehicle as defined in the Connecticut General
Statutes § 14-1, as amended, and motorcycles as defined in the Connecticut
General Statutes § 14-1.
NIGHTTIME HOURS — All the hours not defined as "daytime."
NOISE LEVEL — A frequency-weighted sound pressure level as measured
with a sound level meter using the A-weighting network. The level so read
is designated "dBA."
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, association, syndicate,
company, trust, corporation, municipality, agency, or political or
administrative subdivision of the state or other legal entity of any kind.
PREMISES — Any building, structure, land, or other real property, including
all parts thereof and appurtenances thereto, owned or controlled by a
person.
PROPERTY LINE — The real or imaginary line along the ground surface and
its vertical extension which separates real property owned or controlled by
any person from contiguous real property owned or controlled by another
person, and separates real property from the public right-of-way.
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE EQUIPMENT — All powered or manually
operated tools and equipment used in the repair and upkeep of property.
RESIDENTIAL USE — Properties where the primary use of the property is
for family dwellings and shall include school, day camp, hospital, nursing
home, charitable and philanthropic institution, group day-care home, bedand-
breakfast establishment, public utility building and structure, country
club, radio and television tower, communication facility, community
building, farm, church, college, library, school. NOTE: If the use of the
property or its intended use cannot be determined or if the property is
§ 135-4 FARMINGTON CODE § 135-4
135:236
vacant, the property's designation on the current Zoning Map R80, R40,
R30, R20, R12, R12LG, R9, R9LG, RDM, RA and SA for the Town of
Farmington shall apply.
RESIDENTIAL ZONE — Zones R80, R40, R30, R20, R12, R12LG, R9, R9LG,
RDM, RA and SA designated in the current Zoning Regulations and on the
Zoning Map of the Town of Farmington.
SAFETY AND PROTECTIVE DEVICES — Devices designed to be used, and
actually used, for the prevention of the exposure of any person or property
to imminent danger, including, but not limited to, unregulated safety relief
valves; circuit breakers; protective fuses; back-up alarms required by OSHA
or other state or federal safety regulations; horns, whistles or other warning
devices associated with pressure buildup.
SOUND PRESSURE LEVEL — Twenty (20) times the logarithm to the base
ten (10) of the ratio of the pressure of a sound to the reference pressure of
twenty (20) micro Pascals, expressed in decibels (dB) units.
§ 135-5. Exemptions.
The following shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter:
A. Sounds created by emergency activities or emergency vehicles, sounds
giving warning of emergencies or sounds customarily signaling
particular time(s) of the day.
B. Sounds created by parades, carnivals and other special public social
events, upon a showing of good cause, provided that a permit for such
event is obtained at least three days in advance from the Chief of Police.
C. Sounds created by property maintenance equipment on any property,
regardless of use or zone of the property, that are used for the purpose
of property maintenance. Such equipment must be properly maintained
and must be functioning properly. Such equipment may be used only
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday
and 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on Sunday. This exemption does not extend
to the operation of equipment in a residential use property/zone for uses
other than maintenance, such as, but not limited to, the repairing of
vehicles or any hobby or activity that generates noise over the decibel
level allowed for that use or residential zone.
D. Any safety and protective devices designed to be used, and are actually
used, for the prevention of the exposure of any person or property to
imminent danger, including, but not limited to, unregulated safety relief
valves, circuit breakers, protective fuses, back-up alarms required by
OSHA or other state or federal safety regulations, horns, whistles or
other warning devices associated with pressure buildup.
E. Sounds created by the use of emergency equipment. Such equipment
must be maintained properly and must be functioning properly.
F. Sounds created by the use of intrusion alarms.
§ 135-4 NOISE § 135-6
135:237
§ 135-6. Construction and demolition work.
Construction or demolition of buildings or structures and the maintenance
and construction of streets or highways may be performed only during the
hours between 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on Mondays through Saturdays,
excluding legal holidays. For such work to be performed at any other time,
application shall be made to the Chief of Police for a limited special permit,
which shall be granted only for good cause shown to exist.
§ 135-7. Vehicle noise.
A. All motor vehicles and motorcycles operating within the limits of the
Town of Farmington on public and/or private highways, streets, drives,
boulevards, lanes and avenues generally open to the public and/or
located on private property shall be subject to the noise standards and
decibel levels as set forth in the regulations of the State of Connecticut
Department of Motor Vehicles, § 14-80a entitled "Maximum Permissible
Noise Levels For Vehicles."
B. No sound amplifying devices on or within a motor vehicle shall emit
noise in excess of the noise levels as allowed for the zone where the
sound is generated as specified in this chapter.
§ 135-8. Penalties for offenses.
The violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be punished by a
fine not to exceed $100. Each day any such violation shall continue or each
act in violation shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 135-9. Enforcement.
This chapter shall be enforced by citations issued by designated municipal
officers or employees. The citation hearing procedure established by
Chapter 91 of the Farmington Code shall be followed.
§ 135-10. A scale limits.
A. The following shall be the A scale limits:
Property
Use
Emitter Property Use Receptor
Residential Business Industrial
Day Night Day Night Day Night
Residential 51 46 51 46 51 46
Business 56 51 56 56 56 56
Industrial 61 56 61 56 64 61
B. The microphone used to measure the loudness of a noise shall be placed
at a point on the property line of the emitter closest to the receptor and/
or at the property line of any neighboring property (that may or may not
be contiguous) with a more restrictive decibel allowance. In cases where
§ 135-6 FARMINGTON CODE § 135-10
135:238
the emitter is located on jointly owned property, such as condominiums,
industrial parks, etc., the microphone shall be placed at a 50 foot distance
from the noise source. In all cases the microphone shall be no closer than
five feet from any wall and not less than three feet above the ground. Sound
pressure levels shall be measured with a sound-level meter having an Aweighted
measuring scale.
C. The use of the property shall determine the scale limits to be applied. If the
property use or its intended use cannot be determined, the designation on
the Current Zoning Map of the Town of Farmington shall apply.
D. In measuring sound-pressure levels for the purpose of enforcing this
chapter, an allowance of two decibels shall be made.
E. No sound-amplifying devices on or within a motor vehicle shall emit noise in
excess of the noise levels as allowed for the property use and/or zone where
the sound is generated as specified in this chapter.
Chapter 140
PARKING LOTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Signs — See Ch. 159.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 182.
Zoning regulations — See Ch. 197.
§ 140-1. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to provide standards and controls for the
layout and maintenance of parking lots so as to ensure the safe movement of
pedestrian and vehicular traffic, protect abutting properties from potential
nuisances arising from parking lots and generally promote the public
health, safety and welfare.
§ 140-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MOTOR VEHICLE or VEHICLE — Any vehicle which is self-propelled.
PARKING LOT — Any real estate, whether a lot, parcel, yard or enclosure,
used in whole or in part for the storing or parking of motor vehicles,
where the available space for such parking, including driveways, exceeds 10
parking spaces and where any exit or entrance leads on to or off of any Town
or state highway or street; provided, however, that parking areas incidental
to any one- or two-family residence used solely for residential purposes,
with no business or commercial use incidental thereto, shall not be deemed
to be a parking lot.
PERSON — An individual, firm, partnership or corporation.
§ 135-10 PARKING LOTS § 140-3
140:239
§ 140-3. Permit required; exception.
A. No person shall maintain a parking lot after the effective date of this
chapter without first having obtained from the Town Manager a permit
to operate such lot. Such permit shall be issued by the Town Manager
only upon compliance with the provisions of this chapter and shall be
of indefinite duration; provided, however, that it may be revoked at
any time by the Town Manager for failure of the person owning or
maintaining such lot to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter.
B. In cases where the Zoning Regulations of the Town of Farmington28
require Town Plan and Zoning Commission approval of the layout of
a parking lot, a separate permit application under this chapter shall
not be required. Approval of plans by the Commission shall constitute
compliance with this chapter, and a permit shall be issued under the
terms of this chapter at the time a certificate of occupancy is issued.
§ 140-4. Site plan required. [Amended 7-28-1992]
No person shall construct or maintain a parking lot after the effective date
of this chapter, and no permit to excavate within a highway or street shall
be granted unless such person has filed with the Town Clerk a site plan of
the proposed parking lot, approved and signed by the Town Engineer of the
Town of Farmington. Additionally, each lot shall contain a landscaped area
as required by the Zoning Regulations of the Town of Farmington.
§ 140-5. Barriers, curbing and landscaping.
Areas reserved for parking as shown on the site plan required above shall
be separated from abutting properties and public highways and sidewalks
through either areas of landscaping, curbing or other substantial barriers.
Barriers, curbing and landscaped areas shall be so designed as to ensure
that no portion of any vehicles parked on the lot shall extend over the
property lines.
§ 140-6. Surface requirements; landscaped area.
All parking lots shall have an adequately drained, smooth and durable
surface. Additionally, each lot shall, as required by the Zoning Regulations
of the Town of Farmington, contain at least 10% landscaped area.
§ 140-7. Lighting.
Any lighting used to illuminate any off-street parking shall be so arranged
as to reflect the light away from any adjoining property.
§ 140-8. Layout and design. [Amended 7-28-1992]
The layout and design of a parking lot shall be subject to the review and
approval of the Town Manager upon recommendation of the Town Engineer.
28.Editor's Note: See Ch. 197, Zoning Regulations.
§ 140-3 FARMINGTON CODE § 140-9
140:240
§ 140-9. Signs and traffic control devices.
A. Signs identifying the parking lot and/or the location of entrances and
exits may be required if the Town Manager deems that necessary. In
making such determination the Town Manager shall be guided by:
(1) The volume of vehicular and pedestrian traffic in the vicinity.
(2) The nature of surrounding property uses.
(3) The proposed hours of operation of such parking lot.
(4) The shape and size of such parking lot.
(5) The visibility into and from such parking lot.
(6) The number and purpose of nearby driveways.
B. Control signs and devices may also be required by the Town Manager
where appropriate. Traffic control signs may consist of either detached
signs or markings on the pavement. Traffic control devices may include
both lane markings, one-way markings, posted speed limits, no-throughtraffic
signs, curbing and speed bumps.
§ 140-10. Use of lots as shortcut prohibited. [Amended 7-28-1992]
Parking lots shall not be used as a shortcut or to avoid a traffic control sign
or signal. Persons who violate this section shall be issued a parking violation
now utilized by the Farmington Police Department.
§ 140-11. Application for exemption. [Amended 7-28-1992]
Owners of parking lots which are in existence or for which plans have
been approved as of the date of adoption of this chapter and for which
compliance with §§ 140-5 and 140-6 of this chapter would constitute
unreasonable hardship or expense when compared to the resulting benefit
to the property may apply to the Town Manager to be exempted from said
sections. In reaching a decision on such applications, the Town Manager
shall consider the cost of improvements as compared to the resulting
increase in the value of the property and the improvement of the aesthetic
qualities of the property.
Chapter 144
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Citation hearing procedure — See Ch. 91. Fees — See Ch. 98.
§ 144-1. License required.
No person, except as hereinafter stated, shall sell, offer for sale or solicit
orders for any goods, wares or merchandise within the Town of Farmington
without a license issued by the Chief of Police upon the filing of an
application as hereafter provided.
§ 140-9 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 144-2
144:241
§ 144-2. Exceptions.
This chapter shall not apply to the following:
A. Sales by farmers and gardeners of the produce of their farms and
gardens, the sale, distribution and delivery of milk, teas, coffees, spices,
groceries, meats and bakery goods, newspapers, sales on approval,
conditional sales of merchandise and any other persons or sales which
may be exempt from such regulation by the General Statutes.
B. Sales by persons having an established place of business in the Town of
Farmington.
C. Sales to dealers and business establishments.
D. Sales for the benefit of a charitable organization located in Farmington
or a charitable organization approved by the State Welfare Department.
E. Sales by persons for their own account who are residents of the Town of
Farmington and who have not attained 16 years of age.
§ 144-3. Application information.
The application for such a license shall be made to the Chief of Police, in
writing, and shall contain the following information:
A. The name and description of the applicant; if a partnership, the names of
all partners; if a corporation, club or association, the names of officers.
B. The permanent home address and full local address of the applicant.
C. If employed, the name and address of the employer.
D. If a vehicle is to be used, a description of the same, together with the
license number or other means of identification.
E. A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to be sold.
§ 144-3.1. Background check. [Added 3-13-2007]
Prior to the issuance of such license(s), each applicant and all persons
registered as helpers shall undergo a Farmington Police and Connecticut
State Police Records Check (SPRC).
§ 144-3.2. Appeal process. [Added 3-13-2007]
In the event any such license is denied by the Chief of Police, the applicant
may appeal by making a written request for a hearing before the Town
Manager within fourteen days of such denial.
§ 144-4. Fees. [Amended 5-24-1977]
The license fees per year shall be as determined from time to time by the
Town Council. Each person helping or assisting in the sale, offering items
for sale or soliciting orders shall be individually licensed and shall pay the
license fee determined by the Town Council. Licenses shall expire on the
30th day of June each year.
§ 144-2 FARMINGTON CODE § 144-5
144:242
§ 144-5. Issuance of card or button.
The Chief of Police shall issue to such persons as shall qualify under this
chapter a card or button bearing the name and address of the licensee, the
name and address of his employer, if any, and the expiration date of the
license, signed by the Chief of Police.
§ 144-6. Nontransferability of license.
No license issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be used at any
time by any person other than the one to whom issued.
§ 144-7. Records.
It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to keep a record of all licenses
issued under the provisions of this chapter and a detailed account of all
receipts for such licenses, which receipts shall be turned over monthly to
the Town Treasurer.
§ 144-8. Use of public streets and property restricted.
A peddler or solicitor using a vehicle shall have no exclusive right to
any location on public streets or public property, shall not be permitted
any stationary location therein and shall not be permitted to operate in
any congested area or any area where his operations might impede or
inconvenience the public. For the purpose of this chapter, the judgment of
a police officer, exercised in good faith, shall be deemed conclusive as to
whether the area is congested or the public impeded or inconvenienced.
§ 144-9. Exhibit of license.
Peddlers and solicitors are required to exhibit their licenses at the request
of any citizen.
§ 144-10. Duty of police officers.
It shall be the duty of any police officer of the Town to require any peddler
or solicitor who is not known by such officer to be duly licensed to produce
his license and to enforce the provisions of this chapter against any person
found to be violating the same.
§ 144-11. Night sales at dwellings prohibited.
Calls at the dwelling of any person for sale or solicitation by any licensee
between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. are prohibited, except by
appointment.
§ 144-12. Revocation of license; notice of hearing.
A. Any license may be suspended by the Chief of Police without hearing and
revoked by him after notice and hearing for any of the following causes:
§ 144-5 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 144-12
144:243
(1) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the
application for license.
(2) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of
carrying on the business.
(3) Any violation of this chapter.
(4) Conviction of any crime or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude
subsequent to the issuance of the license.
(5) Conducting the business in an unlawful manner or in such a manner
as to constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to
the health, safety or general welfare of the public.
B. Notice of such suspension and of the hearing on the revocation of the
license shall be given together, in writing, setting forth specifically the
grounds for suspension and the time and place of hearing before the
Town Manager. Such notice shall be mailed by certified mail, return
receipt requested, to the licensee at his last known address at the time
the license is suspended, and the date fixed for the hearing shall be not
less than five days nor more than 10 days after the mailing of the notice.
[Amended 7-28-1992]
§ 144-13. Expiration of licenses.
All licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter shall expire on the
30th day of June after the date of issue.
§ 144-14. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 7-28-1992]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not to exceed $100.
§ 144-15. Enforcement. [Added 3-28-1995]
This chapter has been specifically designated for enforcement by citations
issued by designated municipal officers or employees, and the citation
hearing procedure established by Chapter 91 of the Farmington Code shall
be followed.
Chapter 148
PROPERTY, TOWN-OWNED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Public buildings — See Ch. 53.
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 76.
Dogs — See Ch. 78.
Citation hearing procedure — See Ch. 91.
Motorized vehicles — See Ch. 189.
§ 144-12 FARMINGTON CODE § 148-1
148:244
§ 148-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate activities and behavior on
property owned by the Town of Farmington or licensed or leased to the
Town or to which the Town has been granted an easement for use. The
regulations will enhance the enjoyment of and provide protection for all
persons using said property. The regulations will provide appropriate
penalties and enforcement procedures for violations.
§ 148-2. Definitions:
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AGRICULTURAL USE — Open space property which is used for farming
activities, including but not limited to the growth of agricultural crops.
MOTOR BOAT — Any boat or flotation device which is powered by other
than muscular or wind power.
MOTOR VEHICLE — A vehicle propelled by other than muscular power,
excluding a wheelchair and any other device used by persons with
disabilities or handicaps.
MULTI-USE TRAIL — A trail constructed on open space property, to be
used for hiking, biking, cross-country skiing, walking, jogging or similar
recreational uses. The Town Council shall by resolution designate which
Town open space properties shall be used as multi-use trails.
OPEN SPACE PROPERTY — Property owned by or licensed to or leased
to the Town of Farmington and which is dedicated by deed, license or
lease agreement as open space for conservation or agricultural use, use by
hunters or sportsmen, leisure use, parks, playgrounds and multi-use trails
as defined herein. Open space property shall not include school grounds.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — A parcel of land owned by the Town of Farmington in
conjunction with a public road or passway.
SCHOOL GROUNDS — A parcel of land or portion thereof upon which is
located a public school and associated grounds, operated by the Town of
Farmington Board of Education and the Town of Farmington.
TOWN PROPERTY — Property owned by or licensed to or leased to the Town
of Farmington, excluding open space, rights-of-way and school grounds.
Examples of Town property include but are not limited to Town Hall, the
Highway Department and sewer pump stations.
§ 148-3. Violations.
It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to commit any of the
following actions with respect to the properties listed:
A. To disturb, alter, enhance, destroy, remove or damage the land, wildlife,
vegetation or improvements on any open space property, right-of-way,
§ 148-1 PROPERTY, TOWN-OWNED § 148-3
148:245
school grounds or Town property except as authorized by the Town
Manager or his or her designee for any authorized agricultural use.
B. To leave, deposit, dump or throw any litter, trash, garbage or rubbish
other than in a designated receptacle on any open space property, rightof-
way, school grounds or Town property.
C. To erect, build or place any improvements or personal property on any
open space property, right-of-way, school grounds or Town property
except as authorized by the Town Manager or his or her designee.
D. To possess or discharge any firearm, fireworks or other hunting
implement on any open space property, school grounds or Town-owned
property except as permitted during Town-approved or -sponsored
events or as permitted by the Town Manager or his or her designee;
however, firearms and other hunting implements may be possessed and
discharged in accordance with state law on open space property where
hunting is permitted.
E. To set a fire of any type on any open space property, right-of-way, school
grounds or Town property except as specifically authorized by the Town
Manager or his or her designee and the Fire Marshal.
F. To apply chemical substances, including but not limited to fertilizers,
pesticides, herbicides, etc., on the grounds of any open space property,
right-of-way, school grounds or Town property except as authorized by
the Town Manager or his or her designee.
G. To drive, operate or park any motor vehicle or motor boat except
agricultural vehicles in conjunction with an authorized agricultural use,
motorcycle, all-terrain vehicle, or snowmobile on any open space
property, school grounds or Town property except on a road or parking
lot or any area especially designated for motor vehicles by type and use
as posted.
H. To be present on any multi-use trail or open space property except for
open space property used for agricultural use, Westwoods Golf Course
and Tunxis Mead-Thomas J. Quirk Park after 10:00 p.m. and before 5:00
a.m. except to participate in a permitted or supervised activity of the
Town or as otherwise permitted by the Town Manager or his or her
designee.
I. To be present on the Westwoods Golf Course property beyond the hours
established and posted by the Director of Parks and Grounds except
to participate in a permitted or supervised activity of the Town or as
otherwise permitted by the Town Manager or his or her designee.
J. To be present on the Tunxis Mead-Thomas J. Quirk Park property after
12:00 midnight and before 5:00 a.m. except to participate in a permitted
or supervised activity of the Town or as otherwise permitted by the Town
Manager or his or her designees.
K. To be present on school grounds beyond the hours established and
posted by the Farmington Board of Education or the Town of Farmington
except to participate in a permitted or supervised activity of the Town
or as otherwise permitted by the Superintendent of Schools or Town
Manager or his or her designee.
§ 148-3 FARMINGTON CODE § 148-3
148:246
L. To partake of any alcoholic beverage on any open space property except
for Westwoods Golf Course and except as otherwise permitted by the
Town Manager or his or her designee.
(1) No person shall partake of alcohol on school grounds or Town
property except in conjunction with a permitted or supervised
activity of the Board of Education or the Town or as otherwise
permitted by the Superintendent of Schools or the Town Manager or
his or her designees.
(2) No person shall partake of alcohol on the Westwoods Golf Course in
violation of any rules established and posted for that facility.
M. To take onto any open space property, school grounds or Town property
any dog or pet not on a leash which can be restricted to a maximum of
six feet in length unless such pet is participating in a program sponsored
by the Town.
§ 148-4. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating any of the above provisions shall be fined not less than
$50 nor more than $100, and/ or community service for not more than 20
hours per offense. Police officers shall issue citations for violations of any of
the provisions set forth above. All moneys received shall be remitted to the
office of the Tax Collector.
§ 148-5. Hearing procedure for citations.
The hearing procedure for any citations issued for violations of the above
regulations shall be the procedures set forth in Chapter 91 of the Code of
the Town of Farmington, and the violator of any of the above regulations
shall be substituted for the words "owner or keeper" in said Chapter 91.
Chapter 151
SCENIC ROADS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Citation hearing procedures — See Ch. 91.
Historic areas — See Ch. 111.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 169.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 182.
§ 151-1. Findings; purpose.
A. The scenic and rural roads of the Town of Farmington are an
irreplaceable resource.
B. The scenic values of some rural roads in Farmington have been
destroyed or are in danger of destruction because of past or potential
alterations to their rights-of-way. Such alterations have had, and could
continue to have, a significant adverse impact on the quality of the
Town's environment in general, and, in particular, on aesthetic and
§ 148-3 SCENIC ROADS § 151-1
151:247
historic values that are of great but immeasurable benefit to residents
and visitors alike.
C. As explicitly expressed by Section 7-149a of the Connecticut General
Statutes, the preservation and protection of the scenic or historic values
of rural roads is essential to the welfare of the people of Connecticut. It
is the purpose of this chapter to balance that need in Farmington with
the traditional need to provide, in transportation matters, for common
convenience and public safety.
D. Therefore, be it ordained by the Town of Farmington that, pursuant
to the authority granted by Section 7-149a of the Connecticut General
Statutes, the Town of Farmington provide for the designation of Town
roads (highways) or portions thereof as scenic roads, and further, in
order to maintain the scenic nature of highways so designated or
portions thereof, the Town of Farmington is authorized to regulate, in
accordance with this chapter, the future alteration or improvement of
roads so designated, including, but not limited to, widening of the rightof-
way or of the traveled portion of the highway, paving, changes in
grade, straightening, removal of stone walls and removal of mature
trees.
§ 151-2. Authority.
The authority to designate a highway or any portion of any highway as a
scenic road is hereby designated to the Town Plan and Zoning Commission
of the Town of Farmington upon receipt of a petition as set forth in § 151-4
of this chapter.
§ 151-3. Designation criteria.
A. No highway or portion of a highway shall be designated as a scenic road
if the abutting property contains intensive commercial development or if
the highway itself has intensive vehicular traffic. Prior to designating a
highway or portion thereof as a scenic road, the Town Plan and Zoning
Commission must first specifically find that at least one of the following
criteria is met:
(1) The highway is unpaved;
(2) The highway is bordered by mature trees or stone walls;
(3) The traveled portion of the highway is no more than 20 feet in width;
(4) The highway offers scenic views;
(5) The highway blends naturally into the surrounding terrain; or
(6) The highway parallels or crosses over brooks, streams, lakes, or
ponds.
B. No highway or portions thereof may be designated as a scenic road by
the Town Plan and Zoning Commission pursuant to this chapter unless
the owners of the majority of the lot frontage abutting the highway or
portion thereof agree to the designation of the highway as a scenic road
by filing a written statement of approval with the Town Clerk of the Town
of Farmington.
§ 151-4. Procedure for designation.
§ 151-1 FARMINGTON CODE § 151-4
151:248
A. Property owners may petition the Town Plan and Zoning Commission
for a designation of a highway or portion thereof as a scenic road.
The petition shall state what road or portion of road is requested to
be designated as a scenic road and describe those characteristics of
the road which qualify it for scenic road status, as well as other
characteristics which enhance the scenic character of the road. The
petition shall be signed by the owners of a majority of lot frontage
abutting the road or portion of road in question (such ownership shall be
verified by the Town Assessor), stating that they approve of designating
the road or portion of road a scenic road, and indicating, to the best
of their knowledge, their lot frontage along the road or portion of the
road in question. Each signer of the petition shall indicate his or her
address. The petition should also include the names and addresses of
owners of lot frontage abutting the road or portion of road in question
who did not sign the petition. The petition must contain the name,
address and signature of the circulator of the petition, who must be a
resident of Farmington. Said petition shall also have a signed statement
by the circulator that the circulator either knows each individual who
signed the petition or that the signer satisfactorily identified himself or
herself to the circulator. An original and one copy of the petition shall
be filed with the Town Clerk, who shall retain the copy and forward
the original to the Town Plan and Zoning Commission. Upon receipt of
a petition the Commission shall transmit a copy to the Town Engineer
who shall provide a legal description of the road right-of-way. Where
it is determined that such road or portion thereof has no established
legal boundary, no scenic road designation shall be made until such
boundary(ies) have been set in accordance with Chapter 169 of the
Farmington Code of Ordinances.
B. In order to designate a highway or portion thereof a scenic road, the
Town Plan and Zoning Commission shall first hold a public hearing
regarding the designation of such road as a scenic road. Notice of
the public hearing shall be given by publication in a newspaper in
substantial circulation in the Town of Farmington at least twice in
intervals of not less than two days, the first not more than 15 days, nor
less than 10 days, and the last not less than two days prior to the date of
such hearing and by sending a copy thereof by mail to the owners of lots
fronting the highway or the portion of the highway to be designated as
a scenic road. The Town Plan and Zoning Commission shall act upon the
designation within the period of time permitted under Section 8-26d of
the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended. Notice of the decision of
the Commission shall be published in a newspaper having a substantial
circulation in the Town of Farmington and addressed by certified mail to
the owners of lots fronting on that highway or portion thereof designated
as a scenic road, by its secretary or clerk, under his signature in any
written, printed, typewritten or stamped forms, within 15 days after such
decision has been rendered. Such notice shall be a simple statement
that the highway or a portion thereof was or was not designated as a
scenic road by the Town Plan and Zoning Commission, together with the
date of such action. The grounds for the designation or nondesignation
§ 151-4 SCENIC ROADS § 151-4
151:249
shall be stated in the records of the Commission and shall include in as
much detail as possible the special features which make the highway so
designated as scenic, or the reasons for denying designation.
§ 151-5. Rescission and appeal.
A. The designation of a highway or a portion thereof as a scenic road may
be rescinded by the Town Plan and Zoning Commission, using the above
procedures, and provided that the owners of the majority of the lot
frontage abutting the highway or a portion of the highway concur with
such rescission as set forth in this chapter.
B. Any person aggrieved by a designation or refusal to designate a highway
or portion of a highway as a scenic road pursuant to this section or
by any alteration or improvement of such highway may appeal such
designation in the manner and utilizing the same standards or review
provided for appeals from the decisions of the Town Plan and Zoning
Commissions under Connecticut General Statute Section 8-28, as
amended.
§ 151-6. Application for alterations.
A. Preservation objective. Routine maintenance and the regulation of
future alterations and improvements of designated highways shall be
carried out so as to preserve to the highest degree possible the scenic
characteristics of the highway which are indicated in the records of the
Town Plan and Zoning Commission as the basis for the designation.
B. Hearing and decision responsibility. The alteration or improvement of a
designated scenic road shall be determined by the Town Plan and Zoning
Commission. Any proposal for alteration or improvement, whether by
public or private applicant, shall be submitted to the Town Plan and
Zoning Commission, which shall hold a public hearing prior to rendering
its decision.
C. Routine road maintenance. Such maintenance shall include removal of
dead and seriously diseased or damaged trees and branches of trees;
trimming of the tree branches that encroach on the traveled portion
of the highway below the height needed to allow school buses and
emergency vehicles to pass; trimming or removal of brush and removal
of boulders or other obstacles that encroach on the traveled portion
of the road; necessary trimming for utility lines; trimming of brush to
enhance and protect scenic views, stone walls, mature trees and other
characteristics of the scenic road set forth in the decision designating
it a scenic road; correction of drainage problems without significant
damage to existing stone walls and mature trees; and graveling,
retreatment and repair of existing roadway surfaces.
D. Natural disasters. In the case of a natural disaster in which a road
becomes impassable or unsafe for public travel and access must be
provided, emergency repairs may be made as needed.
E. Standards for alterations. When contemplating alterations to a scenic
road for common convenience and necessity, including, without
limitation, safety reasons for fire and police considerations, the following
procedures shall be followed:
§ 151-4 FARMINGTON CODE § 151-6
151:250
(1) Review of a suitable map and, where deemed necessary by the Town
Plan and Zoning Commission, of a technical report documenting the
cited hazards and offering alternative solutions.
(2) Public hearing to allow full public participation.
(3) A decision-making process that not only reviews the specific safety
features, but also takes into account the overall impact of the
possible change in a scenic road as well as the public response.
(4) The final decision shall reflect the least damage to the character of
the scenic road. If stone walls or portions thereof must be removed,
the Town shall make the greatest effort to ensure they are rebuilt
along the untraveled portion of the scenic road.
(5) If alterations to a scenic road are required, then they shall be
planned with due regard to the following parameters:
(a) Speed limits. Scenic values are correlated with lower speeds.
The lower speed shall be posted and suitably enforced.
(b) Curves. Scenic values are correlated with the existence of
curves, which allow a constant unfolding of new and changing
views. Curves shall not be eliminated until they are found to be
a definite hazard within the concept of the specific road.
(c) Grades. Hills and valleys are correlated with scenic values. They
shall not be destroyed by cuts and fills unless absolutely
essential for road safety.
(d) Widths. A narrow road is correlated with high scenic beauty.
Designated highways should not be widened unless the amount
of traffic, as determined by a professionally based factual study,
demands it. For some rural roads, the amount of traffic that
can be handled can be greatly increased by wide bypasses and
turnouts, constructed at intervals where they do least damage to
scenic and other values.
(e) Side slopes. Existing steepness of side slopes is preferable to
reduction of gradient by extensive removal of soil and rock. This
is especially true where the slope is fully stabilized and where it
is rich with existing groundcover, shrubs and trees.
(f) Vistas. Vistas of distinctive landscapes shall be preserved by
professional forestry management techniques.
(g) Utility lines. Wherever possible, utility lines should be put
underground. Where they are overhead, the Town should seek
the cooperation of the utility corporations by implementing
suitable vegetation management techniques which preserve the
wild flowers and the shrubs.
(h) Vegetation. Vegetation on the side of the road shall be managed
in such a way as to preserve wild flowers, shrubs of ornamental
wildlife values, larger trees overarching smaller, isolated trees,
as well as closed forest canopies, all of which have extremely
high scenic values.
(i) Billboards, sand, gravel and salt piles, refuse disposal, and other
unsightly structures or situations shall be forbidden.
(j) Where possible, scenic and preservation easements should be
acquired from adjacent owners to ensure the continuance of
§ 151-6 SCENIC ROADS § 151-6
151:251
natural topography, desirable features, and scenic and historic
values in the public interest.
F. Any action under § 151-6, Subsections B, C, D and E, shall be taken in a
manner which will avoid or reduce adverse effects on the characteristics
of the designated highway specified in the decision designating it a
scenic road. Any reconstruction of a designated highway shall be
performed in similar manner with a view to restoring the road to the
extent possible to its scenic character at the time of designation.
G. Paving criteria. Paving of the unpaved traveled portion of a scenic road
shall be permitted if the owners of a majority of lot frontage along the
unpaved portion of the road indicate their approval of the paving by
signing a written statement agreeing to the paving and filing it with the
Town Clerk or where the Town Plan and Zoning Commission with the
advice of staff has made a determination that such pavement is required
for safety purposes.
H. Rights of landowners.
(1) Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prohibit a person owning
or occupying land abutting the highway or portion thereof
designated as a scenic road by the Town Plan and Zoning
Commission:
(a) From maintaining and repairing the land which abuts the road
so designated if the maintenance occurs on land not within the
right-of-way, paved or unpaved, of the scenic road; or
(b) From having access to his property by an otherwise
appropriately authorized driveway or subdivision road
encroachment within a scenic road right-of-way, provided that
such encroachment is constructed so as to safeguard the road's
scenic features as recorded by the Town Plan and Zoning
Commission.
(2) Nothing herein shall prohibit a landowner from permanently
removing a portion of a stone wall in order to construct or improve
a driveway or, in the case of a subdivision, to connect a subdivision
road with a designated scenic road.
§ 151-7. Enforcement.
A. The Town Plan and Zoning Commission acting through its zoning
enforcement official(s) shall enforce the chapter.
B. Violation of this chapter shall be subject to a fine not exceeding $100 per
day for each day the violation continues, and such other legal remedies
as may be available to the Commission. The hearing procedure for any
citations issued for violations of this chapter shall be the procedure set
forth in Chapter 91 of the Town of Farmington Town Code.
§ 151-6 FARMINGTON CODE § 151-7
151:252
Chapter 152
SEPTIC SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Water Pollution Control Authority — See Ch.
68.
Citation hearing procedure — See Ch. 91.
Fees — See Ch. 98.
Sewers — See Ch. 156.
Solid waste — See Ch. 165.
Subdivision regulations — See Ch. 172.
§ 151-7 SEPTIC SYSTEMS § 151-7
152:253

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 152-1. Sanitary Code.
The following provisions of this chapter are hereby adopted as the Sanitary
Code of the Town of Farmington.
§ 152-2. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement
of this chapter:
DWELLING — Any building which is wholly or partly used or arranged or
designed to be used for living or sleeping by human occupants.
DWELLING UNIT — Any room or group of rooms located within a dwelling
and forming a single habitable unit, with facilities which are used, arranged
or designed to be occupied for living, sleeping, cooking and eating.
FARMINGTON VALLEY DISTRICT DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH
(FARMINGTON VALLEY HEALTH DEPARTMENT OR FVHD) — The legally
designated health authority of the Town of Farmington.[Amended
7-28-1992]
MULTIPLE DWELLING — Any dwelling containing more than two dwelling
units.
OWNER — Any person having title to or control of property either as
principal or agent.
ROOMING HOUSE — Any dwelling or that part of any dwelling containing
one or more rooming units in which space is let by the owner or operator
to three or more persons who are not the husband or wife, son or daughter,
mother or father or sister or brother of the owner or operator.
ROOMING UNIT — Any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable
unit used or intended to be used for living and sleeping but not for cooking
or eating purposes.
TOWN — The Town of Farmington, Connecticut.
§ 152-3. Applicability.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply throughout the geographical
limits of the Town of Farmington.
§ 152-4. Incorporation of state standards. [Amended 7-28-1992]
The provisions of the Public Health Code of the State of Connecticut,
as amended, relating to matters not specifically provided for hereunder
are adopted and incorporated herein by this specific reference and made
a part hereof. Three copies of the Public Health Code of the State of
Connecticut shall be filed for public examination at the office of the Town
Clerk, Town of Farmington, for 30 days before the passage of this chapter.
§ 152-1 SEPTIC SYSTEMS § 152-4
152:255
In the interpretation and application of the provisions of this chapter, such
provisions shall be held to be minimum requirements adopted for the
promotion of the public health and safety. Whenever the requirements of
this chapter are at variance with the requirements of the Public Health
Code of the State of Connecticut, the most restrictive or that imposing
the highest standards shall govern. When amendments or additions to
the Public Health Code of the State of Connecticut are adopted, such
amendments shall automatically become a part of the Sanitary Code of
the Town of Farmington 60 days after adoption and publication by the
Commissioner of Health Services.
§ 152-5. Enforcement. [Amended 7-28-1992]
The FVHD shall have the power and duty to enforce this chapter.
§ 152-4 FARMINGTON CODE § 152-5
152:256
ARTICLE II
Permit and Approval Procedure
§ 152-6. Approval by FVHD required. [Amended 7-28-1992]
No building requiring private sewage disposal facilities or a private water
supply shall hereafter be constructed in the Town unless the sewage
disposal and water supply facilities are approved by the FVHD, and no
building shall be occupied in the Town unless the sewage disposal and water
supply facilities are approved by the FVHD.
§ 152-7. Permit required.
No person shall commence the construction of any building requiring
provision for private sewage disposal or private water supply until a permit
has been obtained from the FVHD. No existing private sewage system
or private water supply shall hereafter be altered until the plans for the
proposed alterations have been approved by and permit for such alterations
issued by the FVHD.
§ 152-8. Application for permit.
A. Application for a permit shall be made on forms supplied at the office
of the FVHD. The completed application for a permit shall be submitted
to the FVHD along with plans showing all information required by this
chapter and prepared in a manner acceptable to the FVHD. No permit
shall be issued until plans are approved as conforming to the
requirements of this chapter.
B. Upon receipt of a completed application for a permit, the FVHD shall
review the application as soon as practical and give his approval or
disapproval promptly and in any case on or before the 30th day after
receipt of the application. If such application is disapproved, the specific
reason for this action shall be stated, in writing, and forwarded to the
applicant. Permit fees, which shall be established by the Farmington
Town Council, shall be paid upon submission of the application for a
permit.
§ 152-9. Inspections.
A. The FVHD shall make periodic inspections and a final inspection of the
work to ensure construction in accordance with the approved plans.
B. Inspection should be made at the following stages of construction:
(1) Sewage tests: prior to commencement of construction.
(2) Trenches excavated and open: before system is installed.
(3) Final inspection: system installed and connected but before covering
or backfilling.
C. If the construction of the system is satisfactory at the time of final
inspection, the FVHD shall notify the applicant, in writing, of this
approval.
§ 152-6 SEPTIC SYSTEMS § 152-9
152:257

ARTICLE III
Requirements for Domestic Sewage Receptacles
§ 152-10. Disposal of human waste and domestic sewage.
All human and domestic sewage, including laundry wastes and kitchen
wastes, shall be disposed of in properly managed sewers, septic tank
systems or by other means approved by the State Department of Health
Services, in accordance with the following requirements:
A. Human excrement and domestic sewage, including laundry wastes and
kitchen wastes, shall be disposed of by sanitary methods in such a
manner that they will not gain access to any waters except under
conditions approved by the State Department of Health Services and
State Water Resources Commission.
B. No sewage disposal system, sewage overflow or privy vault shall, after
the effective date of this chapter, be constructed or permitted to remain
on any premises from which a public sewer is accessible without the
permission of the FVHD.
C. Every toilet or other sewage disposal system or privy vault shall be
kept in a sanitary condition at all times and shall be so constructed and
maintained as to prevent the escape of odors and to exclude animals and
insects.
D. No material from any septic tank, cesspool or privy vault situated on
any watershed, the water of which is used for drinking purposes, shall
be deposited within 100 feet of the high-water mark of any reservoir
or stream on such watershed. Such material, if deposited at any place
on such watershed, shall be disposed of by burial or by other methods
approved by the State Department of Health Services so that no portion
of the material can escape or be washed into a water supply stream or
reservoir.
E. No material from any septic tank, cesspool or privy vault or other
accumulation of human excrement shall be removed from any property
and transported to any watershed, the water of which is used for
drinking purposes, unless the methods of transportation and disposal
are in accordance with a written permit secured from the State
Department of Health Services. Such permit shall designate where and
in what manner such material shall be disposed of. A written permit
for disposal of human excrement transported from any property to any
other area shall be obtained from the FVHD.
F. Material removed from any privy vault, toilet or other sewage disposal
system shall be disposed of by burial or other sanitary methods approved
by the FVHD. The location of disposal shall comply with the minimum
separating distances given in § 152-15. Unless the contents of a privy
vault, septic tank or cesspool were disposed on the land of the owner
of such vault, septic tank or cesspool, a written permit or license shall
be secured from the FVHD for the transportation and disposal of such
material. Such permit or license shall designate where and in what
manner such material shall be disposed of.
G. No domestic sewage, including laundry and kitchen wastes, shall be
allowed to discharge or flow into any storm drain, gutter, street,
§ 152-10 SEPTIC SYSTEMS § 152-10
152:259
roadway or public place, nor shall such material discharge onto any
private property so as to create a nuisance.
H. Sufficient and suitable toilet accommodations, well lighted and
ventilated and separated for each sex, shall be provided at public
buildings and all places of public assembly, and all toilets provided for
the public shall be maintained in a sanitary condition.
§ 152-11. High-density units.
No sewage disposal system shall, after the effective date of this chapter,
be constructed or rebuilt for any dwelling, apartment, boarding house or
hotel without compliance with §§ 152-8 through 152-24, inclusive, unless
otherwise approved by the FVHD. Such approval by the FVHD shall not
be granted for discharge of any wastes into any waters of the state.
Connections shall be made to public sewers if available.
A. High-density units as above shall not be built in areas with percolation
rates greater than one (1) inch per three minutes.
B. Dwelling units requiring both on-site sewage disposal and private water
supply shall be located on a parcel of land having a minimum area of
20,000 square feet, unless special approval is obtained from the FVHD.
[Amended 5-28-1968]
C. A usable area equal in size to the installed subsurface disposal system
shall be provided for expansion of the system.
§ 152-12. House sewer specifications.
House sewers shall not be less than four inches in diameter. The grade
shall be at least 1/4 inch per foot for four-inch sewers and shall not be less
than 1/8 inch per foot for larger sizes. House sewers shall be laid with tight
joints to a septic tank in a straight line and on a uniform grade, except
where accessible manholes or surface cleanouts are provided at changes of
direction or grade. Pipe for such house sewers shall be of cast iron, with
leaded or equal joints, to a point at least 10 feet beyond the foundation
wall of any cellar or basement. Portions of house sewers within 100 feet of
a well shall be of cast iron with leaded or equal joints, but no portions of
such sewer, however constructed, shall be within 25 feet of a cellar drain or
ground- or surface water drain unless the pipe is of cast iron with leaded or
equal joints. Sewer lines under pressure from any building shall be cast-iron
pipe throughout their length with leaded or equal joints.
§ 152-13. Water service and house sewer pipes.
Wherever possible and wherever required by local regulations, water
service and house sewer pipes shall be laid in separate trenches at least 10
feet apart. Where laid in the same trench, the water pipe shall be laid on a
trench at least 18 inches above the top of the sewer trench. House sewer
pipes shall be located not less than 25 feet from water-suction pipes.
§ 152-10 FARMINGTON CODE § 152-14
152:260
§ 152-14. Percolation test required.
All lots must have a percolation test in the area of the subsurface disposal
field exclusive of any other soils testing.
§ 152-15. Layout of sewage disposal system; minimum separating
distances.
The sewage disposal system shall be located on the same lot as the building
served. No system shall be laid out in an area where high groundwater,
surface flooding or ledge rock will interfere with its effective operation.
The bottom of any leaching area or cesspool shall be at least three feet
above maximum groundwater level and ledge rock. The following minimum
separating distances between any part of the sewage disposal system and
the items listed shall be provided:
A. Well or spring or domestic water-suction pipe: 100 feet. Greater
separation distance may be required for wells with higher rates of
pumpage than for residential use.
B. Human habitation other than the building served: 50.
C. Building served: 15 feet.
D. Tributary to a water supply or ground- or surface water drain tributary
to water supply reservoir: 100 feet.
E. Any other stream, pond, lake or tidal water, storm drain, cellar drain or
subsoil drain which discharges into a stream, culvert, lake or tidal water
or onto the surface of the ground, unless such drain is cast-iron pipe
with leaded joints or equal: 25 feet.
F. Top of embankment: 15 feet.
G. Property line: 10 feet.
H. Water pressure line: 10 feet. No water service line shall cross any
portion of a sewage system.
§ 152-16. Sketch required.
A sketch of the installed system shall be provided to the Town, pinpointing
the location of units of the disposal system.
§ 152-17. Water carriage sewage disposal; minimum capacities.
A. A rectangular-shaped concrete septic tank shall be provided for water
carriage sewage disposal where no public sewer is available. Such septic
tank shall be constructed with watertight walls and bottom with inlet
baffled or submerged to a depth of at least 18 inches below the surface
of liquid in the tank but not more than 1/2 the liquid depth. Baffles
shall extend six inches above the liquid level. The outlet invert shall be
three inches lower than the inlet invert. With a two-compartment tank,
there shall be adequate connections at middepth, and 2/3 or more of the
required capacity shall be in the first compartment. A septic tank shall
have a removable cover or manhole so as to provide access to the tank
for purposes of inspection and cleaning. At least two manholes shall be
provided for a tank more than 10 feet long and at least one manhole per
compartment. If a manhole is not located over the inlet, an inspection
§ 152-14 SEPTIC SYSTEMS § 152-17
152:261
opening shall be provided at that point. No septic tank shall have a
liquid capacity of less than 1,000 gallons below the outlet invert. The
minimum liquid depth of septic tanks shall be 36 inches, measured from
the bottom of the invert to the outlet. There shall be a minimum of eight
inches between the liquid level and the underside of the tank cover.
B. The minimum liquid capacities are as follows:
(1) Three bedrooms or less: 1,000 gallons.
(2) Larger sizes: add 250 gallons per bedroom.
C. Where additional capacity is needed, two tanks may be used in series for
one installation. No more than two tanks shall be installed in series but
larger tanks shall be used to make up the required capacity.
§ 152-18. Seepage systems; leaching wells.
A. Disposal of septic tank effluent may be by means of tile or other accepted
distribution pipe laid in screened gravel or broken stone or by means of
leaching wells. Seepage systems shall not be located in fill placed over
impervious soil.
B. Leaching wells may be preferable where the amount of area is limited or
where porous soil is at a greater depth than can be secured by tile fields.
They are not recommended where groundwater may interfere with their
operation or where soil of better seepage quality is found at shallow
depth. Leaching wells shall provide a minimum of three feet of original
soil to rock or groundwater. [Amended 7-28-1992]
§ 152-19. Classification of soil.
A. In making tests for classification of soil, such tests should be considered
in the light of groundwater variations as specified in § 152-15. The
classification of soil at the proposed location of a seepage system shall
be determined by soil tests made as follows:
(1) For leaching wells, a hole four inches to 12 inches in diameter shall
be dug, extending to the depth of the proposed well and/or various
stratas as changes may require.
(2) For tile fields, a hole four inches to 12 inches in diameter shall be
dug, extending to the depth of the proposed trenches.
B. Before observations are made, the pit shall be thoroughly wet down by
filling it to within at least 12 inches of the surface. The pit shall then be
filled with water to a depth of 12 inches or more and the rate of drop
of water measured at intervals for a period of 30 to 60 minutes under
normal conditions. The minimum of slowest uniform rate of drop shall be
used in calculating seepage areas.
C. When tests are made, consideration shall be given to the finished grade
of the building sites so that results will correspond to the absorption
value of the soil in which the leaching systems will be constructed.
D. In investigating soil conditions for a large area, one test pit per acre
or one per lot shall be required. Also, in investigating soil conditions,
deep test pits shall be required to check for groundwater, ledge rock or
available good seepage soil below normal depths, at least one per 10
acres or fraction thereof.
§ 152-17 FARMINGTON CODE § 152-20
152:262
§ 152-20. Leaching area and well requirements.
A. Leaching areas and wells.
(1) Leaching area requirements.
(a) The following leaching areas are required for the seepage rates indicated:
Seepage Rate
(minutes)
Leaching Area
(square feet per bedroom)
5 or less 125
6-10 165
11-15 195
16-20 225
21-30 250
30 or more Special consideration needed to avoid nuisance
conditions
(b) Use bottom area only for trench systems.
(c) Use 1/3 gross bottom area for seepage beds.
(2) Leaching wells. For leaching wells, use computations below, provided for a minimum three bedrooms in all cases: [Amended 8-28-1973]
Effective Strata
Depth Below
Inlet
(feet)
3 4 5 6 7 8 9
Inside Diameter
of Leaching Well
(feet)
3 67 83 99 114 130 146 161
4 85 103 122 141 160 179 198
5 104 126 148 170 192 214 236
6 125 151 176 201 226 251 276
7 149 177 205 234 262 290 318
8 173 205 236 267 299 330 362
9 199 233 268 302 337 371 406
10 226 264 301 339 377 415 452
B. All trenches shall follow contours with the bottoms of the individual trenches level.
Depth of trenches should normally be not more than 30 to 36 inches, but depths of
up to 48 inches or greater may be used if warranted by conditions of topography or
more favorable absorption capacity of the soil at that depth. The width of the trench
shall not exceed 36 inches, and the spacing between adjacent sides of trenches shall
be at least three times the width of the trench. The length of the individual trenches
shall not exceed 60 feet, except that in installations where dosing apparatus is used
§ 152-20 SEPTIC SYSTEMS § 152-20
152:263
a maximum length of 100 feet may be used. Distributing pipe shall be laid near
the top of a layer of one-inch screened gravel or one-inch broken stone placed to a
depth of at least 18 inches in the trenches. The depth of stone under the pipe invert
shall be at least 12 inches. Distributing pipes may be unglazed drain tile, at least
four inches in diameter, laid with three-sixteenths-inch open joints. Pipe of vitrified
tile or other acceptable material with suitable perforations of adequate spacing may
also be used. The upper portions of joint openings shall be protected by strips of tar
paper or other suitable material. Tile lines shall be laid on a grade not exceeding
two to four inches per 100 feet. A layer of salt hay or tar paper shall be placed over
the gravel before backfilling the trenches.
C. Construction shall be such as to provide for proper distribution of settled sewage to
trenches. Better distribution, particularly for large systems with several trenches,
is secured in tile fields by using siphon-dozing apparatus to apply the septic tank
effluent. Diverting boxes with several outlets of the same elevation to individual
trenches may be used to distribute the sewage. Where trenches are at different
levels, serial distribution may be used with high level overflows from upper to lower
trenches. [Amended 7-28-1992]
D. In seepage beds where space between trenches is also excavated and backfilled
with one-inch stone or one-inch screened gravel, only 1/3 of the total bottom area
shall be considered effective. Distributing pipe shall be laid six feet to eight feet
on centers. Installation of stone and distributing pipe shall be the same as that
required for leaching trenches. The bottom of the entire bed shall be at the same
elevation.
E. Leaching wells shall be spaced three times the diameter between sides of adjacent
wells. Leaching well walls shall be constructed with masonry laid with open joints
below the maximum liquid level. The walls shall be surrounded by 12 inches of
screened gravel or broken stone.
§ 152-21. Special plans required for certain systems.
Where a seepage rate slower than one inch in 30 minutes or high
groundwater is found, no sewage disposal system shall be built, unless
special plans are prepared and carried out in accordance with regulations
of the FVHD. In impervious soil, swamp or rock, it may not be feasible to
provide subsurface sewage disposal.
§ 152-22. Portable privies.
Portable privies shall be constructed with adequate storage space for
excreta, with self-closing seat covers and fly-tight vaults and with a
screened vent from the vault to the atmosphere. Privies shall be constructed
so as to permit ready cleaning.
§ 152-23. Separate facilities required for certain drainage.
No groundwater drainage or drainage from roofs, cellars or yards shall
discharge into, onto or near any portion of a sewage disposal system.
Separate facilities shall be provided for such drainage.
§ 152-20 FARMINGTON CODE § 152-24
152:264
§ 152-24. Sink and laundry drainage.
A sink drainage, laundry or wastewater system, where no water flush toilet
fixtures are connected, shall be constructed with a septic tank and sewage
system.
§ 152-25. Discharges from commercial buildings.
No discharges from systems of sewage disposal for commercial buildings
into watercourses shall be made unless provided with treatment as
approved by the State Department of Health Services and the State Water
Resources Commission. No sewage disposal system shall, after the effective
date of this chapter, be constructed or rebuilt for any commercial buildings
without compliance with the following subsections, unless otherwise
approved by the FVHD. Connections shall be made to public sewers if
available.
A. The location of the disposal system shall comply with the same
requirements as those listed in § 152-15, except that, in the case of
discharges from laundromats or other commercial or industrial
establishments discharging substantial quantities of detergents, the
disposal system shall not be permitted, unless special plans are prepared
and carried out in accordance with requirements of the FVHD with due
regard to the seepage quality of the soil and location of wells. Disposal
systems receiving substantial quantities of detergents shall be located at
least 200 feet from any well used as a source of drinking water.
B. The septic tank shall comply with § 152-17 with regard to construction
details and shall have a minimum liquid capacity of two cubic feet per
employee or equal to the average twenty-four-hour flow, whichever is
greater. In no case shall a septic tank be installed with a liquid capacity
less than 1,000 gallons. For very large commercial buildings, special
arrangements may be required by the FVHD. In the case of restaurants,
laundromats, toilets for public use or other types of establishments where
water use and sewage flows will depend on the extent of public use or
employment of water uses especially pertinent to the type of establishment
in question, special allowances for capacities of disposal units and area for
future expansion shall be provided as approved by the FVHD.
C. Seepage systems for commercial buildings other than restaurants and
laundries shall be designed in accordance with the following table.
Additional seepage area shall be provided due to clogging characteristics of
waste.
§ 152-24 SEPTIC SYSTEMS § 152-25
152:265
Minimum Uniform Seepage Rate
(minutes to drop 1 inch)
Seepage application in gallons
to 1 square foot of effective
seepage area, bottom area of
trenches, bottom area plus
side area of leaching wells
below inlet or of gross bottom
area of seepage bed
3 3.7
4 2.7
5 2.5
6 2.3
7 2.1
8 2.0
9 1.9
10 1.75
12 1.6
15 1.4
20 1.1
25 0.9
30 0.8
More than 30 Special consideration needed to
avoid nuisance conditions. In
some soils it may be impractical
or impossible to use subsurface
disposal.
D. Seepage disposal facilities other than of the water-carriage type shall be
installed only with the permission of the FVHD and in accordance with these
requirements.
E. No groundwater drainage or drainage from roofs, roads, cellars or yards
or flow of industrial wastes or other liquids that will adversely affect the
operation of a system for domestic sewage disposal or cause an overload on
such system shall be discharged into, onto or near a sewage disposal system
for a commercial building. Such drainage or liquid shall be disposed of
separately, subject to any requirements considered necessary by the FVHD.
F. Nothing in this section shall be construed to permit the creation or
maintenance or any sewage overflow or nuisance, the abatement of which
shall be subject to the provisions of § 152-20 and also Section 19-13-B2 of
the Public Health Code of the State of Connecticut.29
29.Editor's Note: Original Article VII, Appeals, which immediately followed this section, was
deleted 7-28-1992.
§ 152-25 FARMINGTON CODE § 152-25
152:266
ARTICLE IV
Penalties
§ 152-26. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 7-28-1992]
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be fined not
more than $100 for any single violation. Each day such violation is
continued after due notice has been given by the Town Manager shall be
deemed a separate violation and shall be punishable as such.
§ 152-27. Enforcement. [Added 3-28-1995]
This chapter has been specifically designated for enforcement by citations
issued by designated municipal officers or employees, and the citation
hearing procedure established by Chapter 91 of the Farmington Code shall
be followed.
§ 152-26 SEPTIC SYSTEMS § 152-27
152:267
Chapter 156
SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Conservation Commission — See Ch. 9.
Water Pollution Control Authority — See Ch.
68.
Building Code — See Ch. 83, Art. II.
Citation hearing procedure — See Ch. 91.
Fees – See Ch. 98
Septic systems — See Ch. 152.
Solid waste — See Ch. 165.
Subdivision regulations — See Ch. 172.
Water – See Ch. 193
§ 152-27 FARMINGTON CODE § 152-27
152:268
ARTICLE I
Deferred Assessment of Costs
[Adopted 12-27-1960 by Ord. No. 40]
§ 156-1. Sewers through undeveloped land. [Amended 7-28-1992]
Whenever a sewer is laid out and assessed by the Town of Farmington
through or adjacent to undeveloped lands or in a highway abutting such
undeveloped lands and whenever the Farmington Water Pollution Control
Authority, hereinafter referred to as the "Authority," determines that at the
time of completion of said sewer there would not be immediate benefit
accruing to said lands and that such benefits will not accrue until there is a
major change in conditions of accessibility, in zoning restrictions or in use
or in other conditions, the Authority may, by these provisions adopted by
the Council acting under § C3-7 of the Charter of the Town of Farmington,
defer the assessments and the collection of the same until the growth and
development of the area warrants a termination of such deferment.
§ 156-2. Sewers through cemetery land. [Amended 7-28-1992]
Whenever a sewer is laid out and assessed by the Town of Farmington
through or adjacent to land held for cemetery purposes or in a highway
abutting such land, and whenever the Authority determines that at the time
of completion of said sewer there would not be immediate benefit accruing
to said land and that such benefits will not accrue until there is a major
change in conditions or use, the Authority may, by these provisions adopted
by the Town Council acting under § C3-7 of the Charter of the Town of
Farmington, defer the assessments and the collection of the same until such
a major change in conditions or use occurs.
§ 156-3. When connection can be made.
When an assessment for a sewer on any land has been deferred as provided
in the two foregoing sections, connections from such lands to said sewer
shall not be permitted until:
A. The Authority has determined that the conditions have altered due to
change in accessibility, zoning or use or to the establishment or
dedication of streets or to the approval of subdivisions by the Farmington
Town Plan and Zoning Commission or in some other manner sufficient
for normal benefit to accrue to the land or any part thereof and said
Authority has declared that the assessment on such land is due and
payable and given proper notice thereof; or
B. A sanitary sewer connection charge has been paid by or for the owners
of the land which is to be served by said connection, which payment shall
be in lieu of and in amount equal to the assessment on such land.
§ 156-4. Sanitary sewer connection charge. [Amended 5-11-2010]
The amount of a sanitary sewer connection charge to be paid in lieu of
a benefit assessment shall be in an amount equal to the final assessment
§ 156-1 SEPTIC SYSTEMS § 156-4
152:269
rate of the original final assessment applied to the frontage or acreage, as
the case may be, of said land or such part of such land as, in the opinion
of the Authority, is benefited at the time of connection, provided that the
connection charge for any property that is zoned for residential use shall
be in an amount not greater than the present value of the original final
assessment of said land or such part of such land as, in the opinion of the
Authority, is benefited at the time of connection, determined in accordance
with § 156-49.
§ 156-5. Caveat and lien.
A. To notify an owner or prospective buyer of land upon which there is
an assessment for a sewer laid, but deferred as provided hereinbefore,
a caveat shall be filed within 30 days of the passage of the resolution
laying out the sewer or within 30 days of the effective date of this
article, whichever is later, and the benefits, though deferred, shall be
a lien upon the land on account of which they were assessed, which
lien shall commence and attach to such land from the time of passage
by the Authority of the vote laying out said sewer or from the time
of the effective date of this article, whichever is later, and the same
shall remain a lien thereon until three months after such time as such
benefits, the assessment of which was deferred, shall be finally assessed
and declared due and payable, but thereafter such caveat shall not
remain a lien unless within said three months after the assessment of
benefits has been declared due and payable a certificate signed by an
agent of the Authority is lodged with the Town of Farmington, for record,
which certificate shall describe the premises, the amount assessed and
the improvement for which it was assessed, and provided that, in all
cases of such liens, within 30 days from the time when such liens shall
commence and attach to the land, a caveat shall be entered in a record
to be kept by a designated agent of the Authority briefly describing the
land upon which such liens shall attach, together with the names of the
owners thereof.
B. Such caveats shall further indicate the provisions for future payment,
whether by later declaration by the Authority that assessments are due
and payable or by payment of a connection charge, in which case the
caveat and lien will be released on such land or portion of which as
payment in lieu of assessment has been made.
§ 156-6. Sewers built by developers.
Whenever a sewer has not been laid out and assessed by the Authority
but has been built for the Authority under a developer's permit agreement
passing land owned by others, which others might later request a house
connection to the sewer, no connection shall be permitted by the Authority
unless:
A. Said other owner first submits satisfactory written proof to the Authority
that he has paid the developer a normal and equitable share of the sewer
construction cost;
§ 156-4 FARMINGTON CODE § 156-6
152:270
B. Said other owner first signs a form of agreement waiving the Authority's
usual layout and assessment procedures and pays a sanitary sewer
connection charge; or
C. The Authority has passed a layout and assessment covering the section
in question.
§ 156-7. Reimbursement of developers. [Amended 5-11-2010]
The Authority is empowered, at its discretion, to include in agreements with
developers or other owners for the construction of sewers by and at the
expense of such developers or owners provisions for the reimbursement of
said developers or owners for sanitary sewers connection charges collected
as provided in § 156-6 hereof for the costs of sewers constructed by them
in sections of highways on which lands owned by them do not abut, such
reimbursement not to exceed the cost of construction within such sections
of highways, and to limit the time within which such reimbursements may
occur to such time as said Authority may deem expedient for the particular
case , but no reimbursement shall be made after 20 years from the date of
the incorporation of the particular sewer into the public system. Expiration
of the time for reimbursement to the developer shall not release subsequent
permittees from paying a connection charge to the Town of Farmington.
§ 156-8. Special agreements for payment of sewer connection
charges. [Amended 2-26-1963]
Whenever a sewer has been laid out and constructed by the Authority to
serve a particular section of highway or a particular area, no connection
will be permitted thereto for any property which has not been assessed
therefor or has not shared in an equitable manner in the expense thereof,
unless, prior to such connection, the owner of such property first enters
into a special agreement, to be recorded in the land records, providing
for advance payment by the owner of a sanitary sewer connection charge,
except in that situation where the Authority shall, by appropriate vote,
permit payment of said connection charge over a period to be determined
by the Authority, provided that the permission granted will not affect the
power of the Authority to make future sewer layouts and benefit
assessments thereof against the property of said owner in the same manner
as if permission to connect had never been granted by the Authority, and
agreeing to credit said connection charge payment toward any such future
assessment, without allowance for interest between the date of payment of
said charge and the date of any future final assessment billed said owner.
§ 156-9. Determination of amount of connection charge. [Amended
5-11-2010]
The amount of the sanitary sewer connection charge for the connection
under §§ 156-6, 156-7 and 156-8 hereof shall be determined by calculating
the present value of the project's original assessment in accordance with
§ 156-49. Such connection charges, including those deferred in § 156-3B
hereof, shall be paid to the Collector of Revenue of the Town of Farmington,
§ 156-6 SEPTIC SYSTEMS § 156-9
152:271
the collecting agent for the Water Pollution Control Authority and the Town
of Farmington, credited to the proper account, turned over by said Collector
of Revenue to the Treasurer of the Town of Farmington and deposited in
the sewer fund, which shall be separate from other funds of the Town of
Farmington.
§ 156-9 FARMINGTON CODE § 156-9
152:272
ARTICLE II
Permit Agreements
[Adopted 3-12-1974 by Ord. No. 70]
§ 156-10. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases and words
shall have the meanings given herein:
AUTHORITY — The Water Pollution Control Authority of the Town of
Farmington.
BUILDING DRAIN — That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage
system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage
pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to a point such distance
outside the inner face of the building wall as specified by the Building Code
of the State of Connecticut. 30
CONSERVATION COMMISSION — The Conservation Commission of the
Town of Farmington.
LATERAL — The sewer pipe from the main sewer in the street to the
property line.
SEWAGE — Human and animal excretions and all domestic and such
manufacturing wastes as may tend to be detrimental to the public
health.[Amended 7-28-1992]
SEWER — Includes the main pipe or conduit, manholes and other structures
and equipment appurtenant thereto provided to carry sewage.
SEWER SYSTEM — Includes the sewer, laterals, house connections,
pumping stations, rights-of-way, sewage treatment system and other
structures, land and equipment necessary to provide a complete and
efficient system.
TOWN — The Town of Farmington or any of its officers or agencies serving
in an official capacity.
TOWN PLAN AND ZONING COMMISSION — The Town Plan and Zoning
Commission of the Town of Farmington.
§ 156-11. Permit agreement required.
If in the opinion of the Authority a subdivision can be connected to the
existing sewer system, said subdivision shall not be approved by the Town
Plan and Zoning Commission unless the developer has executed with the
Authority a permit agreement calling for installation of a sewer system and
connection to the existing sewer system.
30.Editor's Note: See Ch. 83, Building Construction, Art. II.
§ 156-10 SEPTIC SYSTEMS § 156-12
152:273
§ 156-12. Subdivisions with approved sewer plans.
No subdivision located within an area for which the Authority has a sewer
plan shall be approved by the Town Plan and Zoning Commission until
the developer has executed with the Authority a permit agreement as
hereinafter provided, unless such requirement is waived by the Authority
as provided in § 156-14 below. Any such permit agreement shall provide for
installation of a sewer system by and at the expense of developers and as
further provided below:
A. The developer shall install not only the sewer but also the lateral from
the sewer to the property line. In the case of new street construction,
the developer shall make such installation before surfacing of the street
is commenced.
B. When an owner of any lot or his agent applies for a building permit,
the Building Official shall require, as a condition of the issuance of such
permit, that said owner or agent show on the plot plan the layout of the
future connection from the lateral to the building drain, including the
elevation of the lateral at the street line, the elevation of the finished first
floor and/or cellar floor and the elevation of the building drain to which
the future house connection would be made.
C. The developer shall cap all open ends of the sewer system and shall,
along with completed as-built plans of the sewer system, provide exact
ties and elevations so that the capped ends can be readily located.
D. The Town shall provide elevations at each point where the sewers are
capped, and the developer shall design and build the sewer system
to these elevations. The Town shall provide design capacities for the
sewers.
E. Where topography prevents installation of the sewer within the street,
the developer shall install the sewer within rights-of-way that shall be
deeded to the Town and of adequate width as determined by the Town.
F. If a pumping station is deemed necessary by the Authority to serve
the subdivision, the Authority shall require either that the developer
install said pumping station and appurtenant equipment therefor or that
the developer deposit with the Authority a sum sufficient to defray the
cost of constructing, equipping and installing said pumping station. The
amount of this deposit shall be based on engineers' estimates approved
by the Authority. It may be in the form of cash or a savings account
assignment to be deposited with the Town Treasurer, and it shall be
used only for the construction, equipping and installation of the pumping
station at such time as the sewer system becomes active.
G. The developer shall not be required to include as part of the capped
sewer system construction any pipes, pumping stations or other
appurtenances which would be required for or would serve areas outside
of the subdivision in question, unless provision is made for giving the
developer a credit for the cost of such items in excess of the cost of the
system required for the subdivision in question.
§ 156-12 FARMINGTON CODE § 156-13
152:274
§ 156-13. Design approval when agreement not required.
No subdivision within an area for which the Authority has a sewer plan and
for which a permit agreement has been waived under § 156-14 hereof shall
be approved by the Town Plan and Zoning Commission until the Authority
has approved a design of the sewer system serving said subdivision or
has waived the requirement therefor pursuant to § 156-14 below. Said
design shall be prepared by the developer at his expense, shall conform
to accepted engineering practices and existing installation requirements
and shall provide for an economical and effective future installation of the
sewer system. Any rights-of-way called for by such design as approved by
the Authority shall be deeded to the Town of Farmington.
§ 156-14. Relief from requirements; determination of need.
A. The Authority may grant relief from any of the requirements imposed
by §§ 156-11, 156-12 and 156-13 above if it determines that the need
for the construction or design of sewers is impractical or remote, taking
into consideration the date upon which the sewers might be connected
to the Town sewer system, the estimated cost of construction and the
anticipated need for sewers within the subdivision; provided, however,
that the construction of sewers shall not be required within an area to
which connection to the Town sewer system is not anticipated for more
than 10 years.
B. Such need shall be determined after consideration of all available
information, including the report or opinion of the Town Sanitarian, any
reports or environmental impact studies of such proposed subdivision
performed or submitted by the Conservation Commission and any report
or evidence submitted by the developer of such proposed subdivision.
C. The Authority may establish and publish guidelines and procedures to be
used in determining such need and may amend the same from time to
time as necessary.
§ 156-15. Connection charge. [Amended 5-11-2010]
A. A connection charge may be established as a provision of the permit
agreement calling for the installation of the sewer system, except that
the amount of such charge shall not be stated nor shall it become due
until the sewer system in the development is connected to the public
sewer system. The Authority shall, within 30 days from the date of
its approval of the permit agreement, cause a caveat warning of said
charge to be prepared and recorded on all lots contained within said
development.
B. At such time as a sewer system constructed by a developer pursuant
to a permit agreement is connected to the public sewer system, the
developer shall pay a fee consisting of the sum of $1,000 for each
approved residential dwelling to be serviced by the sewer system
constructed by the developer. Said fee is intended to represent the costs
associated with the preliminary sewer plan review and the preliminary
engineering review of such sewer system. The developer shall pay such
sum to the Collector of Revenue of the Town of Farmington, the
collecting agent for the Water Pollution Control Authority and the Town
§ 156-13 SEPTIC SYSTEMS § 156-15
152:275
of Farmington, and the sum collected shall be turned over by said
Collector of Revenue to the Treasurer of the Town of Farmington and
deposited in the sewer fund, which shall be separate from other funds of
the Town of Farmington.
§ 156-16. Alternate sewage treatment units.
In lieu of private sewage disposal systems, the developer may, subject to
the approval of local and state authorities, build and install a mechanically
operated sewage treatment unit which, subject to appropriate guaranties,
shall be accepted, operated and maintained by the Town and to which the
sewer system shall be connected. Said unit shall revert to the developer at
such time as it is discontinued. The developer may, subject to the approval
of state and local authorities, install a community septic tank and disposal
system.
§ 156-17. Subdivision of lots fronting on existing Town roads.
If a developer subdivides lots fronting on an existing Town road, the
Authority may waive the requirement of installation of a sewer system
serving such lots if it finds such installation to be impracticable, provided
that any easements necessary for future sewer installation are dedicated
to the Town. The Authority may, by agreement with the developer, provide
for immediate or future construction of the sewer system, either by the
developer as provided herein with provision for reimbursement if other
properties connect, by the Authority with the developer defraying his share
and assessments against other properties deferred or by the Authority with
the developer depositing with the Town in the form of cash or a savings
account assignment of his share of the estimated cost, to be held by the
Town for construction at some future date, or by some other reasonable and
equitable method.
§ 156-15 FARMINGTON CODE § 156-17
152:276
ARTICLE III
Sewer Use
[Adopted 11-22-1983 by Ord. No. 37]
§ 156-18. Intent; applicability.
A. This article establishes the procedures for making connections to the
public sewer in the Town of Farmington sanitary sewer system. It also
establishes specific limits for pollutant discharges which by their nature
or by their interaction with sewage will be detrimental to the public
health, cause damage to the public sewer or the water pollution control
facility, pollute the waters of the state or otherwise create a public
nuisance.
B. This article is intended to:
(1) Inform the public as to the technical and administrative procedures
to be followed in obtaining connection to the Town of Farmington
sanitary sewer system.
(2) Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the sanitary sewer system
which will interfere with the collection and/or treatment system.
(3) Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the treatment system
which will pass through the system, inadequately treated, into the
waters of the state or the atmosphere or otherwise be incompatible
with the system.
(4) Improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewaters and
sludges from the system.
C. This article shall apply to the Town of Farmington and to persons outside
of the Town of Farmington who are users of the public sewer. Except as
otherwise provided herein, the Town Engineer of the Town of Farmington
shall otherwise implement and enforce the provisions of this article.
§ 156-19. Definitions and word usage.
A. Definitions. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
ACT or THE ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known
as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1251, et seq.
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD) — The amount of oxygen
required by bacteria while stabilizing decomposable organic matter
under aerobic conditions for five days. The determination of BOD shall
be performed in accordance with the procedures prescribed in the latest
edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and
Wastewater.
BUILDING DRAIN — That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a
building's plumbing which receives the discharge from soil, waste and
other drainage pipes inside the walls of the buildings and conveys it to
the building sewer, beginning five feet (1.5 meters) outside the inner
face of the building wall.
§ 156-18 SEPTIC SYSTEMS § 156-19
152:277
BUILDING SEWER — The extension from the building drain to the
public sewer or other place of disposal; it may also be called a house
connection.
CATEGORICAL STANDARDS — National Categorical Pretreatment
Standards or Pretreatment Standards.
COMBINED SEWER — A sewer intended to receive both sewage and
storm- or surface water.
COMMISSIONER — The Commissioner of Environmental Protection for
the State of Connecticut.
COMPATIBLE POLLUTANT — Biochemical oxygen demand, suspended
solids, pH and fecal coliform bacteria, plus any additional pollutants
identified in the water pollution control facilities NPDES permit, where
the water pollution control facility is designed to treat such pollutants
and in fact does treat such pollutants to the degree required by the
NPDES permit.
COMPOSITE SAMPLE — A mixture of aliquot samples obtained at
regular intervals over a time period. The volume of each aliquot is
proportional to the discharge flow rate for the sampling interval. The
minimum time period for composite sampling shall be four hours.
COOLING WATER — Process water in general used for cooling purposes
to which the only pollutant added is heat and which has such
characteristics that it may be discharged to a natural outlet in
accordance with federal and state laws and regulations.
DOMESTIC SEWAGE — Sewage that consists of water and human
excretions or other waterborne wastes incidental to the occupancy of
a residential building or nonresidential building, but not wastewater
from water-softening equipment, commercial laundry wastewater and
blowdown from heating and cooling equipment.
FLOATABLE OIL — Oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that
it will separate by gravity from sewage by treatment in an approved
pretreatment facility.
GARBAGE — The animal or vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking or serving of foods.
GRAB SAMPLE — A sample which is taken from a waste stream on a onetime
basis with no regard to the flow in the waste stream and without
consideration of time.
HOLDING TANK WASTE — Any waste from holding tanks such as
vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers and septage-hauling trucks.
INCOMPATIBLE POLLUTANT — All pollutants other than compatible
pollutants as defined above.
INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER — All wastewater from industrial
processes, trade or business and is distinct from domestic sewage.
§ 156-19 FARMINGTON CODE § 156-19
152:278
NATIONAL POLLUTION DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES)
PERMIT — A permit issued pursuant to Section 402 of the Act (33 U.S.C.
§ 1342).
pH — The logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen-ion
concentrations. The concentration is the weight of hydrogen ions in
grams per liter of solution.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint-stock company, trust, estate,
governmental entity or any other legal entity or their legal
representatives, agents or assigns. The masculine gender shall include
the feminine and the singular shall include the plural where indicated by
the context.
PRETREATMENT or TREATMENT — The reduction of the amount of
pollutants, the elimination of pollutants or the alteration of the nature of
pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in
lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into a water
pollution control facility. The reduction or alteration can be obtained by
physical, chemical or biological processes, except as prohibited by 40
CFR 403-6(d).
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE — The wastes from the preparation,
cooking and dispensing of foods that have been shredded to such a
degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions
normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than 1/2
inch (1.27 centimeters) in any dimension.
PUBLIC SEWER — A common sanitary sewer controlled by a
governmental agency or public utility.
SANITARY SEWER — A sewer which collects and conveys domestic
sewage from residences, public buildings, commercial establishments,
industries and institutions. A sanitary sewer may also collect and convey
permitted industrial wastewater and unintentionally admitted ground- ,
storm- and surface waters.
SEPTAGE — The liquids and solids which are removed from a tank used
to treat domestic sewage.
SEWAGE — Human and animal excretions and all domestic and such
manufacturing wastes as may tend to be detrimental to the public health.
SEWAGE COLLECTION SYSTEM — The structures and equipment
required to collect and convey sewage to the water pollution control
facility.
SLUG — Any sudden or excessive discharge which exceeds permitted
levels either in terms of pollutant concentration or instantaneous flow
rate in such a manner as to adversely affect the sewage collection system
and/or the water pollution control facility.
SOLUBLE OIL — Oil which is of either mineral or vegetable origin and
disperses in water or sewage at temperatures between 0º C. and 65º
§ 156-19 SEPTIC SYSTEMS § 156-19
152:279
C. For the purposes of this article, emulsified oil shall be considered as
soluble oil.
STORM SEWER — A sewer which collects and conveys stormwater or
groundwater.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — The solid matter, measured in milligrams per
liter, which may be in suspension, floatable or settleable and is
removable by laboratory filtering as prescribed in the latest edition of
Standard Methods for Examination of Water and Wastewater.
TOXIC POLLUTANT — Any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed
as toxic in regulations promulgated by the Administrator of the
Environmental Protection Agency under the provisions of Section 307(a)
of the Act or other Acts.
USER — Any person who contributes, causes or permits the contribution
of sewage into the Town of Farmington sewer system.
WATERCOURSE — A natural or artificial channel for the passage of
water either continuously or intermittently.
WATER POLLUTION CONTROL FACILITY (WPCF) — An arrangement of
devices for the treatment of sewage and sludge.
B. Word usage. Shall is mandatory; may is permissive.
§ 156-20. Use of public sewers.
A. The owner(s) of all houses, buildings or properties used for human
occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes situated within
the Town of Farmington and abutting on any street, alley or right-ofway
in which there is now located or may in the future be located a
public sanitary or combined sewer of the Town of Farmington may, at
the option of the Town of Farmington and at the owner's expense, be
required to install a building sewer to connect their building drain to the
public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this article within 90
days after the date of official notice to do so.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to construct or repair any privy, privy
vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended for the disposal of
sewage if public sewers are available.
§ 156-21. Unauthorized persons.
No unauthorized person(s) shall uncover, make any connections with or
opening into, use, alter, repair or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance
thereof.
§ 156-22. Notification of change in volume or character of
discharge.
Any person proposing a new discharge into the public sewer system or a
substantial change in the volume or character of pollutants that are being
discharged into the public sewer system shall notify the Town Engineer at
least 45 days prior to the proposed change or connection.
§ 156-19 FARMINGTON CODE § 156-23
152:280
§ 156-23. Permit required.
A. A person intending to connect a building drain from his property to
the public sewer shall first obtain a permit to connect from the Town
Engineer. The application shall be made on forms provided by the Town
Engineer and it shall be accompanied by a sketch or plan sufficient
in detail to enable the Town Engineer to determine that the proposed
installation meets the requirements and other applicable specifications,
codes and laws. The application shall be signed by the owner of the
premises to be served or his authorized agent and/or by the qualified
contractor (see § 156-25H) who has been chosen to perform the work of
installing and connecting the building drain to the public sewer. Upon
approval of the application and plan, a permit shall be issued to have the
work performed by the stated contractor. In the event that the premises
changes ownership before the work is completed or if another contractor
is chosen to perform or finish the work, the original permit becomes void
and a new permit must be obtained by the new parties in interest.
B. A connection to the public sewer may be made only for structures in
which the plumbing work and fixtures comply with or will be constructed
to comply with the Building Code,31 laws and regulations and permits
issued thereunder. A fresh-air vent will be required for the building, and
all plumbing shall be in good order. No trench containing a building
drain or connection to the sanitary sewer shall be backfilled until the
Town Engineer has completed an inspection of and approved the work.
The water level in the trench shall be maintained at a level below the
sewer connection before the cap is removed and while the connection
is being made and until such time as it has been inspected, approved
and backfilled. The contractor shall notify the Town Engineer 24 hours
before starting any work authorized under this permit.
C. Permits to connect to the public sewer may be revoked and annulled by
the Town Engineer on written notice to the permittee for such cause and
at such time as he may deem sufficient, and the Town of Farmington
shall be held harmless as a consequence of said revocation or the cause
thereof. All other parties in interest shall be held to have waived the
right to claim damages from the Town of Farmington or its agents on
account of such revocation.
D. Within 30 days of the receipt of the notice provided for in Subsection
C, any permittee may appeal the revocation and annulment of a permit
to connect to the public sewer to the Water Pollution Control Authority
of the Town, which, for good and sufficient cause, may reinstate such
permit. Any such appeal shall be in writing, addressed to the Water
Pollution Control Authority, setting out the grounds for the appeal in
reasonable detail and completeness. The Water Pollution Control
Authority shall consider any such appeal made to it and, if so required
by a person interested therein, shall afford all interested parties an
opportunity to be heard by the Authority or by a committee thereof.
Pending the decision of the Water Pollution Control Authority on an
31.Editor's Note: See Ch. 83, Building Construction, Art. II.
§ 156-23 SEPTIC SYSTEMS § 156-23
152:281
appeal taken under this section, the revocation and annulment of the
permit shall be observed and remain in full force and effect.
§ 156-24. Costs and expenses; indemnification.
All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and connection of the
building sewer shall be borne by the owner(s). The owner(s) shall indemnify
the Town of Farmington from any loss or damage that may directly or
indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.
§ 156-25. Building sewer requirements.
A. A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building.
B. Existing building sewers may be used in connection with the new
buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the Town
Engineer, to meet all requirements of this article.
C. The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer
and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing,
testing and backfilling and trench and connection of the building sewer
to the public sewer shall all conform to the requirements of the Building
and Plumbing Codes or other applicable rules and regulations of the
Town of Farmington. In the absence of code provisions or in amplication
thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate
specifications of the American Society for Testing and Materials and
WPCF Manual of Practice No. 9 shall apply.
D. Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building
at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any
building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer,
sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an
approved means and discharged to the building sewer. Duplex lift
systems shall be provided for commercial and industrial buildings.
E. No person(s) shall make a connection of roof downspouts, foundation
drains, areaway drains or other sources of surface runoff or
groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is
connected, directly or indirectly, to a public sewer.
F. All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately
guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from
hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other property disturbed in
the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the
Town of Farmington.
G. No building sewer shall be constructed within 25 feet of a water supply
well. If a building sewer is constructed within 25 to 75 feet of a water
supply well, it shall be constructed in accordance with all applicable
guidelines promulgated by the Commissioner.
H. All building sewers shall be installed by a drainlayer who possesses
a valid license issued under Chapter 393 of the General Statutes, as
amended.
§ 156-26. Discharge of unpolluted water or drainage.
§ 156-23 FARMINGTON CODE § 156-26
152:282
A. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any unpolluted
waters, such as stormwater, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface
drainage or cooling water, to any sanitary sewer.
B. Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to
such sewers as are specifically designated as combined sewers or storm
sewers and discharged to a watercourse in accordance with all
applicable state and federal laws and regulations.
§ 156-27. Discharge of certain substances prohibited.
No user shall contribute or cause to be contributed, directly or indirectly,
any pollutant or wastewater which will interfere with the operation or
performance of the WPCF. These general prohibitions apply to all such
users of a WPCF, whether or not the user is subject to National Categorical
Pretreatment Standards or any other federal or state pretreatment
standards or requirements. A user shall not contribute the following
substances to any WPCF:
A. Any liquids, solids or gases which, by reason of their nature or quantity,
are or may be sufficient, either alone or by interaction with other
substances, to cause a fire or explosion or be injurious in any other
way to the WPCF or to the operation of the WPCF. At no time shall
two successive readings on an explosion hazard meter at the point of
discharge into the sewage collection system (or at any point in the
system) be more than 5% nor any single reading over 10% of the lower
explosive limit (LEL) of the meter.
B. Solids or viscous substances which may cause obstruction to the flow in
a sewer or other interference with the operation of the WPCF, including
substances such as but not limited to grease, garbage with particles
greater than 1/2 inch in any dimension, animal guts or tissues, paunch,
manure, bones, hair, hides or fleshings, entrails, whole blood, feathers,
ashes, cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal, glass,
straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags, spent grains, spent hops,
wastepaper, wood, plastics, gas, tar, asphalt residues, residues from
refining or processing of fuel or lubricating oil, mud or glass grinding or
polishing wastes.
C. Any sewage having a pH lower than 5.5 or having any other corrosive
property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment
and personnel of the WPCF. The upper limit of pH for any industrial
wastewater discharge shall be established under the discharger's state
discharge permit.
D. Any sewage containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity, either
singly or by interaction with other pollutants, to injure or interfere with
any wastewater treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or
animals or plant life, create a toxic effect in the receiving waters of the
WPCF or to exceed the limitation set forth in a Categorical Pretreatment
Standard. A toxic pollutant shall include but not be limited to any
pollutant identified pursuant to Section 307(a) of the Act.
E. Any noxious or malodorous sewage, gases or solids which, either singly
or by interaction with other sewage, are sufficient to prevent entry into
the public sewers for their maintenance and repair.
§ 156-26 SEPTIC SYSTEMS § 156-27
152:283
F. Any sewage which, by interaction with other sewage in the public sewer,
releases obnoxious gases, forms suspended solids which interfere with
the collection system or creates a condition which may be deleterious
to structures and treatment processes or which may cause the effluence
limitations to the WPCF's NPDES permit to be exceeded.
G. Any substances which may cause the WPCF's effluent or any other
product of the WPCF, such as residues, sludges or scums, to be
unsuitable for reclamation process where the WPCF is pursuing a reuse
and reclamation program. In no case shall a substance discharged to the
WPCF cause the facility to be in noncompliance with the sludge use or
disposal criteria, guidelines or regulations developed under Section 405
of the Act or any criteria, guidelines or regulations affecting sludge use
or disposal developed pursuant to the Resource Conservation Clean Air
Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act or state criteria applicable to the
sludge management method being used.
H. Any substance which will cause a WPCF to violate its NPDES permit or
the receiving water quality standards.
I. Sewage containing substances which are not amendable to treatment
or reduction by the wastewater treatment process employed or are
amendable to treatment only to such degree that the water pollution
control facility effluent cannot meet the limits stipulated in the Town of
Farmington's NPDES permit.
§ 156-28. Limitations and restrictions on certain substances.
The following described substances, materials, waters or waste shall be
limited in discharges to public sewers to concentrations or quantities which
will not harm either the sewers or water pollution control facility, will
not have an adverse effect on the receiving stream or will not otherwise
endanger public property or constitute a nuisance. The Commissioner may
set lower limitations if more severe limitations are necessary to meet the
water quality standards of the receiving stream. The limitations or
restrictions on materials or characteristics of sewage discharged to the
public sewer are as follows:
A. Sewage having a temperature higher than 150º F. (65º C.).
B. Sewage containing fat, wax, grease, petroleum or mineral oil, whether
emulsified or not, in excess of 100 milligrams per liter, with floatable oil
not to exceed 20 milligrams per liter, or containing substances which may
solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32º F. and 150º F. (0º
C. and 65º C.).
C. Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. (See § 156-19.) Garbage
grinders may not be connected to sanitary sewers from hotels, institutions,
restaurants, hospitals, catering establishments or similar places where
garbage originates from the preparation of food in kitchens for the purpose
of consumption on the premises or when served by caterers. Food strainers
are to be used to remove large food particles. [Amended 4-7-2014]
D. Any sewage containing odor-producing substances exceeding limits which
may be established by the Commissioner.
§ 156-27 FARMINGTON CODE § 156-28
152:284
E. Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as
may exceed limits established by the Commissioner in compliance with all
applicable state and federal regulations.
F. Materials which exert or cause:
(1) Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids, such as but not
limited to sodium chloride and sodium sulfate.
(2) Excessive discoloration, such as but not limited to dye wastes and
vegetable-tanning solutions.
(3) Unusual BOD (biochemical oxygen demand) or chlorine demand in such
quantities as to constitute a significant load on the water pollution
control facility.
(4) Unusual volume of flow or concentrations of wastes constituting a slug,
as defined in § 156-19.
G. Overflow from holding tanks or other receptacles storing organic wastes.
H. Sewage with a concentration of pollutants in excess of the following limits:
Pollutant
Concentration in parts per
million
(mg/l)
Arsenic as AS 0.05
Barium as Ba 5.0
Boron as BO 5.0
Cyanides as CN (amendable) 0.1
Fluoride as F 20
Chromium (Total) 1.0
Chromium (Cr +6) 0.1
Magnesium as Mg 100
Manganese as Mn 5.0
Copper as Cu 1.0
Zinc as Zn 1.0
Cadmium 0.1
Lead 0.1
Tin 2.0
Silver 0.1
Mercury 0.01
Nickel 1.0
Note: All metals are to be measured as total metals.
§ 156-29. Discharges requiring permit from Department of
Environmental Protection.
A. In accordance with C.G.S. § 22a-430, as amended, a permit from the
Commissioner of Environmental Protection is required prior to the
§ 156-28 SEPTIC SYSTEMS § 156-29
152:285
initiation of a discharge of any of the following wastewaters to a public
sewer: [Amended 7-28-1992]
(1) Industrial wastewater of any quantity.
(2) Domestic sewage in excess of 5,000 gallons per day through any
individual building sewer to a public sewer.
B. A potential discharger must submit a permit application to the
Department of Environmental Protection not later than 90 days prior to
the anticipated date of initiation of the proposed discharge.
§ 156-30. Discharge of deleterious substances.
A. If any sewage is discharged or is proposed to be discharged to the public
sewers which contains the substances or possesses the characteristics
enumerated in § 156-28 of this article and which, in the judgment of
the Commissioner, may have a deleterious effect upon the wastewater
facilities, processes, equipment or receiving waters or which otherwise
may create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the
Commissioner may, in accordance with C.G.S. § 22a-430, as amended:
[Amended 7-28-1992]
(1) Reject the discharge of the wastes.
(2) Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the
public sewers.
(3) Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge.
B. If the Commissioner permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste
flows, the design and installation of the equipment shall be subject to the
review and approval of the Commissioner, subject to the requirements of
all applicable codes, ordinances and laws.
§ 156-31. Power of Town Engineer. [Amended 7-28-1992]
The Town Engineer shall have the right to reject the discharge of any
wastes or require more stringent effluent limitations than required by the
user's C.G.S. § 22a-430 permit, the decisions of the Commissioner
notwithstanding.
§ 156-32. Separators. [Amended 7-28-1992; 4-7-2014]
Grease, oil and gross particle separators shall be installed when, in the
opinion of the Authority, they are necessary for the proper handling of
sewage containing floatable grease in excessive amounts, as specified in
§ 156-28B, or any flammable wastes, sand or other harmful substances,
except that such separators shall not be required for private living quarters
or dwelling units. All separators shall be of a type and capacity approved
by the Authority and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible
for cleaning and inspection. In the maintaining of these separators, the
owner(s) shall be responsible for the proper removal and disposal by
appropriate means of the captured material and shall maintain records
of the dates and means of disposal, which are subject to review by the
Authority. Any removal and hauling of the collected materials shall be
performed by a waste disposal firm which possesses a valid permit from the
Authority. A fats, oils and grease management program as approved by the
§ 156-29 FARMINGTON CODE § 156-32
152:286
Authority and administered by the Town staff shall outline the wastewater
pretreatment requirements for food preparation establishments and other
commercial facilities that discharge fats, oils and grease in their wastewater
flow and shall be incorporated into this section. A copy of the management
program shall be available in the Town Clerk's office and on the Town
website.
§ 156-33. Maintenance of facilities required.
Where pretreatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided or required
for any sewage, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and
effective operation by the owner(s) at his expense.
§ 156-34. Appurtenances to facilitate measurement and sampling.
When required by the Commissioner, the owner of any property serviced by
a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable structure,
together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances, in the
building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of
the wastes. Such structure, when required, shall be accessible and safely
located and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the
Commissioner. The sampling structure shall be located at a point along the
industrial waste stream where a representative sample of the industrial
wastewater may be obtained prior to its being diluted by domestic sewage
in the building sewer. The structure shall be installed by the owner at his
expense and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at
all times.
§ 156-35. Monitoring of industrial discharges. [Amended
7-28-1992]
All industries discharging into a public sewer shall perform such monitoring
of their discharge as required by the Commissioner in any state discharge
permit issued pursuant to C.G.S. § 22a-430 as amended, including but not
limited to installation, use and maintenance of monitoring equipment,
keeping records and reporting the results to the Commissioner. Such
records shall be made available upon request of the Commissioner or the
Town Engineer.
§ 156-36. Measurements, tests and analyses.
All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of sewage to
which reference is made in this chapter shall be determined in accordance
with the latest edition of Standard Methods for Examination of Water and
Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association. Sampling
methods, location, times, durations and frequencies are to be determined
on an individual basis subject to the stipulations and general conditions of
the discharger's state discharge permit.
§ 156-32 SEPTIC SYSTEMS § 156-37
152:287
§ 156-37. Special agreements.
No statement contained in this article shall be construed as preventing
any special agreement or arrangement between the Town of Farmington
and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength
or character may be accepted by the Town of Farmington for treatment,
provided that such agreements do not contravene any requirements of
existing state or federal regulations and are compatible with any user
charge and industrial cost recovery system in effect.
§ 156-38. Federal standards to prevail.
Upon the promulgation of the Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standard
for a particular industrial subcategory, the Federal Standard, if more
stringent than limitations imposed under this article for sources in that
subcategory, shall supersede the limitations imposed under this article.
§ 156-39. Dilution of discharge prohibited.
No user shall increase the use of process water in an attempt to dilute
a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment
to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in the Federal
Categorical Pretreatment Standards or in any specific pollutant limitations
which may be developed by the Commissioner.
§ 156-40. Accidental discharge.
A. Each user shall provide protection from accidental discharge of
prohibited materials or other substances regulated by this article.
Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall be
provided and maintained at the owner or user's own cost and expense.
The Commissioner may require that plans showing facilities and
operating procedures be submitted for review and approval prior to
construction of the facilities.
B. Within five days following an accidental discharge, the user shall submit
to the Town Engineer and the Commissioner a detailed written report
describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken
by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification
shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage or other liability
which may be incurred as a result of damage to the WPCF, fish kills,
aquatic plants or any other damage to persons or property, nor shall such
notification relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties or other liability
which may be imposed by this article or other applicable law.
§ 156-41. Protection from damage.
No person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy,
uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment
which is a part of the sewage collection system or water pollution control
facility.
§ 156-37 FARMINGTON CODE § 156-42
152:288
§ 156-42. Powers and authority of inspectors.
A. The Town Engineer and other duly authorized employees of the Town
of Farmington bearing proper credentials and identification shall be
permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection,
observation, measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with the
provisions of this article.
B. While performing the necessary work in private properties referred to
in Subsection A above, the Town Engineer or duly authorized employees
of the Town of Farmington shall observe all safety rules applicable to
the premises established by the user. The Town of Farmington shall
indemnify the user against loss or damage to its property by Town
of Farmington employees and against liability claims and demands for
personal injury or property damage asserted against the user, except
as may be caused by negligence or failure of the user to maintain safe
conditions.
C. The Town Engineer and other duly authorized employees of the Town
of Farmington bearing proper credentials and identification shall be
permitted to enter all private properties through which the Town of
Farmington holds a duly negotiated easement for the purposes of repair
and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying within said
easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement
shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated
easement pertaining to the private property.
§ 156-43. Penalties for offenses.
A. Any person found to be in violation of any provisions of this article,
except § 156-41, shall be served by the Town of Farmington with written
notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time
limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within
the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations.
B. Any person who continues any violation beyond the time limit provided
for in Subsection A shall be subject to a fine in an amount not exceeding
$100 for each violation. Each day in which any such violation shall
continue shall be deemed a separate offense. [Amended 7-28-1992]
C. Any person who is found to be in violation of any of the provisions of this
article shall become liable to the Town of Farmington for any expense,
loss or damage occasioned the Town of Farmington by reason of such
violation.
D. Any person who is found to be in violation of C.G.S. § 22a-430, as
amended, shall be subject to a monetary penalty or forfeiture under
C.G.S. § 2a-426. [Amended 7-28-1992]
§ 156-44. Enforcement. [Added 3-28-1995]
This chapter has been specifically designated for enforcement by citations
issued by designated municipal officers or employees, and the citation
hearing procedure established by Chapter 91 of the Farmington Code shall
be followed.
§ 156-42 SEPTIC SYSTEMS § 156-44
152:289

ARTICLE IV
Costs and Charges; Payment Assistance
[Adopted 1-24-1995]
§ 156-45. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to authorize the Farmington Water Pollution
Control Authority (WPCA) to assist a property owner with limited income
in paying for costs arising from constructing a sewer line and, in certain
instances where a water line has been constructed in conjunction with a
sewer line, a water line from the property line to the property owner's home
and related costs by having the Town pay for such costs, adding such costs
to the amount of the owner's sewer assessment or connection charge, with
the total amount to be paid, with interest, in installments approved by the
WPCA.
§ 156-46. Background.
The construction and use of sewer lines results in a substantial sewer
assessment or connection charge being levied against property owners
benefiting from such construction or use. The payment of the assessment
or connection charge amount is made easier by the WPCA permitting such
payment to be made by installments over a period of years. The sewer
assessment or connection charge at present does not cover the cost of
constructing the sewer line from the property line to the property owner's
residence and related costs. These are additional substantial costs borne
entirely by the property owner. In certain instances with property owners
having limited income, having to pay these additional costs in one lump
sum, in addition to the sewer assessment or connection charge installment
payment, may impose a hardship upon such property owners. Such hardship
can be significantly alleviated by having the Town pay a contractor for
running the sewer line and, in certain instances where a water line has been
constructed in conjunction with a sewer line, a water line from the property
line to the property owner's residence and related costs and adding such
costs to the amount of the sewer assessment or connection charge to be
paid, with interest, in installments.
§ 156-47. Authorization.
The WPCA is authorized in instances where a property owner's gross annual
income is within the limits established in § 156-48 below to pay the costs of
laying a sewer line and, in the instances referred to above, a water line from
the property line to the property owner's residence and related costs and
to add such costs to the amount of the property owner's sewer assessment
or connection charge and to permit the combined amount to be paid, with
interest, in installments over the period of years established by the WPCA
for payment of sewer assessment or connection charges.
§ 156-45 SEPTIC SYSTEMS § 156-48
152:291
§ 156-48. Standards.
In order for a property owner to be eligible for assistance under this article,
the gross annual income of the property owner shall not exceed 150% of
the median family income for the Hartford area, as determined annually by
the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, or its
successor.
§ 156-48 FARMINGTON CODE § 156-48
152:292
ARTICLE V
Residential Assessments and Sewer Costs
[Adopted 5-11-2010]
§ 156-49. Benefit assessment methods for properties zoned for
residential use.
A. The following table provides the maximum benefit assessments to be paid
by benefiting property owners of property zoned for residential use within
the Town of Farmington; provided, however, the assessment amounts
contained in the table shall be updated annually by the Authority during
its budget process using the Construction Cost Index set forth in the latest
edition of the Engineering News Record ("ENR").
2010 Calendar Year Assessment Amounts
Zoning Class Assessment Amount
R-20 and Under $10,000
R-30 and R-40 $12,500
R-80 $15,000
B. When a property owner who deferred his sewer benefit assessment requests
connection or is required to connect to a public sewer system, or when
persons independently connect to a developer-constructed sewer, or when
the owner of a newly created lot seeks to connect to a public sewer system
for which an assessment has not previously been set, the amount of the
sanitary sewer connection charge for the connection shall be determined
by converting the original assessment rate for that sewer to present value
using the Construction Cost Index set forth by the latest edition of the
Engineering News Record ("ENR").
C. In accordance with General Statutes § 7-249, the maximum amount that
the Authority shall assess a benefiting property owner shall be the lesser
amount of either the assessment amount as determined by the above table
or the net project cost, after deduction of grants and reimbursements,
divided by the number of benefiting property owners.
§ 156-50. Sewer cost responsibilities.
A. The intent of this section is to provide a guideline for the determination
of the responsibility for the payment of the costs related to a nondeveloper
sewer project and the various sources of payment of such
costs by the Town (general taxpayers), the Authority and a benefiting
property owner:
(1) Town of Farmington.
(a) Funding source.
[1] General obligation bonds paid by general taxpayers.
(b) Cost responsibilities.
[1] Water treatment plant upgrades.
[2] New pumping stations and other new collection system
improvements (e.g., interceptors).
§ 156-49 SEPTIC SYSTEMS § 156-50
152:293
[3] Portion of mainline/lateral extension costs not covered by
sewer assessments (e.g., neighborhood sewer projects).
(2) Water Pollution Control Authority.
(a) Funding source.
[1] Sewer use fees paid by all users of system.
(b) Cost responsibilities.
[1] Operation and maintenance of treatment plant.
[2] Basic and routine maintenance, repairs and upgrades to
town-wide system.
[3] Replacement and upgrades to pumping stations and other
collection system improvements (e.g., interceptors).
[4] Studies and engineering work.
(3) Benefiting property owners.
(a) Funding source.
[1] Private sources.
(b) Cost responsibilities.
[1] Assessable portion of neighborhood mainline/lateral
extensions costs.
[2] Costs and expenses incidental to the installation of sewer
lines from property line to property owner's residence and
related costs (Town of Farmington Code §§ 156-24 and
156-46).
B. The following definitions are provided herein as a guideline with respect
to certain terms referenced in this chapter with respect to a sewer
system:
BENEFIT ASSESSMENT — A benefit assessment is the charge a
municipality or wastewater district places against a property to recover
the cost of capital expenditures for the acquisition, construction, or
upgrading or wastewater collection, conveyance, or treatment facilities.
("Methods of Capital Cost Recovery on Water Pollution Control Projects,"
published January 1997 by CT-DEP).
CONNECTION CHARGE — A connection charge, referenced in C.G.S.
§ 7-255, may be levied at the time of connection with the sewer and is
generally in addition to the benefit assessment. Connection charges take
basically two forms. The first, which exists while the debt for the sewer
system is still active, generally covers the municipal cost of processing
a permit to connect, including the inspection of the connection. The
second, which usually occurs after the capital debt for the sewer has
been paid off, covers both the permit processing costs and a lump sum
payment in lieu of a benefit assessment. ("Methods of Capital Cost
Recovery on Water Pollution Control Projects," published January 1997
by CT-DEP).
USER CHARGE — A sewer use charge is designed to recover the
operating costs of the wastewater treatment system (operations,
maintenance and limited component replacement) and is charged only
to those properties which actually discharge to the sewer system.
("Methods of Capital Cost Recovery on Water Pollution Control Projects,"
published January 1997 by CT DEP).
§ 156-50 FARMINGTON CODE § 156-51
152:294
§ 156-51. Authority's power to mandate sewer projects.
A. Pursuant to Title 7, Chapter 103 of the General Statutes, and Chapter
68 of the Town of Farmington Municipal Code, the power to acquire,
construct and operate a sewerage system or systems within the Town of
Farmington rests with the Authority.
B. The Authority may, within its discretion, deem it necessary to construct
a sewer system and mandate that such system be constructed. Such
construction shall be carried out in accordance with the Connecticut
General Statutes. Such sewer projects will be assessed to the individual
homeowners within the project in accordance with § 156-49.
C. If an existing development or neighborhood which the Authority has not
yet mandated to have a sewerage system wishes to construct a sewerage
system, the construction of the system shall be considered a developerbuilt
project under a developer permit agreement. The existing
development or neighborhood shall be considered the developer in
accordance with § 156-14. In the event that an existing development
or neighborhood elects to construct a sewerage system, the property
owners within the scope of said project shall be responsible for all costs
not excepted by § 156-12D or § 156-14.
§ 156-51 SEPTIC SYSTEMS § 156-51
152:295

ARTICLE VI
Sewer Use Charge System
[Adopted 7-12-2016]
§ 156-52. Purpose.
A. An ordinance establishing user charges in the Town of Farmington for
the purpose of providing funds for the operation, maintenance and
replacement expenses associated with the municipal wastewater
collection, conveyance, and treatment facilities.
B. As provided for under § 7-255 et seq. of the Connecticut General
Statutes, the Water Pollution Control Authority (WPCA) is empowered
to establish and revise fair and reasonable charges for the use of the
municipal sewerage system. The owner of property against which any
such use charge is levied shall be liable for the payment thereof.
Municipally owned and other tax-exempt property which uses the
sewerage system shall be subject to such charges under the same
conditions as are the owners of other property.
C. No charge for the use of the municipal sewerage system shall be
established or revised until after a public hearing before the WPCA, at
which owners of property which use the sewerage system shall have an
opportunity to be heard concerning the proposed charges. Notice of the
time, date, and place of such hearing shall be published at least ten days
before the hearing in a newspaper having a general circulation in the
municipality, and a copy of the proposed charges shall be on file in the
office of the Town Clerk for public inspection at least ten days before the
date of the hearing.
D. Within ten days of having established such charges, the WPCA shall
cause the same to be published in a newspaper having a general
circulation in the municipality.
§ 156-53. Calculation of charges.
A. The total cost of the operation and maintenance of the sewerage system,
including replacement fund (OM&R cost) shall be recovered from the
users of the system. Each user's share of the OM&R cost of the sewerage
system shall be in proportion to the user's contribution to the total
wastewater loading of the sewerage system. All residential users shall be
charged on the residential basis of their total wastewater contribution.
All commercial, industrial and public agencies shall be charged on the
quantity of water consumed for the year and shall be based upon water
consumption values provided to the Town of Farmington by the
appropriate water company that supplies those users. Surcharges shall
be added to the volume-based charges for wastewater discharges whose
BOD or suspended solids concentrations are in excess of 300 ppm, or for
discharges whose other constituents result in an identifiable increase in
wastewater conveyance, treatment, or disposal costs. Should the WPCA
determine that there has been a discharge that exceeds the maximum
concentration as defined within this article and/or within other
applicable state codes or other discharges that impede the daily nutrient
removal and daily workings of the plant, the person(s) who allow the
§ 156-52 SEPTIC SYSTEMS § 156-53
152:297
unauthorized discharge shall be responsible for any and all costs,
damages and expenses incurred to the Town of Farmington for the
removal of such discharge and rectification costs and expenses that
enable the WPCA to return the plant operation to normal nutrient
removal levels. "Normal nutrient removal levels" are defined to be those
levels of which the plant operates during any given day or time period
throughout the year.
B. The WPCA will review the sewer user charges annually and revise the
rates as necessary to ensure that adequate revenues are generated
to recover all OM&R costs and that the rate structure continues to
distribute the costs of wastewater collection and treatment among the
users in proportion to their contribution.
§ 156-54. Collection and payment of sewer use charges.
A. All sewer use charges shall be billed yearly through the Town for the
WPCA and shall be paid in full within a period of thirty days after same
is declared due and payable unless otherwise stated on the billing form.
The billing form shall state the amount owed by the property owner for
sewer use and the portion of the bill that is dedicated to pay for debt
service.
B. Any charge for the use of a sewerage system not paid within thirty
days of the due date shall thereupon be delinquent and shall bear
interest from the due date at the rate and in the manner provided by
the general statutes for delinquent property taxes. Each addition of
interest shall be collectible as a part of such connection or use charge.
Any such unpaid connection or use charge shall constitute a lien upon
the real estate against which such charge was levied from the date
it became delinquent. Each such lien may be continued, recorded and
released in the manner provided by the general statutes for continuing,
recording and releasing property tax liens. Each such lien shall take
precedence over all other liens and encumbrances except taxes and may
be foreclosed in the same manner as a lien for property taxes.
C. All revenues collected under the provisions of this article shall be kept
separate from any other funds of the municipality and shall be used
solely for the purposes stated in Article 1 of this chapter, and for no other
purpose. Fiscal year-end balances shall be used to defray the following
year's costs, or shall be deposited in a nonlapsing fund established for
replacement of major mechanical components which could reasonably
be expected to require replacement during the useful life of the
treatment works. If, as a result of a shortfall, funds have been
transferred from other sources into the sewerage funds account, those
funds shall be repaid at the beginning of the next fiscal year, and the
sewer user charge shall be increased to cover the transfer of these
funds.
§ 156-55. Appeals and adjustments.
A. Any person aggrieved by any charge for the use of the sewerage system
may make written appeal to the WPCA within thirty days of the billing
date, requesting a review of the user charge. This request shall, where
§ 156-53 FARMINGTON CODE § 156-55
152:298
necessary, show the actual or estimated flow and/or strength of the
discharge in comparison with the values upon which the charge is based,
including how the measurements or estimates were made.
B. Should an agreement not be reached between the person(s) making
such a request to review their charge and the WPCA, those person(s)
aggrieved by any charge for the use of a sewerage system may appeal
to the superior court for the judicial district wherein the municipality
is located and shall bring any such appeal to a return day of said court
not less than twelve or more than thirty days after service thereof. The
judgment of the court shall be final.
§ 156-56. Septage.
The Town of Farmington WPCF does not accept for disposal or treatment of
any private septage wastewater in any manner.
§ 156-57. Definition.
PPM — Parts per million
§ 156-55 SEPTIC SYSTEMS § 156-57
152:299
Chapter 159
SIGNS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Citation hearing procedure — See Ch. 91. Zoning regulations — See Ch. 197.
§ 159-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
OUTDOOR ADVERTISING BILLBOARDS — Outdoor billboards, signs and
devices used solely for advertising services or products having no relation
to the property on which the billboards are located.
§ 159-2. Findings.
Outdoor advertising billboards are found to be detrimental to the public
interest and safety in the following respects:
A. Outdoor advertising billboards are distracting and, when located along
the highways, constitute a traffic safety hazard.
B. Outdoor advertising billboards are aesthetically offensive and impair
and are detrimental to the environment and to the enjoyment of the
environment by the public.
C. The existence of outdoor advertising billboards within the Town
contravenes the efforts of the Town and its residents to beautify the
Town.
§ 159-3. Prohibition.
No outdoor advertising billboards shall be erected or maintained within the
Town on and after the first day of July 1977.
§ 159-4. Exceptions.
The following signs and devices shall be excepted from the provisions of this
chapter, and this chapter shall not be found to apply to such uses:
A. Official signs or notices required or authorized by law.
B. Signs identifying or describing the nature of the activities conducted
on the property on which the sign is located, to include identifying
or describing the property, its occupants, products sold or services
rendered.
C. Directional signs reasonably required and in compliance with the Town
Zoning Regulations.32
32.Editor's Note: See Ch. 197, Zoning Regulations.
§ 156-57 FARMINGTON CODE § 159-4
159:300
D. Temporary signs advertising events carried on in the Town of
Farmington for charitable purposes.
E. Signs advertising the sale or lease of the property on which they are
located which comply with the requirements of the Town Zoning
Regulations.
§ 159-5. Penalties for offenses.
The violator of any provision of this chapter shall be subject to a penalty
for such violation in an amount not to exceed $100 and each day that such
violation continues shall be a new and separate violation.
§ 159-6. Enforcement. [Added 3-28-1995]
This chapter has been specifically designated for enforcement by citations
issued by designated municipal officers or employees, and the citation
hearing procedure established by Chapter 91 of the Farmington Code shall
be followed.
Chapter 165
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Citation hearing procedure — See Ch. 91.
§ 159-4 SIGNS § 159-6
159:301

ARTICLE I
Garbage and Refuse Collection
[Adopted 10-5-1948 by Ord. No. 6]
§ 165-1. Responsibility of Town Council.
The Town Council may provide for the collection of garbage and refuse in
the Town or in any part or parts thereof.
§ 165-2. Costs of collection. [Amended 9-26-1950; 5-24-1960]
The cost of said collection shall be determined by the Council. Service
charges to cover the cost shall be fixed, from time to time, by the Council
against those to whom said service is made available or against the owners
of the properties to whom said service is made available or against both,
as deemed appropriate by the Council. Said service charges may vary in
amounts, said amounts to bear a reasonable relationship to the amount
of service rendered. A minimum service charge may be made against all
persons and all owners of properties to whom the service is made available,
whether or not actual service is rendered.
§ 165-3. Rules and regulations.
The Council may establish rules and regulations necessary to effectively
carry out the purposes of this article and may designate the Town Manager
to act in its behalf and for the Town in order to carry out the provisions of
this article.
§ 165-4. Liens. [Amended 2-25-1969; 5-27-1975]
Any claim or debt due for such a service charge shall bear interest from the
due date at the rate and in the manner provided by the General Statutes
for delinquent property taxes if such service charge is not paid within
30 days of the due date. Each addition of interest shall be collectible
as a part of such service charge. Any such charge which has become
delinquent shall constitute a lien upon the property against which the
charge was assessed and may be collected by the Collector of Revenue or
other person designated by the Council in accordance with the provisions of
the General Statutes for the collection of property taxes. Each such lien may
be continued, recorded and released in the manner provided by the General
Statutes of the State of Connecticut for continuing, recording and releasing
tax liens. Each such lien shall take precedence over all other liens and
encumbrances, except taxes, and may be foreclosed in the same manner as
a lien for property taxes. Any such charge may also be collected by the Town
against the property owner in an action at law, together with the cost of
collecting the same.
§ 165-1 SIGNS § 165-4
159:303

ARTICLE II
Licensing of Collectors
[Adopted 2-23-1988 by Ord. No. 87]
§ 165-5. Findings.
The accumulation, collection, removal and disposal of solid waste must be
controlled by the Town of Farmington for the protection of the public health,
safety and welfare. It is consequently found and declared that:
A. The Town of Farmington is authorized by law to regulate the disposition
of solid waste generated within its boundaries and to collect a charge
therefor and to license refuse collectors.
B. The Town of Farmington is also authorized by C.G.S. § 22a-220a to
designate the area where solid waste generated within its boundaries
shall be disposed.
C. The Town of Farmington has executed the municipal service agreement
requiring it to cause all solid waste generated within its boundaries
and which meets the contractual standards to be delivered to the Mid-
Connecticut System.
D. The public health, safety and welfare of the Town of Farmington will
be best served by requiring the delivery of such solid waste to the
Mid-Connecticut System Hartford Facility for processing by the Mid-
Connecticut System and for the generation of electricity.
E. The enactment of this article is in furtherance of this municipality's
regional solid waste management plan.
§ 165-6. Definitions.
The following terms shall have the following meanings:
AUTHORITY — The Connecticut Resources Recovery Authority established
pursuant to Chapter 446e of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
CONTRACTUAL STANDARDS — For solid waste delivered to the Mid-
Connecticut System, as follows:
It must be solid waste emanating from within the corporate boundaries
of the Town of Farmington.
A.
It must not be of such a quantity, quality or other nature as to materially
impair the operation or capacity of the Mid-Connecticut System or any
portion thereof, normal and reasonable wear and usage excepted.
B.
It must not be of such a quantity, quality or other nature as to materially
impair the strength or the durability of the structures, equipment or
works which are part of the Mid-Connecticut System or any portion
thereof.
C.
It must not be of such quantity, quality or other nature as to create
flammable or explosive conditions in the Mid-Connecticut System or
any portion thereof.
D.
§ 165-5 SIGNS § 165-6
159:305
DIRECTOR — The Highway Superintendent of the Town of Farmington.
DISPOSAL CHARGE — That amount of money to be charged for each ton of
solid waste delivered to the Mid-Connecticut System as established by the
procedures authorized in the municipal service agreement.
HAZARDOUS WASTE — Pathological, biological, cesspool or other human
wastes, human and animal remains, radioactive, toxic and other hazardous
wastes which, according to federal, state or local rules or regulations
from time to time in effect, require special handling in their collection,
treatment or disposal, including those regulated under 42 U.S.C. § 6921 to
42 U.S.C. § 6925 and regulations thereunder adopted by the United States
Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to the Resource Conservation
and Recovery Act of 1976, 90 Stat. 2806, 42 U.S.C. § 6901, such as cleaning
fluids, crankcase oils, cutting oils, paints, acids, caustics, poisons, drugs,
fine powdery earth used to filter cleaning fluid and refuse of a similar
nature.
MID-CONNECTICUT SYSTEM — The system for the processing of solid
waste and the recovery of energy therefrom constructed by the Authority
pursuant to the municipal service agreement.
MUNICIPAL SERVICE AGREEMENT — The municipal solid waste
management services contract between the Town of Farmington and the
Authority dated as of 1987.
REFUSE COLLECTOR — Includes any person, firm or corporation engaged
in the business of collecting and transporting commercial, household or
industrial solid waste for hire within the Town of Farmington.
SOLID WASTE — Unwanted or discarded materials consistent with the
meaning of that term pursuant to C.G.S. § 22a-260(7), excluding semisolid
or liquid materials collected and treated in a sewerage system.
§ 165-7. License required.
All solid waste accumulated in the Town of Farmington shall be collected,
conveyed and disposed of by the Town of Farmington or by persons licensed
It must not contain chemical or other properties which are deleterious,
as determined by the Authority, or capable of causing material damage
to any part of the system or to personnel.
E.
F. It must not include any hazardous waste.
It must not exceed the following dimensions:
(1) Lumber: six feet in length or width or four inches in thickness.
Trees or limbs: six feet in length or three inches in diameter, with
branches cut to within six inches of the trunk.
(2)
(3) Metal pipe: three feet in length and 1 1/2 inches in inside diameter.
(4) Cans or drums: five-gallon capacity, opened and empty.
G.
§ 165-6 FARMINGTON CODE § 165-7
159:306
by the Town of Farmington to perform such work and in accordance with
the provisions of this article. No other person shall collect, convey over
any street or dispose of any solid waste in the Town of Farmington, except
that the actual producers of solid waste or the owners of premises in
the Town of Farmington upon which solid waste has accumulated may
personally collect, convey and dispose of such solid waste using a vehicle
no larger than a three-fourths-ton pickup truck, upon complying with the
other provisions of this article and with any other applicable ordinances and
regulations. No solid waste collected from outside the Town of Farmington
shall be disposed of under a license or registration issued pursuant to this
article.
§ 165-8. Licensing procedure; fees; inspections; license restrictions.
A. Licensing and registration authority designated. The director shall be
the licensing and registration authority for refuse collectors and vehicles
and containers. The director shall grant a license within a reasonable
time following the filing of a proper application and payment of the
prescribed fee, unless he finds one or more of the following conditions
to prevail:
(1) The applicant has been irresponsible in the conduct of solid waste
collection and hauling operations based upon previous suspensions
and/or revocations of licenses.
(2) The applicant lacks suitable equipment with which to collect solid
waste in a safe and nuisance-free manner and in compliance with
this article.
B. License required. Each refuse collector shall annually, on or before
July 1, apply for a license from the director, on such form as he shall
prescribe, to engage in the business of solid waste collection in the Town
of Farmington.
C. Registration of vehicles and containers. Each licensed refuse collector
shall obtain a separate registration for each vehicle he operates to
transport solid waste within the Town of Farmington. When a vehicle
is employed to transport more than one container, each container to
be transported instead of the vehicle shall be registered. Registrations
shall not be transferable from vehicle to vehicle nor from container
to container; provided, however, that the director may allow such
temporary transfer of registrations in hardship situations, such as a
temporary breakdown of an individually licensed vehicle.
D. Registration term, fee and renewal. All registrations shall be issued for
a term not to exceed one year and shall be renewable on or before the
first day of July of each year. The registration fee shall be $100 for each
vehicle and/or container with a capacity of 10 or more cubic yards and
$50 for each vehicle and/or container of a capacity of less than 10 cubic
yards.
E. Reinspection upon sale or transfer of a vehicle during the registration
year. Whenever a duly registered vehicle is sold or transferred to
another refuse collector licensed in the Town of Farmington during the
registration year, said vehicle shall be reinspected within seven days of
such transfer date, but no additional fee shall be required.
§ 165-7 SIGNS § 165-8
159:307
F. Display of registration. The registration issued shall be conspicuously
displayed on the left front of the body of each vehicle or container so
licensed or as may be directed.
G. Notification required upon sale or transfer of route. When any licensee
shall sell or transfer all or part of his route to another refuse collector
presently licensed to collect solid waste in the Town of Farmington, he
shall forthwith give written notice to the director at least seven days
before the date of the sale or transfer stating the name of the buyer or
transferee and the intended date of sale.
H. Licenses nontransferable. Licenses are not transferable. When any
licensee shall sell or transfer all or part of his route to any refuse
collector not licensed in the Town of Farmington, he shall first notify
the director, in writing, of his intent to sell, and the transferee shall, at
the same time, make application for a license to operate in the Town of
Farmington.
I. Routes serviced. As a prerequisite to the issuance or renewal of any
license, the refuse collector must, during the month of June, furnish to
the director the geographical routes within the Town of Farmington that
such refuse collector services or intends to service.
§ 165-9. Revocation or suspension of license.
A. Generally. A license to engage in solid waste collection in the Town of
Farmington and to use the Mid-Connecticut System Hartford Facility or
other refuse facilities provided by the Town of Farmington is a privilege,
not a right. Failure to comply with the provisions of this article shall
be grounds for revocation or suspension of any license or registration
issued under the provisions of this article, in addition to any other
penalty imposable by law.
B. Notice required. Revocation or suspension shall only become effective
10 calendar days after receipt of written notice from the director.
C. Request for review; filing; effect of failure to file. If a refuse collector
objects to the director's action described in Subsection B above to
revoke or suspend his license or registration, he may, within five
calendar days of receipt of said notice, file a written request for review
with the Town Manager. Failure to timely file such request for review
shall make the director's action final and binding upon the refuse
collector.
D. Effect of timely filing. Timely filing of such request for review shall
operate as an automatic stay of the director's action.
E. Hearing. The Town Manager shall, within 15 days, hear and decide the
matter. Such hearing shall be private; except, however, that such hearing
may be public if so requested, in writing, by the refuse collector. The
decision of the Town Manager shall be final and binding upon the refuse
collector.
F. Names and addresses of customers to be furnished upon revocation
or suspension. Whenever a refuse collector's license or registration is
revoked or suspended, he shall furnish the director, within 24 hours,
with the names and addresses of his customers to ensure continuity of
service.
§ 165-8 FARMINGTON CODE § 165-9
159:308
G. Refusal of permission to use the Mid-Connecticut System Hartford
Facility. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein, the director
shall have the power to refuse permission to a refuse collector to use
the Mid-Connecticut System Hartford Facility when, in his opinion, such
refuse collector has violated this article or any other applicable rule or
regulation.
§ 165-10. Administration; rules and regulations.
A. The director shall administer the licensing of any refuse collector
engaged in the collecting and transporting of solid waste in the Town of
Farmington.
B. The director shall, when considering an application for a solid waste
collection license, including renewal, ascertain that the applicant has
adequate liability insurance, as required in the solid waste permitting
disposal and billing regulations of the Authority.
C. The director may promulgate additional collection and disposal
procedures from time to time as he deems proper, but such rules shall
not be inconsistent with this article.
§ 165-11. Collector's responsibilities.
A. Place of delivery; payment. Each refuse collector shall deliver all solid
waste meeting the contractual standards collected within the territorial
limits of the Town of Farmington to the Mid-Connecticut System
Hartford Facility and pay the disposal charge.
B. Deposit at dropoff location. All other solid waste, including that
personally disposed of by a producer of solid waste or the owner of
premises in the Town of Farmington upon which solid waste has
accumulated in such volumes as the Town can accept, may be deposited
at such citizen dropoff location within the Town of Farmington for
transshipment to the Mid-Connecticut System upon payment of such
charge as the Town may set. Such solid waste shall be limited to small
volumes which are brought to the site by the property owner or solid
waste generator in their own vehicles. The Town shall have the exclusive
right to determine the acceptability of such solid waste.
C. Failure to pay. Any refuse collector failing to pay to the Authority any
disposal charge within 30 days after the date of a bill therefor shall
pay, in addition to the disposal charge shown on such bill, interest on
such disposal charge at the rate of 1% per month or fraction thereof
commencing on the date of such bill, plus all costs of collection,
including an attorney's reasonable bill, incurred by the Authority. A
failure to pay shall also be grounds for revocation or suspension of a
license and registration.
D. Prohibition on delivery. No licensee shall deliver any solid waste meeting
the contractual standards to any final place other than the Mid-
Connecticut System Hartford Facility, unless the Mid-Connecticut
System Hartford Facility is incapable of accepting such solid waste at
the time of delivery, in which event such solid waste shall be delivered to
the place designated by the director.
§ 165-9 SIGNS § 165-11
159:309
E. Construction and maintenance of vehicles and containers. All vehicles
registered to collect and transport solid waste to the Mid-Connecticut
System Hartford Facility shall be automatic unloading vehicles of
watertight construction and shall be maintained free from obnoxious
odors and accumulated solid waste. Any such vehicle with a capacity in
excess of 10 cubic yards shall be of a closed construction. A container
utilized primarily for nonliquid solid waste need not be of watertight
construction and shall be completely enclosed and maintained free from
obnoxious odors and accumulated solid waste. If any such vehicle shall
have a capacity of less than 10 cubic yards, it may have an open top,
provided that it be covered when it is in motion to prevent the escape of
solid waste.
§ 165-12. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating the terms of this article shall be fined not more than
$100 for each offense, in addition to any other penalty imposable hereunder.
§ 165-12.1. Enforcement. [Added 3-28-1995]
This chapter has been specifically designated for enforcement by citations
issued by designated municipal officers or employees, and the citation
hearing procedure established by Chapter 91 of the Farmington Code shall
be followed.
§ 165-11 FARMINGTON CODE § 165-12.1
159:310
ARTICLE III
Recycling
[Adopted 12-18-1990 by Ord. No. 91]
§ 165-13. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to revise and restate Ordinance No. 9133 to
include changes in the law relating to recycling solid waste included in
Public Act Nos. 90-220 and 90-249.
§ 165-14. Establishment of recycling system.
There is established a Town solid waste recycling program with standards to
effect the maximum level of recycling of solid waste and source separation.
§ 165-15. Administrator.
The Highway Superintendent shall be the administrator of the recycling
program and is vested with full powers to develop and operate a recycling
program consistent with this article and the laws and regulations of the
state.
§ 165-16. Findings.
The recycling of solid waste is a responsibility of the Town of Farmington
and of each residence and business within the Town, as contained in C.G.S.
§§ 22a-241 to 22a-241h, inclusive, and §§ 22a-220 to 22a-220a, inclusive, as
amended by Public Act Nos. 90-220 and 90-249. It is consequently found
and declared that:
A. Pursuant to C.G.S. § 22a-241b, as amended by Public Act No. 90-220,
on and after January 1, 1991, each person who generates solid waste
from residential property shall separate from other solid waste the items
designated for recycling pursuant to said statute and every other person
(business or institution) who generates solid waste shall make provision
for the separation from other solid waste of the items so designated.
B. Under C.G.S. § 22a-241b, as amended, the Town shall, by January 1,
1991, adopt an ordinance to assure that persons, businesses and waste
haulers comply with recycling requirements and to provide the
Department of Environmental Protection with the name, address and
phone number of the person to receive information and respond to
questions regarding recycling from the Department on behalf of the
municipality.
C. The public health, safety and welfare of the Town shall be best served
by the recycling of those items so designated by the Department of
Environmental Protection and by delivering such other solid waste to the
Connecticut Resources Recovery Authority's Mid-Connecticut project for
processing in the generation of electricity.
33.Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 91 was originally adopted 4-17-1990.
§ 165-13 SIGNS § 165-16
159:311
D. The enactment of this article will enable the Town to effectuate the
separation and collection of certain recyclable materials, thereby
fulfilling the Town's obligations under applicable state law and
regulations.
E. The successful operation of the recycling program may require the
issuance of regulations and instructions setting forth procedures to be
followed by residents, businesses and institutions, collectors and others.
The administrator of the recycling program is authorized and directed
to promulgate such regulations and instructions, which shall be binding
upon all persons within the Town in order to effect an efficient and
economical recycling program consistent with this article and applicable
state law and regulations.
§ 165-17. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the terms below shall have the following
meanings:
CARDBOARD — Corrugated boxes and similar corrugated and kraft paper
materials which have a minimum of contamination by food or other
material.
COLLECTOR — Any person who holds himself out for hire to collect solid
waste from residential, business, commercial and other establishments
within the Town and, particularly, such person who has been authorized by
the Town to collect solid waste within the Town. 34
COMMISSIONER — The Commissioner of Environmental Protection of the
State of Connecticut or his authorized agent.
GENERAL STATUTES — The General Statutes of Connecticut, as amended.
GLASS FOOD AND BEVERAGE CONTAINER — A glass bottle or jar of any
size or shape used to package food or beverage products suitable for human
or animal consumption.
HDPE (high-density polyethylene) PLASTIC FOOD AND BEVERAGE
CONTAINER — Any high-density polyethylene bottle, jar or container of any
size or shape used to package food or beverage products suitable for human
or animal consumption or used for household laundry products or motor oil
and which is frequently marked on the bottom of the bottle, jar or container
with the number two encircled by the recycling symbol.
INTERMEDIATE PROCESSING FACILITY or INTERMEDIATE
PROCESSING CENTER — A facility where glass, metals, paper products,
batteries and other items are removed from the waste stream for recycling
or reuse.
LEAVES — The foliage of trees.
METAL FOOD AND BEVERAGE CONTAINER — An aluminum, bimetal,
steel, tin-plated steel or other metallic can, plate or tray of any size or shape
34.Editor's Note: See Art. II of this chapter.
§ 165-16 FARMINGTON CODE § 165-17
159:312
used to package food or beverage products suitable for human or animal
consumption.
NEWSPAPER — Used or discarded newsprint which has a minimum of
contamination by food or other material.
OFFICE PAPER — Used or discarded high-grade white paper and manila
paper, including but not limited to paper utilized for file folders, tab cards,
writing, typing, printing, computer printing and photocopying, which is
suitable for recycling and which has a minimum of contamination, excluding
office paper generated by households.
PERSON — Any individual, organization, corporation, trust, partnership,
foundation, group, association or establishment or any combination of them.
PET (polyethylene terepthalate) PLASTIC FOOD AND BEVERAGE
CONTAINER — Any bottle, jar or container of any size or shape used
to package food or beverage products suitable for human or animal
consumption and which is frequently marked on the bottom of the bottle,
jar or container with the number one encircled by the recycling symbol.
RECYCLABLES or ITEMS REQUIRED TO BE RECYCLED or STATUTORY
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Cardboard, glass food and beverage
containers, metal food and beverage containers, newspaper, office paper,
scrap metal, storage batteries and waste oil, as defined herein, and such
other items as may be designated by the Commissioner.
RECYCLE — To separate or divert an item or items from the solid waste
stream for the purpose of processing it or causing it to be processed into a
material product, including the production of compost, in order to provide
for disposition of the item or items in a manner, other than incineration or
landfilling, which will best protect the environment.
RECYCLING — The processing of solid waste to reclaim material therefrom.
RECYCLING BOX or RECYCLING CONTAINER — Any box or container
designated as a recycling container by the Town.
RECYCLING FACILITY or RECYCLING CENTER — Land and appurtenances
thereon and structures where recycling is conducted, including but not
limited to an intermediate processing center.
RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY — Real estate containing one or more dwelling
units, excluding hospitals, institutions, motels and hotels.
RESOURCES RECOVERY FACILITY — A facility utilizing processes to
reclaim energy from municipal solid waste and, particularly, the Mid-
Connecticut Resources Recovery Facility located in Hartford.
SCRAP METAL — Used or discarded items which consist predominately
of ferrous metals, aluminum, brass, copper, lead, chromium, tin, nickel or
alloys thereof, including but not limited to white goods and metal food
containers.
§ 165-17 SIGNS § 165-17
159:313
SCRAP TIRES — Discarded rubber or synthetic rubber tires used by or
manufactured for vehicles, including but not limited to automobiles, trucks,
buses and trailers.
SOLID WASTE — Solid, liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous material that
is unwanted or discarded, including but not limited to material processed at
a recycling facility.
SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL AREA — Land and appurtenances thereon and
structures, including a landfill or other land disposal site, used for the
disposal of more than 10 cubic yards of solid waste.
SOLID WASTE FACILITY — Any solid waste disposal area, volume reduction
plant, transfer station, woodburning facility or biomedical waste treatment
facility.
STATE — The State of Connecticut.
STORAGE BATTERY — Lead acid batteries or other batteries used in motor
vehicles such as automobiles, airplanes, boats, recreational vehicles,
tractors and like applications.
TOWN — The Town of Farmington and includes authorized officers, boards,
commissions and agencies of the Town.
TRANSFER STATION — The site and depository to which solid waste and
items to be recycled may be deposited for hauling to the Mid-Connecticut
Resource Recovery Facility or to an intermediate processing center or such
other place designated or approved by the Town.
WASTE OIL — Crankcase oil that has been utilized in internal combustion
engines.
§ 165-18. Operation of recycling program.
A. Each person owning or occupying property, whether it be residential,
business or institutional, shall separate or cause to be separated from
other solid waste the following items for recycling:
(1) Cardboard.
(2) Glass food and beverage containers.
(3) Metal food and beverage containers.
(4) Newspaper.
(5) Scrap metal.
(6) Storage batteries.
(7) Waste oil.
(8) Office paper (business and institutional users only).
(9) Leaves.
(10) Such other items as may be designated by the Town.
B. The occupant or owner of any building within the Town whose solid
waste is collected by the Town or its authorized agents shall place items
to be recycled as follows:
(1) The Town shall provide one free recycling container to each
occupant or owner of any building within the Town whose solid
waste is collected by the Town or its authorized agents.
§ 165-17 FARMINGTON CODE § 165-18
159:314
(a) The owner or occupant of any building shall label the recycling
container or cause said container to be labeled with the address
where the container shall be used.
(b) The recycling container shall remain the property of the Town.
(c) The replacement of recycling containers or the purchase or
supply of additional containers shall be determined by the
administrator of the Town recycling program.
(2) All items to be recycled set out for collection by the Town shall be
placed in the recycling container as follows:
(a) Glass food containers and metal food containers shall be rinsed
and placed together in the recycling container.
(b) Newspaper shall be bundled and shall be placed on top of the
glass food containers and metal food containers in the recycling
container.
(c) Cardboard shall be flattened and placed with the other items to
be recycled in the recycling container.
C. The occupant or owner of any building within the Town whose solid
waste is collected by the Town or its authorized agents shall handle
other items to be recycled as follows:
(1) Waste oil shall be brought to the highway garage in covered
containers and shall be placed next to the waste oil storage
container.
(2) Scrap metal shall be brought to the scrap metal storage container at
the recycling center.
(3) Storage batteries shall be brought to the highway garage.
(4) Scrap tires shall be brought to the recycling center.
(5) Leaves shall be placed behind the curb or street line in the fall. At
other times during the year, leaves may be brought to the recycling
center.
(6) No nonrecyclable items, including plastic bags, shall be included
with recyclables.
(7) No single container of recyclables shall weigh more than 50 pounds.
D. All recycling containers shall be placed for collection purposes within 10
feet of the street or curb line.
E. The Town's authorized collector shall deliver items to be recycled to an
intermediate processing center or to such other locations designated by
the Town and shall pay or otherwise arrange for payment of recycling
charges.
F. It shall be a violation of this article for any person not authorized by
the Town to collect or pick up or cause to be collected or picked up
any items to be recycled which have been deposited at the curb for
collection. From the time of deposit at the curb for collection, recyclable
items become the property of the Town.
G. Nothing in this article shall abridge the right of any person, partnership,
firm or corporation to give or sell their recyclables, including deposit
beverage containers, to any person, partnership, firm, corporation or
recycling program lawfully operated for profit, nonprofit or charitable
purposes, provided that such recyclables shall not have been deposited
at the curb for collection by the Town or its designated agent.
§ 165-18 SIGNS § 165-18
159:315
H. The administrator of the recycling program shall be responsible for
and shall arrange for the items listed above, generated from residential
properties that have their solid waste collected by the Town's collector,
to be collected and delivered to the regional intermediate processing
center or to such other designated site in accordance with the provisions
of this article and applicable state law and regulations.
I. The administrator of the recycling program shall take appropriate action
to cause each owner of property used for business, institutional and/or
other nonresidential purposes, at such owner's expense, to collect and
have recycled the items listed above in accordance with the provisions
of this article and applicable state laws and regulations.
J. The administrator of the recycling program may require collectors of
solid waste to submit to the Town plans for recycling and periodic
reports setting forth specified data relating to the amount and nature of
items recycled.
K. The administrator of the recycling program, with the consent of the
Town Manager, may require the separation and recycling of items in
addition to those designated above.
L. The administrator of the recycling program may promulgate additional
collection, recycling and disposal procedures from time to time as he
deems proper, but such rules shall not be inconsistent with this article.
§ 165-19. Regulation of collectors.
A. Any collector hauling solid waste generated by residential, business or
other establishments within the Town shall register in the Town within
30 days of the effective date of this article and shall disclose the name
of any other municipality in which such collector hauls solid waste. The
administrator of the recycling program is authorized and directed to
establish reasonable requirements and qualifications for a person to be
a collector of solid waste within the Town. A permit and payment of a
permit fee may be required.35
B. The door of any private vehicle used to haul solid waste generated within
the Town shall be clearly marked with the business name and address of
the hauler.
C. The administrator of the recycling program shall, by mail, give notice
of this article and any other provisions promulgated for the collection,
hauling, processing and marketing of items required to be recycled to
all collectors registered under Subsection A of this section. After such
notice, any collector who has reason to believe that a person from
whom he has collected solid waste has discarded items required to be
recycled with such solid waste shall promptly notify the administrator
of the recycling program of the alleged violation. Upon request by the
administrator of the recycling program, a collector shall provide a
warning notice, by tag or other means, to any person suspected by
the collector or by the Town of violating separation requirements. Each
collector shall also assist the Town by identifying any person responsible
for creating loads containing significant quantities of items required to
35.Editor's Note: See Art. II of this chapter.
§ 165-18 FARMINGTON CODE § 165-19
159:316
be recycled mixed with solid waste which are delivered to a resources
recovery facility or solid waste facility by the collector.
D. On and after January 1, 1991, as required by Section 4(b) of Public Act
No. 90-220, the owner or operator of each resources recovery facility
or solid waste facility who has reason to believe, upon visual inspection,
that a load of solid waste which is delivered to the facility contains
significant quantities of any items required to be recycled is required to
provide prompt notification of such belief to the driver of the vehicles
delivering the load and to the administrator of the recycling program if
the load originated within the Town. Under said Section 4(b) of Public
Act No. 90-220, the owner or operator of each resources recovery facility
or solid waste facility is also required to conduct unannounced
inspections of loads delivered to resources recovery facilities or solid
waste facilities.
E. Any collector who dumps more than one cubic foot in volume of solid
waste at one time in an area not designated for such disposal or who
knowingly mixes other solid waste with items required to be recycled
shall, for a first violation, be liable for a civil penalty of $1,000 and for
a subsequent violation shall be liable for a civil penalty of $5,000. The
Town or the Attorney General, at the request of the Commissioner, may
bring an action under Section 3(f) of Public Act No. 90-220, which action
shall have precedence in the order of trial as provided in C.G.S. § 52-191.
§ 165-20. Liaison with state.
A. The administrator of the recycling program shall serve as the Town
liaison agent with the Commissioner with respect to receiving
information and responding on behalf of the Town to questions regarding
recycling from the Department of Environmental Protection. In the event
that the person serving as the Town liaison agent with the Commissioner
is changed, the Town, within 30 days of the change, shall provide the
Commissioner with the name, address and telephone number of the
newly designated person.
B. Notices from collectors, operators of resources recovery facilities and
solid waste facilities referred to in § 165-19C and D above shall be
submitted to the administrator of the recycling program.
§ 165-21. Annual report.
On or before July 1, 1991, and annually thereafter, the Town or its
designated regional agent shall provide a report to the Commissioner of
Environmental Protection describing the measures taken during the
preceding year to meet its obligations under Section 2 of Public Act No.
90-220. The Commissioner shall provide the Town with a form for such
report. The report shall include but not be limited to the following:
A. A description of the efforts made by the Town to promote recycling.
B. A description of the Town's efforts to ensure compliance with separation
requirements.
C. The amount of each recyclable item contained in its solid waste stream
which has been delivered to a recycling facility as reported to the
§ 165-19 SIGNS § 165-21
159:317
Town or its designated regional agent by the owner or operator of the
recycling facility or by a scrap metal processor.
D. The amount of solid waste generated within the Town's boundaries
which has been delivered to the Mid-Connecticut Resource Recovery
facility for disposal, as reported to the Town or its designated regional
agent by the owner or operator of the Mid-Connecticut facility.
§ 165-22. Penalties for offenses; enforcement.
A. Notwithstanding any other sections of the General Statutes to the
contrary, the Town, acting by its administrator of the recycling program,
may impose a penalty not to exceed $500 for each violation by a
commercial establishment of the requirements of Subsection (c) of
C.G.S. § 22a-241b, as amended by Section 1 of Public Act No. 90-220, as
set forth in § 165-18 of this article.
B. The owner or operator of the Mid-Connecticut Resource Recovery
Facility or a landfill who fails to notify the Town about the delivery of
loads of solid waste originating from the Town containing significant
quantities of items to be recycled as required by this article shall be
subject to a warning by the Town or the Commissioner for a first
violation and to a civil penalty of $500 for any subsequent violation.
If the Town fails to receive such notification as required, the Town, or
the Attorney General, at the request of the Commissioner, may bring an
action under Section 3 of Public Act No. 90-249.
C. Any person who violates the provisions of this article shall, in addition
to other legal remedies available to the Town, be cited or fined not
more than $100 for each offense, and each violation of this article or of
regulations and instructions promulgated pursuant to this article shall
be a separate violation. This article and the regulations and instructions
promulgated pursuant to this article may be enforced by citations issued
by the administrator of the recycling program. Before issuing any
citation, the administrator of the recycling program shall issue a written
warning providing notice of the specific violation in accordance with
C.G.S. § 7-148(c)(10)(A).
D. The Town may be subject to penalties imposed upon it under Section 2(g)
of Public Act No. 90-220 if the Commissioner determines that the Town
is making insufficient progress in implementing a recycling program.
E. The citation hearing procedure provided in C.G.S. § 7-152c is established
as the Town's citation hearing procedure, which may be followed when
citations pursuant to § 165-22C of this article are issued. The chief
executive officer of the Town is authorized to issue such rules and
regulations governing the operation of the citation hearing procedure so
long as such rules and regulations are consistent with C.G.S. § 7-152c.
F. Enforcement. This article has been specifically designated for
enforcement by citations issued by designated municipal officers or
employees, and the citation hearing procedure established by Chapter
91 of the Farmington Code shall be followed. [Added 3-28-1995]
§ 165-23. Drop-off location; transfer station.
§ 165-21 FARMINGTON CODE § 165-23
159:318
A. All other solid waste, including that disposed of by a generator of solid
waste or the owner of premises in the Town on which such solid waste
has accumulated in such volume as the Town can accept, may be
deposited at a citizen drop-off location within the Town, to be recycled
or disposed of upon payment of such charge as the Town may set. Such
solid waste shall be limited to small volumes which are brought to the
site by the property owner or occupant or the solid waste generator in
his own vehicles. The Town shall have the exclusive right to determine
the acceptability of such solid waste.
B. The Town shall assist small generators of solid waste by providing a
transfer station for certain items to be recycled and by assisting in the
overall education and publicity efforts promoting recycling.
C. The Town may designate a recycling facility for the delivery of items to
be recycled generated by residential units within the Town whose solid
waste is not collected by the Town or its authorized agents. Prior to
designating a recycling facility within the Town, the Town Council shall
give advance notice of its intent to designate such a recycling facility
and, prior to the final designation of such a facility, shall hold a public
hearing and shall consider private recycling occurring within the Town.
§ 165-23 SIGNS § 165-23
159:319

ARTICLE IV
Central Connecticut Solid Waste Authority
[Adopted 6-29-2010]
§ 165-24. Statement of purpose.
Pursuant to Section 7-273aa of the Connecticut General Statutes Annotated,
which provides that any two or more Connecticut municipalities may, by
concurrent ordinances of their legislative bodies, create a regional solid
waste authority under the provisions of Sections 7-273aa to 7-273oo,
inclusive (Chapter 103b), to jointly manage solid waste and recycling
services on behalf of its members, the purpose of this article is to create
such a regional authority to be known as the "Central Connecticut Solid
Waste Authority (CCSWA)." Upon adoption of this article by two or more
municipalities, CCSWA shall be created.
§ 165-25. Creation of regional solid waste authority.
CCSWA is hereby created as a regional authority under the provisions of
Chapter 103b and shall have all the rights, powers, duties and obligations of
a regional authority pursuant to Chapter 103b and Chapters 446d and 446e
of the Connecticut General Statutes Annotated.
§ 165-26. Designation of regional solid waste authority.
The Town of Farmington hereby designates CCSWA as its regional solid
waste authority, including its regional resource recovery authority, and
adopts the provisions of Chapter 103b in connection with this election
to become a member of CCSWA; provided, however, that this designation
and membership election shall not constitute a commitment of the
Municipality's solid waste or recycling streams, and provided further that
the Municipality agrees that it shall take no action, now or in the future,
contrary to its currently existing legal obligations and commitments,
including, without limitation, making any pledge of its municipal solid waste
or recycling streams to a disposal or recycling option chosen through
CCSWA which has an effective date commencing prior to the expiration
date of any currently existing waste stream commitment to another disposal
or recycling arrangement. By adopting this article, the Municipality shall
not be obligated now or in the future to make any such commitment of its
solid waste or recycling streams, or to commit any funding toward CCSWA,
without further express authorization by its legislative body.
§ 165-27. Purpose of Authority.
The purpose of CCSWA shall be to solicit and jointly manage solid waste and
recycling services on behalf of its members.
§ 165-24 SIGNS § 165-28
159:321
§ 165-28. Principal address of Authority.
The principal address of CCSWA shall be 241 Main Street, Hartford,
Connecticut 06106, c/o the Capitol Region Council of Governments.
§ 165-29. Members of Authority.
The members of CCSWA shall be the municipalities, including the
Municipality, which adopt this article. Each member municipality shall be
assigned to one of four subregions of CCSWA: (1) the Northwest Sub-
Region, (2) the Naugatuck Valley Sub-Region, (3) the Greater Capitol Sub-
Region or (4) the Shoreline Sub-Region.
§ 165-30. Voting System for meetings of Authority's full
membership.
The number of votes to be cast by each municipal member of CCSWA
at any meeting of the Authority's full membership shall be determined
in accordance with the following five-tiered voting system based on the
individual population of each municipal member compared to the total
population of all CCSWA municipal members (all such population figures to
be derived from the most recent annual data published by the Connecticut
Department of Public Health):
A. Each municipal member whose individual population is less than one
percent of the total population of all CCSWA municipal members shall
have one vote;
B. Each municipal member whose individual population is equal to or
greater than one percent, but less than two percent, of the total
population of all CCSWA municipal members shall have two votes;
C. Each municipal member whose individual population is equal to or
greater than two percent, but less than five percent, of the total
population of all CCSWA municipal members shall have three votes;
D. Each municipal member whose individual population is equal to or
greater than five percent, but less than ten percent, of the total
population of all CCSWA municipal members shall have four votes; and
E. Each municipal member whose individual population is equal to or
greater than ten percent of the total population of all CCSWA municipal
members shall have five votes.
§ 165-31. Appointment, removal and term of office of municipal
member representatives.
Each municipal member shall appoint one representative to CCSWA, which
shall be the current chief elected official of the municipality or that official's
designee, and that representative shall exercise the voting powers
established for that municipal member as set forth in this article. As long
as the method of appointment and removal and the term of office of each
municipal member representative shall be consistent with the first sentence
of this section, the details of such appointment, removal and term of office
shall be as determined by the appointing municipality; provided, however,
§ 165-28 FARMINGTON CODE § 165-31
159:322
that not more than half of the terms of all such municipal representatives
shall expire within any one fiscal year.
§ 165-32. Annual meeting and bylaws of Authority.
There shall be at least one annual meeting of all municipal members of
CCSWA, to elect the members of the Executive Committee and enact such
other business as shall be deemed advisable at such meeting, all as provided
in the bylaws of CCSWA to be adopted after its formation. It shall require
the affirmative vote of a majority of all CCSWA municipal members to enact
the Authority bylaws or adopt any amendments thereto, such vote to take
place at a duly called meeting of the full membership of CCSWA, with proxy
voting to be permitted at such meeting.
§ 165-33. Prohibition against member monetary compensation
other than host community compensation.
The members and member representatives of CCSWA shall receive no
monetary compensation solely for their service as members and member
representatives of CCSWA; provided, however, that the ability of CCSWA,
if it chooses to do so in its sole discretion, to pay host community
compensation to municipal members which agree to host facilities owned or
used by CCSWA within their municipal borders shall not be affected by this
prohibition.
§ 165-34. Executive committee of Authority.
The full membership of CCSWA shall elect an Executive Committee to
manage the operations of CCSWA; provided, however, that the specific
division of responsibilities for such management between the Executive
Committee, the full membership of CCSWA and any other body or officer of
CCSWA shall be consistent with the bylaws of CCSWA to be adopted after its
formation. No member of CCSWA shall have more than one representative
on the Executive Committee, and each member of the Executive Committee
shall have one vote, without regard to the voting system established by
§ 165-30 of this article for meetings of the Authority's full membership.
The members of such Executive Committee shall constitute an odd number,
shall include at least one representative of each of the five voting tiers
established pursuant to § 165-30 of this article for meetings of the
Authority's full membership, and shall also be determined by considerations
of geographical representation based on the four subregions established
under § 165-29 of this article, all such matters and the terms of office
and appointment of such Executive Committee members and other matters
pertaining thereto to be specifically determined in a manner consistent with
the bylaws of CCSWA to be adopted after its formation.
§ 165-35. Adoption.
This article is hereby adopted pursuant to and in compliance with all laws
governing the Municipality's adoption of ordinances.
§ 165-31 SIGNS § 165-35
159:323
Chapter 169
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Citation hearing procedures — See Ch. 91.
Parking lots — See Ch. 140.
Subdivision regulations — See Ch. 172.
§ 165-35 FARMINGTON CODE § 165-35
159:324
ARTICLE I
Relocation and Improvement of Streets and Highways
[Adopted 6-22-1954 by Ord. No. 22; amended in its entirety
8-22-1995]
§ 169-1. Authority of Town Council to file surveys, maps or plans.
The Town Council is authorized to prepare and file in the office of the
Town Clerk surveys, maps or plans of proposed highways and streets or
the relocation, grade widening or improvement of existing highways and
streets, provided that such map or plan, after completion, shall have been
approved at a meeting of the Council. Such map or plan shall have inscribed
thereon the following: "Recommended by the Town Council" and shall bear
the date of such recommendation and be signed by the Chairman of the
Council.
§ 169-2. Notification of owners; hearing; assessment of benefits;
liens.
A. The Council shall, upon the filing of such survey, map or plan, give
notice to each record owner of land included in such survey, map or
plan, by certified mail, return receipt requested, or by advertisement in
a newspaper of general circulation in the Town of Farmington, of such
filing and of the place within the Town where and the time, not less
than 10 days after such mailing and publication, when the Council or a
committee thereof shall hear any person claiming to be affected thereby.
B. The Council or such committee, after such hearing, may approve and
adopt such map or plan and may make assessments of benefits accruing
to and damages sustained by any person owning land included in such
survey, map or plan, and any assessments of benefits so made shall,
from the time of the completion of such work, constitute a lien against
the property affected, which lien shall take precedence over all other
encumbrances, except taxes and other municipal liens or encumbrances
of earlier date.
C. Such liens may be continued by filing with the Town Clerk, for record
in the land records of the Town, within 90 days after such assessment
shall have been made and notice thereof given to the person or persons
affected thereby, a certificate of such lien signed by the Collector of
Revenue, which lien may be enforced in the same manner as is provided
for the enforcement of tax liens.
D. New streets or highways shall be marked or defined in accordance with
Section 13a-41 of the General Statutes of Connecticut.
§ 169-3. Changes in maps or plans.
The Council may change any survey, map or plan so made and filed by
it at such time and in such manner as it shall deem necessary and shall
thereupon file a survey, map or plan of change, inscribed as hereinbefore
provided, with the Town Clerk. Notice by certified mail, return receipt
requested, of such change shall be given by the Council to each record
§ 169-1 SIGNS § 169-3
159:325
owner of land affected thereby and by advertisement as in the first instance,
and the subsequent proceedings shall be as provided in the case of an
original filing.
§ 169-4. Appeals.
Any person adversely affected from the action of the Town Council taken
under § 169-2 hereof may appeal such action as provided in Section 13a-40
of the General Statutes of Connecticut.
§ 169-3 FARMINGTON CODE § 169-4
159:326
ARTICLE II
Excavations and Obstructions
[Adopted 2-28-1956 by Ord. No. 26]
§ 169-5. Permit required.
Within the Town of Farmington no person, firm, corporation, public utility
or public agency shall excavate within the highway lines of any street or
highway under the control of or maintained by the Town or dig below the
surface of any such street or highway or place any obstruction thereon or
install a driveway or do grading thereon without first obtaining a permit
therefor from the Highway Superintendent or his authorized representative.
§ 169-6. Issuance and expiration of permit.
The issuance and expiration of such permits shall be in accordance with the
following rules and regulations:
A. No such permit shall be issued until after receipt of an application, to
be made in writing on forms provided by the Town and signed by the
applicant or his authorized representative.
B. The fee for every permit issued under the provisions of this article
shall be as determined by the Town Council; provided, however, that
such fee shall be waived in the case of any firm, corporation or agency
which, by charter or franchise, is legally authorized in the course of its
normal activities to make excavations or place obstructions in the limits
of public highways in the Town. [Amended 7-18-1992]
C. No permit shall be issued until after the applicant has deposited with
the Town a cash deposit or a corporate surety bond issued by a surety
company licensed to do business in and having a place of business
in the State of Connecticut or other security which, in the opinion of
the Highway Superintendent, constitutes sufficient guaranty that any
excavation made under such permit will be restored without cost to the
Town.
D. No such permit shall be issued until after the applicant furnishes the
Town Manager or his authorized representative with a certificate of
insurance certifying thereon that the applicant is covered by liability
insurance and that the Town of Farmington is an assured thereunder
for the operations described in the permit, in the amounts as follows:
[Amended 7-28-1992]
(1) For all damages, including damages for care and loss of services,
arising out of bodily injury, sickness and disease, including death,
at any time resulting therefrom, sustained by one person in any one
accident: the amount of $100,000.
(2) A total amount of $500,000 for all damages, including those for care
and loss of services, arising out of bodily injury, sickness and disease,
including death, at any time resulting therefrom, sustained by two or
more persons in any accident.
(3) For all damages arising out of injury to or destruction of property
of one or more persons or organizations, including the loss of use
thereof, as the result of any one accident, the amount of $50,000.
§ 169-5 SIGNS § 169-6
159:327
E. Upon the filing of an application and security as aforesaid and payment
of the required fee, the Highway Superintendent shall cause to be
issued, on forms provided by the Town, a permit specifying the nature
and location of the work to be done and the terms and conditions of such
work, which terms and conditions shall be based upon the requirements
within which said work is to be completed, but such time shall not be
longer than one year from the date of said permit. Notwithstanding such
other conditions as may be imposed, it shall be a condition of each
permit issued under this article that the permittee shall, for a period
of one year from the date of issuance of such permit, unless sooner
released from this condition over the written signature of the Highway
Superintendent or his authorized representative, save harmless the
Town of Farmington from any and all claims for penalties and damages
arising from or in consequence of any work performed by or any act or
omission of the applicant under such permit.
F. Upon completion of all work specified on the permit, including the
restoration of any excavation and the removal of any obstruction, the
permittee may present his permit to the Highway Superintendent or his
authorized representative, who shall cause such work to be inspected
and, if the work has been completed to his satisfaction and in accordance
with the terms and conditions of said permit, shall certify thereon as to
the completion of said work and the expiration of said permit.
§ 169-7. Request for restoration by Town; costs.
At the time of the issuance of a permit under this article, an applicant may
request that the Town of Farmington perform such work as is necessary
to restore any excavation or remove any obstruction which is authorized
under said permit and, upon payment by the applicant of a sum which, in
the opinion of the Highway Superintendent, will equal the cost of such work,
said Superintendent may grant such request and so indicate on the permit.
All other conditions of such permit, however, as set forth in § 169-6D above,
shall remain in full force and effect for a period of one year from the date of
such permit. If the actual cost of restoration or removal is greater than the
amount paid by the permittee under this section, the excess amount shall be
billed to the permittee by the Town and shall be payable within 30 days. If
the actual cost is less than the amount so paid, the balance shall be returned
to the permittee by the Town.
§ 169-8. Inspections.
The Highway Superintendent or his authorized representative is
empowered to inspect or cause to have inspected, at any time, any or all
work being done or performed under a permit issued under the provision of
this article.
§ 169-9. Restoration for public safety.
If, in the opinion of the Highway Superintendent, the public safety and
welfare so warrant, he may direct the permittee to restore any excavation
§ 169-6 FARMINGTON CODE § 169-9
159:328
or remove any obstruction within 12 hours of such notice and, if such
excavation is not restored or such obstruction removed within said period,
he may cause such work to be done and the permittee shall be responsible
for the full expense of such work.
§ 169-10. Barricading required.
All excavations made in any part of any street or highway under the control
of or maintained by the Town must be barricaded and illuminated with
colored lights in such a manner as to give full warning of their presence and
be satisfactory to the Highway Superintendent of the Town.
§ 169-11. Public service companies.
A. None of the foregoing provisions of this article shall apply to any work
performed in connection with the maintenance, repair, replacement or
relocation of existing utility poles owned by any public service company
or to the erection of any temporary protective warning signs or devices.
B. Sections 169-8, 169-9 and 169-10 of this article shall not apply to the
initial installation of utility poles owned by any public service company
in connection with the extension of service by such company.
C. Nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent or unduly delay
the making of any necessary excavation or the performance of any work
related thereto by any public service company in the event of emergency,
and, in such cases, such public service company may proceed with such
work without regard for the provisions of this article, provided that,
within a reasonable period of time after the cessation of such emergency
and not longer than 10 days, all provisions of this article shall become
effective with respect to such work.
§ 169-12. Construal of provisions.
Nothing herein contained shall be constructed to relieve any permittee from
any obligations or liabilities to the Town of Farmington or to any other
parties which may be imposed upon him by law.
§ 169-13. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 7-28-1992]
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this article shall
be subject to a fine of not more than $100 for each provision thus violated,
and each day such violation shall continue after notice to the offender shall
be deemed a separate offense.
§ 169-13.1. Enforcement. [Added 3-28-1995]
This article has been specifically designated for enforcement by citations
issued by designated municipal officers or employees, and the citation
hearing procedure established by Chapter 91 of the Farmington Code shall
be followed.
§ 169-9 SIGNS § 169-13.1
159:329

ARTICLE III
Sidewalk Repair
[Adopted 6-26-1956 by Ord. No. 28]
§ 169-14. Inspections authorized; order for repair.
A. The Town Manager of the Town of Farmington be and he hereby is
authorized and directed to inspect or cause to be inspected from time
to time any and all sidewalks located within the Town and to order the
repair or replacement of any sidewalk which any such inspection may
disclose to be defective.
B. Such order shall be mailed certified mail, return receipt requested, to
the record owner of the property upon which such defective sidewalk
shall be situated, shall be directed to him at his address as of record
appears and shall specify a date not less than 30 days from the date
thereof prior to which the order must be complied with within such
specified time, except that said order may be extended for a period
of 30 days by the Town Manager upon good cause shown. [Amended
7-28-1992]
§ 169-15. Contracts for repairs; costs. [Amended 7-28-1992]
The Town Manager is hereby authorized to contract publicly or privately
for such repairs or replacements as such order shall have specified, and
the costs thereby incurred, together with interest at the rate per annum
authorized by law in the case of delinquent property taxes, shall constitute
a debt of such owner to the Town of Farmington and shall constitute a lien
of such premises from the date incurred until paid and may be collected by
any means provided by law for the collection of any tax due to the Town.
§ 169-14 SIGNS § 169-15
159:331

ARTICLE IV
Access to Town-Maintained Roads
[Adopted 2-27-1979 by Ord. No. 77]
§ 169-16. Permit for accessway required.
A. No vehicular accessway not now in existence to roads maintained by the
Town from properties abutting thereto shall be permitted unless written
authorization for a specifically described access is obtained from the
office of the Town Manager. The Town Manager is hereby authorized
to promulgate regulations providing for the procedure to be followed in
applying for such accessway and in issuing a permit. A fee as determined
by the Town Council shall be charged to cover the cost of each
application. [Amended 7-28-1992]
B. A permit for an accessway not now existing shall be required for all
vehicular access to Town-maintained roads. An accessway shall include
private driveways, entrances and exits to and from commercial and
industrial establishments, parking areas, subdivisions and other roads
intersecting with roads maintained by the Town.
§ 169-17. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 7-28-1992]
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this article shall
be subject to a fine of not more than $100 for each provision violated, and
each day that such violation shall continue after notice to the offender shall
be deemed a separate offense.
§ 169-17.1. Enforcement. [Added 3-28-1995]
This article has been specifically designated for enforcement by citations
issued by designated municipal officers or employees, and the citation
hearing procedure established by Chapter 91 of the Farmington Code shall
be followed.
§ 169-18. Responsibility of Town for certain highways.
The Town is presently maintaining all public highways which it recognizes
as public highways and for which it has the responsibility of maintenance.
Any highways located within the Town of Farmington which may have
been public highways sometime in the past but which are not presently
maintained by the Town of Farmington are hereby considered abandoned
for highway purposes, and the Town shall not be responsible for maintaining
such highways or putting them into proper condition to afford public
passage over them.
§ 169-16 SIGNS § 169-18
159:333

ARTICLE V
Fuel Lines in Streets
[Adopted 12-18-1984 by Ord. No. 56]
§ 169-19. Applicability. [Amended 7-28-1992]
Section 29-320 of the General Statutes of Connecticut, as amended, and
regulations governing the storage, use and transportation of flammable
liquids shall apply to all fuel oil lines coming within the scope of this article.
§ 169-20. Minimum depth.
The minimum depth of a fuel oil line in any street within the Town shall be
four feet.
§ 169-21. Filing and approval of certified plans.
A certified plan of the proposed layout of fuel oil lines in streets within
the Town shall be filed and approved by the Town Engineer prior to
commencement of construction of said fuel oil line.
§ 169-22. Installation and backfilling.
The installation of fuel oil lines in streets within the Town and the backfilling
operation relating to the same shall be performed in accordance with
regulations of the Town of Farmington pertaining to construction of roads
and shall be approved by the Town Engineer.
§ 169-23. Completed plans; certificate.
Upon completion of the installation of the fuel oil lines in streets within
the Town, complete plans of the layout and construction of said fuel lines
bearing a certificate that said fuel lines were constructed as shown on said
plan shall be filed with the Town Engineer on reproducible paper or cloth.
§ 169-24. Cash deposit or surety bond. [Amended 7-28-1992]
Prior to final approval of the installation of said fuel oil lines and prior
to acceptance by the Town of any streets in which are located such fuel
oil lines, a cash deposit or a corporate surety bond issued by a surety
company licensed to do business and having a place of business in the
State of Connecticut or such other security deemed satisfactory by the Town
Council in an amount of $25,000 shall be delivered to the Town Manager
to guarantee the proper rebuilding and resurfacing of any Town street in
which excavations may be required to be made to repair or maintain said
fuel oil line. Said bond or such other security as is posted shall be for
a period of five years, at the end of which time such security shall be
renewed for additional periods of five years each, and no owner, developer
or supplier of oil shall be authorized to supply oil or to service such facility
until such security has been duly filed and accepted by the Town. In the
event that the maintenance or repair of said fuel oil line requires excavation
§ 169-19 SIGNS § 169-24
159:335
into a Town street, the Town shall have full recourse against such security
filed with the Town if the street has not been restored to a reasonable
condition as approved by the Town Engineer within a reasonable period
after completion of the repairs or maintenance.
§ 169-25. Liability insurance. [Amended 7-28-1992]
No excavation shall be made in a Town street at any time unless, prior
thereto, a certificate of insurance has been filed by the party responsible
for such excavation making the Town of Farmington an insured under said
party's insurance coverage and protecting the Town against liability of any
nature whatsoever arising from such excavation in an amount of not less
than $500,000 for bodily injury per person and in an amount of not less than
$50,000 for property damage.
§ 169-26. Report on integrity of system.
The owner/operator of the fuel systems governed by this article shall submit
on an annual basis to the Town Engineer certification of the integrity of such
system. This certification shall be prepared by an independent consulting
laboratory, shall describe the testing methods used and shall contain the
conclusions of the consultant as to the condition of the system. Such reports
shall be submitted on or before July 1 of each year.
§ 169-24 FARMINGTON CODE § 169-26
159:336
ARTICLE VI
Snow and Ice Removal
[Adopted 11-24-1987 by Ord. No. 19]
§ 169-27. Time limit for removal.
The owner of any building or land bordering upon any street or public place
within the Town where there is a paved sidewalk shall cause to be removed
from the sidewalk for a width of four feet or the width of the paved surface,
whichever is less, any and all snow within 24 hours after the same shall
have fallen or been deposited thereon, and, with respect to any ice or sleet
deposited thereon, shall, within 24 hours from the time of such deposit,
cause the sidewalk to be made safe and convenient by removing the ice or
sleet therefrom or by covering the same with sand and some other suitable
substance.
§ 169-28. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 7-28-1992]
The owner of any building or lot whose duty under § 169-27 above is to
clear or make safe the sidewalk adjacent thereto who shall violate any
of the provisions of the foregoing section or refuse or neglect to comply
with the same subject to a fine of not more than $100 for each offense. In
each instance, the owner shall be responsible and it shall be no defense
to any prosecution that the owner has contracted with the occupant of the
premises or some other person to remove snow, ice and sleet from the
sidewalk.
§ 169-29. Lien. [Amended 7-28-1992]
Whenever any sidewalk shall be permitted to remain with the deposit
thereon of snow, ice or sleet in violation of § 169-27 above, the Town
Manager may cause such snow and ice or sleet to be removed from the
sidewalk. The total cost of such removal, together with interest per annum
thereon as authorized in the case of delinquent property taxes shall
constitute a lien in favor of the Town against the adjoining property and
shall be and remain a claim against the owner thereof, which claim may be
collected by foreclosing on said lien. Within three months after the cost of
such removal has been incurred, the Town Manager or his designee shall
file in the office of the Town Clerk a certificate describing the property on
which the lien exists and stating the owner of the property, the amount
claimed, the nature of the work and the date of completion thereof. Such
lien shall take precedence over all other liens, mortgages, attachments and
other encumbrances, except as otherwise provided by law. Any such lien
may be foreclosed in the same manner and form as a tax lien.
§ 169-30. Enforcement. [Added 3-28-1995]
This article has been specifically designated for enforcement by citations
issued by designated municipal officers or employees, and the citation
§ 169-27 SIGNS § 169-30
159:337
hearing procedure established by Chapter 91 of the Farmington Code shall
be followed.
§ 169-30 FARMINGTON CODE § 169-30
159:338
ARTICLE VII
Laying Out and Constructing Sidewalks; Assessing Benefits and
Deferring Payment of Assessments
[Adopted 8-22-1995]
§ 169-31. Responsibility for sidewalks.
The Town Manager shall be responsible for laying out, constructing,
repairing and replacing sidewalks and for implementing the process of
assessing special benefits and deferring the payment of such assessments.
§ 169-32. Procedure.
A. Whenever the Town Manager determines that there is a need for the
construction of a new sidewalk or whenever a petition is received
requesting the construction of a new sidewalk and the Town Manager
approves such request, the following procedure for laying out and
constructing the new sidewalk and, if applicable, for assessing the cost
to properties benefiting therefrom, shall be followed.
B. If the Town Manager determines that the construction of a new sidewalk
is substantially for the direct benefit of the Town, the Town Manager may
recommend that all or a portion of the costs of construction be borne by
the Town.
C. The Town Manager also may recommend that payment of all or a portion
of any assessment levied on certain properties benefiting from the
construction of a new sidewalk be deferred until such time as the
property, or applicable portion thereof, shall be built upon, a building
permit issued therefor or a subdivision plan approved for such property,
or, if such property has already been developed, until such time as the
property is sold or title to the property is otherwise transferred.
(1) The Town Manager shall have a map prepared showing the layout
of the proposed sidewalk improvement to include the location of
properties likely to be specially benefited from such improvements
and shall cause such map to be filed in the office of the Town Clerk.
(2) After the map has been filed in the office of the Town Clerk, the
Town Manager shall give notice, by certified mail, return receipt
requested, of the proposed sidewalk improvement and of the date,
time and place of a public hearing on the proposed improvement, to
all persons reasonably affected by such improvement, to include all
owners of properties likely to be specially assessed for the benefit of
such improvements. Such notice shall be given at least 15 days prior
to the date of the hearing. A copy of the notice shall also be published
in a newspaper having a general circulation within the Town, the
date of such publication to be at least seven days prior to the date of
the hearing.
(3) The Town Manager shall preside at the public hearing. He shall
explain the proposed sidewalk improvements, answer questions and
receive comments from those present. The Town Manager shall state
the estimated costs of the sidewalk improvements and how such
costs are likely to be allocated by special assessment against
§ 169-31 SIGNS § 169-32
159:339
properties benefiting from the improvements, and the Town
Manager's recommendation, if any, that assessments for certain
properties benefiting from the improvements be deferred. In
determining the amount of the costs and expenses of sidewalk
improvements to be recovered by special assessments and the
allocation of such costs and expenses among properties benefiting
from the sidewalk improvements, the Town Manager shall, among
other things, consider the following:
(a) Whether the proposed sidewalk is the only sidewalk on the street
or whether there exists a sidewalk on the other side of the street,
and whether or not properties on both sides of the street will be
benefited from the proposed sidewalk improvement.
(b) Whether the proposed sidewalk improvement is of direct benefit
to the Town, such as enabling children in the neighborhood to
walk to school rather than having to be bussed, or improving the
safe circulation of pedestrian and wheelchair traffic.
(c) If the sidewalk improvement will be of some direct benefit to the
Town, what portion of the costs should be borne by the Town.
(4) After the public hearing and after the Town Manager has determined
the extent of the sidewalk improvement and the amount of special
assessments to be made based on the estimated costs, the Town
Manager shall present the total proposal, to include the method
and amount of assessments, and certain properties for which
assessments shall be deferred, to the Council for its approval,
rejection or modification.
(5) If the Council approves the proposed sidewalk improvement, as it
may have been modified, the Town Manager shall cause a notice to
be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to each owner
of property determined to be benefited from the improvement and
against whom a special assessment shall be levied, setting forth
the preliminary amount of the proposed assessment and whether
the proposed assessment shall be deferred until such time as the
property, or applicable portion thereof, shall be built upon, a building
permit issued therefor or a subdivision plan approved for such
property, or, if such property has already been developed, until such
time as the property is sold or title to the property is otherwise
transferred. A copy of such notice shall be recorded in the land
records with respect to each of said properties, which notice shall
constitute a caveat.
(6) The Town Manager shall proceed to have the sidewalk improvement
constructed in accordance with applicable Town procedures.
(7) Assessment procedure; compiling of costs.
(a) If an assessment of properties has been deemed appropriate, the
Town Manager, upon completion of the sidewalk improvement,
shall have the actual costs and expenses compiled and, on the
basis of such total costs, shall:
[1] Assess the properties benefiting from the sidewalk
improvement in a specific amount.
[2] State when payment of the assessments are due.
§ 169-32 FARMINGTON CODE § 169-32
159:340
[3] Give notice to each property owner of said assessment or
deferral of said assessment by certified mail, return receipt
requested.
[4] Publish the assessments in a newspaper having a general
circulation within the Town.
[5] Certify to and record said assessments with respect to each
of said benefiting properties on the land records of the Town,
or in the case of a deferral, place a caveat on the land records
of the Town indicating deferral of the assessment on the
property until the property, or applicable portion thereof,
shall be built upon, a building permit issued therefor or
a subdivision plan approved for such property, or, if such
property has already been developed, until such time as
the property is sold or title to the property is otherwise
transferred, at which time the assessment will be due and
payable.
(b) Actual costs shall include the costs of surveys, plans, legal
expenses, interest (including any interest on borrowings of the
Town), publication costs, costs of construction and any other
costs appurtenant thereto.
(8) Any amount due on any such special assessment shall constitute a
lien upon the property until the amount of such assessment has been
fully paid. All amounts past due shall be subject to an interest charge
at the same rate as charged for delinquent property taxes.
§ 169-32 SIGNS § 169-32
159:341

ARTICLE VIII
Municipal Liability for Ice and Snow on Public Sidewalks
[Adopted 8-26-1997]
§ 169-33. Limitation of liability.
In accordance with C.G.S. Sec. 7-163a, notwithstanding the provisions of
Section 13a-149 or any other General Statute or Special Act, the Town shall
not be liable to any person injured in person or property caused by the
presence of ice or snow on a public sidewalk unless the Town is the owner
or person in possession and control of land abutting such sidewalk, other
than land used as a highway or street, provided that the Town shall be liable
for its affirmative acts with respect to such sidewalk.
§ 169-34. Abutting property owner's liability.
The owner or person in possession and control of land abutting a public
sidewalk shall have the same duty of care with respect to the presence of
ice or snow on such sidewalk toward the portion of the sidewalk abutting
his property as the Town had prior to the effective date of this article
adopted pursuant to the provisions of C.G.S. Sec. 7-163a and shall be liable
to persons injured in person or property where a breach of said duty is the
approximate cause of said injury. No action to recover damages for injury to
the person or to property caused by the presence of ice or snow on a public
sidewalk against a person who owns or is in possession and control of land
abutting a public sidewalk shall be brought but within two years from the
date when the injury is first sustained.
§ 169-33 SIGNS § 169-34
159:343

ARTICLE IX
Illicit Discharges and Connections
[Adopted 7-12-2011]
§ 169-35. Intent and purpose.
A. The purpose of this article is to provide for the health, safety, and
general welfare of the citizens of Farmington through the regulation of
non-stormwater discharges to the storm drainage system. This article
establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into
the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) in order to comply
with requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination
System (NPDES) permit process.
B. The objectives of this article are:
(1) To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the municipal separate
storm sewer system (MS4) by stormwater discharges by any user.
(2) To prohibit Illicit Discharges and Connections to the municipal
separate storm sewer system.
(3) To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance,
monitoring and enforcement procedures necessary to ensure
compliance with this article.
§ 169-36. Applicability.
This article shall apply to all water entering the storm drainage system
generated on any developed or undeveloped lands unless explicitly
exempted by the Town Engineer.
§ 169-37. Designation of administrator.
The Town Engineer is hereby appointed to administer, implement, and
enforce the provisions of this article.
§ 169-38. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs) — Schedules of activities,
prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution
prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other
management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants
directly or indirectly to stormwater, receiving waters, or stormwater
conveyance systems. BMPs also include treatment practices, operating
procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or
water disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage.
CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY — Activities subject to NPDES construction
permits, CT DEP construction permits or Town of Farmington erosion and
sediment control permits. These include construction projects resulting in
land disturbance of 0.5 acre or more. Such activities include but are not
limited to clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition.
§ 169-35 SIGNS § 169-38
159:345
CT DEP — The Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS — Any material, including any substance, waste,
or combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or
physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly
contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health,
safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored,
transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed.
ILLEGAL DISCHARGE — Any direct or indirect non-stormwater discharge
to the storm drainage system, except as exempted in § 169-39 of this article.
ILLICIT CONNECTIONS — An illicit connection is defined as either of the
following:
INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY — Activities subject to NPDES industrial permits as
defined in 40 CFR, Section 122.26(b)(14).
MS4 — Municipal separate storm sewer system.
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES)
STORMWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT — A permit issued by EPA [or by
a state under authority delegated pursuant to 33 U.S.C. § 1342(b)] that
authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States,
whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general areawide
basis.
NON-STORMWATER DISCHARGE — Any discharge to the storm drainage
system that is not composed entirely of stormwater.
PERSON — Except to the extent exempted from this article, any individual,
partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation,
trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility,
cooperative, city, county or other political subdivision of the state, any
interstate body or any other legal entity.
POLLUTANT — Anything which causes or contributes to pollution of air,
water or soil. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints,
varnishes, and solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; nonhazardous
liquid and solid wastes and yard waste; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter,
or other discarded or abandoned objects and accumulations, so that same
may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and
Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which
allows an illegal discharge to enter the storm drainage system,
including but not limited to any conveyances that allow any nonstormwater
discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash
water to enter the storm drainage system and any connections to
the storm drainage system from indoor drains and sinks, regardless
of whether said drain or connection has been previously allowed,
permitted, or approved by the Town; or
A.
Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial
land use to the storm drainage system which has not been documented
in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by the Town.
B.
§ 169-38 FARMINGTON CODE § 169-38
159:346
fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and
pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and
residues that result from constructing a building or structure; and noxious
or offensive matter of any kind.
PREMISES — Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land, whether
improved or unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.
PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER — A professional engineer licensed in the
State of Connecticut.
STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM — Publicly owned facilities by which
stormwater is collected and/or conveyed, including but not limited to any
roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped
storm drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, natural
and man-made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage
structures.
STORMWATER — Any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely
of water from any form of natural precipitation and resulting from such
precipitation.
STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN — A document which
describes best management practices and activities to be implemented by a
person or business to identify sources of pollution or contamination at a site
and the actions to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to stormwater,
stormwater conveyance systems, and/or receiving waters to the maximum
extent practicable.
STORMWATER RUNOFF — That portion of the precipitation (excess
rainfall, snow melt or irrigation) on a drainage area that is discharged from
the area in the form of flow across the surface of the ground.
TOWN ENGINEER — The Town of Farmington Town Engineer or his/her
designee.
TOWN MANAGER — The Town of Farmington Town Manager or his/her
designee.
WASTEWATER — Any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated
stormwater, discharged from a facility.
WATERCOURSE — A permanent or intermittent stream or other body of
water, either natural or man-made, which gathers or carries surface water.
This includes, but is not limited to, lakes, ponds, rivers, and streams.
§ 169-39. Discharges prohibitions.
A. Prohibition of illegal discharges. No person shall discharge or cause to
be discharged into the municipal storm drainage system or watercourses
any materials, including but not limited to pollutants or waters
containing any pollutants that cause or contribute to a violation of
applicable water quality standards, other than stormwater. The
commencement, conduct or continuance of any illegal discharge to the
storm drainage system is prohibited except as described below:
§ 169-38 SIGNS § 169-39
159:347
(1) The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions
established by this article:
(a) Naturally occurring discharges such as rising groundwaters,
uncontaminated groundwater infiltration [as defined at 40 CFR
35.2005(20)], springs, diverted stream flows, and natural
riparian habitat or wetland flows;
(b) Uncontaminated pumped groundwater, foundation or footing
drains (not including active groundwater dewatering systems),
crawl space pumps;
(c) Water line flushing;
(d) Landscape irrigation; and
(e) Fire-fighting activities.
(2) Discharges specified in writing by the Town Engineer as being
necessary to protect health and safety.
(3) Dye testing is an allowable discharge, but requires a verbal
notification to the Town Engineer prior to the time of the test.
(4) The prohibition shall not apply to any non-stormwater discharge
permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order
issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of
the Federal Environmental Protection Agency or CT DEP, provided
that the discharge is in full compliance with all requirements of the
permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations,
and provided that written approval has been granted for any
discharge to the storm drainage system.
B. Prohibition of illegal connections.
(1) The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit
connections to the storm drainage system is prohibited.
(2) This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit
connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection
was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at
the time of connection.
(3) A person is considered to be in violation of this article if the person
connects a line conveying sewage to the MS4, or allows such a
connection to continue.
§ 169-40. Suspension of MS4 access.
A. Suspension due to illicit discharges in emergency situations. The Town
Engineer may, without prior notice, suspend MS4 discharge access to
a person when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or
threatened discharge which presents or may present imminent and
substantial danger to the environment, or to the health or welfare of
persons, or to the MS4 or waters of the United States. If the violator
fails to comply with a suspension order issued in an emergency, the
Town Engineer may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent
or minimize damage to the MS4 or waters of the United States, or to
minimize danger to persons.
B. Suspension due to the detection of illicit discharge.
(1) Any person discharging to the MS4 in violation of this article may
have his/her MS4 access terminated if such termination would abate
§ 169-39 FARMINGTON CODE § 169-40
159:348
or reduce an illicit discharge. The Town Engineer will notify a
violator of the proposed termination of its MS4 access. The violator
may petition the Town Engineer for a reconsideration and hearing.
(2) A person commits an offense if the person reinstates MS4 access
to premises terminated pursuant to this section, without the prior
written approval of the Town Engineer.
§ 169-41. Industrial or construction activity discharges.
Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES
stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such
permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form
acceptable to the Town Engineer prior to the allowing of discharges to the
MS4.
§ 169-42. Monitoring of damages.
A. Applicability. This section applies to all premises that have stormwater
discharges associated with industrial and/or construction activities.
B. Access to premises.
(1) The Town Engineer shall be permitted to enter and inspect premises
subject to regulation under this article as often as may be necessary
to determine compliance with this article. If a discharge has security
measures in force which require proper identification and clearance
before entry into its premises, the discharger shall make the
necessary arrangements to allow access to representatives of the
Town Engineer.
(2) Persons shall allow the Town Engineer ready access to all parts of
the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, examination
and copying of records that must be kept under the conditions of an
NPDES permit to discharge stormwater, and the performance of any
additional duties as defined by state and federal law.
(3) The Town Engineer shall have the right to set up on any premises
such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the Town Engineer
to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the premises' stormwater
discharge.
(4) The Town Engineer has the right to require the discharger to install
monitoring equipment as necessary. The premises' sampling and
monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and
proper operating condition by the discharger at its own expense.
All devices used to measure stormwater flow and quality shall be
calibrated to ensure their accuracy.
(5) Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access
to the premise to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly
removed by the person responsible for maintaining the premises at
the written or oral request of the Town Engineer and shall not be
replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the
person responsible for maintaining the premises.
(6) Unreasonable delays in allowing the Town Engineer access to a
premises is a violation of a stormwater discharge permit and of
this article. A person who is the operator of a premises with a
§ 169-40 SIGNS § 169-42
159:349
NPDES permit to discharge stormwater associated with industrial
activity commits an offense if the person denies the Town Engineer
reasonable access to the premises for the purpose of conducting any
activity authorized or required by this article.
(7) If the Town Engineer has been refused access to any part of the
premises from which stormwater is discharged, and he is able to
demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation
of this article; or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample
as part of a routine inspection and sampling program designed to
verify compliance with this article or any order issued hereunder;
or to protect the overall public health, safety, and welfare of the
community, then the Town Engineer may seek issuance of a search
warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 169-43. Requirement to prevent, control, and reduce stormwater
pollutants by use of best management practices.
The Town Engineer will implement requirements identifying best
management practices for any activity, operation, or facility which may
cause or contribute to pollution or contamination of stormwater, the storm
drainage system, or waters of the United States. The owner or operator of
a commercial or industrial establishment shall provide, at its own expense,
reasonable protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or
other wastes into the municipal storm drainage system or watercourses
through the use of these structural and nonstructural BMPs. Further, any
person responsible for a property or premises which is, or may be, the
source of an illicit discharge may be required to implement, at said person's
expense, additional structural and nonstructural BMPs to prevent the
further discharge of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer
system. Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid NPDES permit
authorizing the discharge of stormwater associated with industrial activity,
to the extent practicable, shall be deemed in compliance with the provisions
of this section. These BMPs shall be part of a stormwater pollution
prevention plan (SWPPP) as necessary for compliance with the
requirements of the NPDES permit.
§ 169-44. Watercourse protection.
Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such
person's lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within
the property free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and other obstacles
that would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow of water
through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain
existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse,
so that such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function, or
physical integrity of the watercourse.
§ 169-42 FARMINGTON CODE § 169-45
159:350
§ 169-45. Notification of spills.
Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person
responsible for a facility or operation has information of any known or
suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in illegal
discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the storm drainage
system, or waters of the United States, said person shall take all necessary
steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release.
In the event of such release of hazardous materials, said person shall
immediately notify emergency response agencies of the occurrence.
Additionally, in the event of a release of hazardous and/or nonhazardous
materials, said person shall notify the Town Engineer in person or by phone
no later than the next business day. Notifications in person or by phone
shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the Town
Engineer within three business days of the phone notice. If the discharge of
prohibited materials emanates from commercial or industrial activities, the
owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written
record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence.
Such records shall be retained for at least three years.
§ 169-46. Enforcement.
A. Notice of violation.
(1) Whenever the Town Engineer finds that a person has violated a
prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this article, he shall
order compliance by written notice of violation to the responsible
person. Such notice may require, without limitation:
(a) The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
(b) The elimination of illicit discharges or connections;
(c) That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease
and desist;
(d) The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected
property; and
(e) The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs.
(2) If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property
are required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which
such remediation or restoration must be completed. Said notice
shall further advise that, should the violator fail to remediate or
restore within the established deadline, the work will be done by a
designated governmental agency or a contractor and the expense
thereof shall be charged to the violator.
B. Procedure for issuance of citations.
(1) The Town Manager shall issue a written notice to any person who
violates any provision of this article. No written notice may be issued
against the state or any state official or employee acting within
the scope of his/her employment. Such written notice shall explain
the nature of the violation and the steps required for compliance,
and shall allow a seventy-two-hour period within which to correct
the violation or within which a written plan for correction shall be
submitted to the Town Manager, setting forth a reasonable time
§ 169-45 SIGNS § 169-46
159:351
period for correction of the violation as agreed upon by the Town
Manager. A written notice issued pursuant to this subsection shall
be served: 1) by hand delivery, at which time the seventy-two-hour
period shall begin; or 2) by certified mail, return receipt requested,
and by regular first class mail. Three (3) business days shall be
allowed for mail delivery of the notice prior to the commencement of
the seventy-two-hour period.
(2) Within two (2) business days after the period for correction
established in Subsection A expires, the Town Engineer shall
reinspect the subject property to determine compliance.
(3) If the violations set forth in the written notice have not been
corrected at the time of reinspection, the Town Manager, in his/her
capacity as chief executive officer, shall issue a citation and fine in
the amount of $250.00 for each violation by hand, by certified mail,
return receipt requested, by leaving a true and attested copy of the
citation at the usual place of abode or residence of the person in
violation, or in the case of a corporate or business entity, delivery
to the business address or the address of the statutory agent of
said entity. No such fine shall be levied against the state or any
state official or state employee acting within the scope of his/her
employment. All citations issued pursuant to this section shall state
the violation for which the citation is being issued, the fine imposed
for the violation, the time period within which the fine must be paid,
and an address for remittance of the fine.
C. Compliance periods after citation.
(1) Any violation for which a citation is issued and which is not corrected
within the time period specified in Subsection B shall be a new
violation of this article, and every twenty-four-hour period thereafter
in which the violation is not corrected shall constitute a new
violation. The citation shall include a notice to the alleged violator
that each twenty-four-hour period of noncompliance after the time
period specified in Subsection B shall constitute a new violation and
a new fine of $250.00.
(2) The Town Manager shall not be responsible for a daily reinspection.
Rather, the person to whom the citation has been issued shall be
responsible for reporting subsequent compliance by way of written
report to the Town Manager. The Town Manager shall reinspect to
confirm compliance within one (1) business day of receipt of such
report.
D. Payment of fines.
(1) All fines imposed under this article which are uncontested shall
be made payable to the Town of Farmington and shall be received
by the Town Manager within ten (10) business days from receipt
of the citation. All fines collected by the Town Manager shall be
directed to the Town Finance Director to be deposited into the Town
of Farmington General Fund.
(2) If no payment is received for any fine imposed under this article
within the time allowed for payment, then the Town Manager shall
§ 169-46 FARMINGTON CODE § 169-46
159:352
act in accordance with the procedures established in Chapter 91 of
the Code of the Town of Farmington.
E. Remedies not exclusive. The remedies listed in this article are not
exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal,
state, or local law and it is within the discretion of the Town Engineer to
seek cumulative remedies.
§ 169-47. Hearing procedure for citation.
The procedure for admitting liability to a violation under this article, and
the hearing procedure for any citation issued pursuant to this article, shall
be in accordance with the provisions set forth in Chapter 91 of the Code of
the Town of Farmington.
§ 169-48. Appeals.
Any person or entity aggrieved by a finding, determination, notice, order
or action taken under the provisions of this article may appeal and shall be
advised of his/her right to appeal in accordance with the provisions set forth
in Chapter 91 of the Code of the Town of Farmington.
§ 169-49. Miscellaneous.
The penalties established by this article shall not be exclusive of any other
enforcement remedy which may be imposed by the Town Manager, or his/
her designee, for violations of this article, as authorized by any state statute,
Town ordinance, or the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations, of
the Town of Farmington or otherwise any other penalty that may be imposed
by any local, state or federal agency.
§ 169-50. Savings clause.
The enactment of this article shall not operate as an abatement of any action
or proceeding previously taken, now pending, or taken prior to the effective
date of this article. All said actions and proceedings are hereby ratified to
be continued.
§ 169-51. Severability.
All provisions of the Town Code in conflict herewith are hereby repealed
and if, for any reason, any word, clause, paragraph, or section of this article
shall be held to make the same unconstitutional, this article shall not hereby
be invalidated and the remainder of the ordinance shall continue in effect.
Any provision herein which is in conflict with the Connecticut General
Statutes is hereby repealed, it being understood that said statutes shall take
precedence over this article.
§ 169-52. Statutory authorization.
The Legislature of the State of Connecticut has, in Title 7, Chapter 98,
Section 7-148(c)(7), of the General Statutes, delegated the responsibility
§ 169-46 SIGNS § 169-52
159:353
to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the
public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry.
§ 169-53. Effective date.
This article shall become effective ten (10) days after publication in a
newspaper having a circulation in Farmington.
§ 169-52 FARMINGTON CODE § 169-53
159:354
Chapter 172
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 83.
Housing standards — See Ch. 118.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 169.
Zoning regulations — See Ch. 197.
Chapter 174
SWIMMING POOLS, PRIVATE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Hearing procedures for citations — See Ch.
78.
§ 174-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate all private swimming pools
located within the Town which contain at least 24 inches of water in depth
at any point by requiring a fence not less than four feet above the ground to
enclose the pool.
§ 174-2. Requirements.
A. Every person owning land on which there is situated a swimming pool,
which contains 24 inches (610 millimeters) or more of water in depth
at any point, shall erect and maintain thereon an adequate enclosure,
either surrounding the property or pool area, sufficient to make such
body of water inaccessible to small children. Such enclosure, including
gates therein, shall be not less than four feet (1,219 millimeters) above
the underlying ground. All gates shall be self-closing and self-latching
with latches placed four feet (1,219 millimeters) above the underlying
ground and otherwise made inaccessible from the outside to small
children.
B. This chapter shall become effective on October 1, 1994, so as to provide
pool owners not in compliance with the above provisions a reasonable
time to come into compliance.
§ 174-3. Penalties for offenses.
A. The owner of any private swimming pool not in compliance with any of
the above provisions on and after October 1, 1994, shall be in violation
of this chapter. Any person violating this chapter shall be fined $100 for
each day that such pool is not in compliance with the above provisions.
B. Town officials and employees specifically designated by the Town
Manager shall issue citations for violations of any of the provisions set
forth above. Fines for violations of this chapter shall be effective as of
§ 169-53 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS § 174-3
172:355
the 30th day following the date of the citation; provided, however, that
if within 30 days after the date of the citation the owner substantiates
to the Town Manager or his designee that action has been initiated to
comply with this chapter within a reasonable time period, such fines
shall not become effective unless and until the Town Manager
determines that the owner is no longer making a good-faith effort to
comply with this chapter within that time period and provides written
notice to the owner of such determination.
§ 174-4. Hearing procedure for citations.
The hearing procedure for any citations issued for violations of the above
regulations shall be the procedure set forth in § 78-4 of Chapter 78 of
the Code of the Town of Farmington, and the violator of any of the above
regulations shall be substituted for the words "owner or keeper" in said
§ 78-4.
Chapter 176
TAXATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Tax bills — See Charter, § C9-9.
Assessment and collection of taxes — See
Charter, § C9-10.
Fire Department — See Ch. 29.
§ 174-3 FARMINGTON CODE § 174-4
174:356
ARTICLE I
Low- and Moderate-Income Housing Tax Abatement
[Adopted 8-24-1971 by Ord. No. 64]
§ 176-1. Authority of Town Manager to enter into contracts.
[Amended 7-28-1992]
The Town Manager is hereby authorized and empowered to enter into a
contract on behalf of the Town of Farmington on terms and conditions
stated in § 176-2 of this article with any owner of housing, the construction
or rehabilitation of which shall have been commenced after July 1, 1971,
and which housing is solely for low- or moderate-income persons or families,
for the abatement, in whole or in part, of real property taxes on such
housing.
§ 176-2. Contract provisions.
A. Said contract shall be subject to approval by the Town Council.
B. Moneys equal to the amount of such abatement shall be used solely for
one or more of the following purposes:
(1) To reduce rents below the levels which would be achieved in the
absence of such abatement.
(2) To improve the quality and design of such housing.
(3) To effect occupancy of such housing by persons and families of
varying income levels within limits determined by the State
Commissioner of Housing.
(4) To provide necessary related facilities and services in such housing.
C. Said abatement shall terminate at any time when such housing is not
solely for low- or moderate-income persons or families or when said
housing ceases to fulfill the purposes stated in Subsection B above or
the purposes stated in C.G.S. §§ 8-215 and 8-216, as said sections may
be amended.
D. The owner shall give all assurances required by the Town Manager and
by the Commissioner of Housing that the amount of the tax abatement
shall be used for the purposes stated in C.G.S. §§ 8-215 and 8-216, as
said sections may be amended.
E. The owner shall permit the Town Manager and the Commissioner of
Housing to inspect said premises are being used for the purposes stated
in Subsection B and stated in C.G.S. §§ 8-215 and 8-216, as said sections
may be amended.
F. The Town Manager shall review the use being made of the premises
annually to confirm that the purposes set forth in Subsection B above
are being fulfilled.
G. Said abatement shall continue for a specified number of years not to
exceed 50.
H. The contract shall state whether or not it shall be subject to approval
by the Commissioner of Housing in order to qualify the Town for
reimbursement in the form of a grant-in-aid by the State of Connecticut,
pursuant to C.G.S. §§ 8-215 and 8-216, as said sections may be amended,
for the amount of tax abatement provided under said contract.
§ 176-1 SWIMMING POOLS, PRIVATE § 176-2
174:357
I. Such other terms and provisions not inconsistent with C.G.S. §§ 8-215
and 8-216, as said sections may be amended, may be included as deemed
appropriate.
§ 176-2 FARMINGTON CODE § 176-2
174:358
ARTICLE II
Exemption for Tax-Exempt Institutions
[Adopted 10-23-1973 by Ord. No. 68]
§ 176-3. Effective date.
Pursuant to C.G.S. § 12-81(b), the property tax exemption authorized by any
of Subsections (7) to (16), inclusive, of C.G.S. § 12-81 shall be effective as
of the date of acquisition of the property to which the exemption applies.
When the adjustment for taxes between the seller and buyer is made on the
fiscal-year basis, the exemption for the purposes of this article shall also
be made on a fiscal-year basis. When the tax-exempt organization has paid
a tax for a period subsequent to the date of acquisition of the property or
when the tax-exempt organization has reimbursed the prior owner for taxes
paid by said prior owner for a period subsequent to the date of acquisition
of the property, the Collector of Revenue of the Town of Farmington is
authorized and directed to reimburse the tax-exempt organization for all
such payments made by it for a period subsequent to the date of acquisition
of the property.
§ 176-4. Effect on certain prior taxes.
This article shall have no effect on taxes prior to those on the list of October
1, 1972.
§ 176-3 SWIMMING POOLS, PRIVATE § 176-4
174:359

ARTICLE III
Ambulance-Type Vehicles Exemption36
[Adopted 7-24-1990 by Ord. No. 93]
§ 176-5. Exemption granted.
Pursuant to C.G.S. § 12-81c, an exemption from personal property taxation
is provided for any ambulance-type motor vehicle which is used exclusively
for the purpose of transporting a medically incapacitated individual, except
any such vehicle used to transport any such individual for payment.
§ 176-6. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AMBULANCE-TYPE VEHICLE — Includes a vehicle equipped with special
hand controls or with other adaptations to assist physically disabled drivers
or passengers.
§ 176-7. Intent.
It is the intent of this article that physically disabled persons requiring
special adaptations to a motor vehicle either to drive said vehicle or to be
transported by such vehicle shall be entitled to a personal property tax
exemption for said vehicle.
§ 176-8. Application; continuance of exemption.
An applicant for a personal property tax exemption pursuant to this article
shall file an application with the Assessor on or before the annual
assessment date (October 1). Such exemption shall continue from year to
year so long as the vehicle is being used for the above-stated purpose.
36.Editor's Note: Former Art. III, Solar Energy Exemption, adopted 12-21-1976 by Ord. No.
75, was repealed 3-9-2004. This ordinance also renumbered former Art. IV, §§ 176-6
through 176-9, as Art. III, §§ 176-5 through 176-8.
§ 176-5 SWIMMING POOLS, PRIVATE § 176-8
174:361

ARTICLE IV
Property Tax Relief for Elderly Homeowners (Local Option)37
[Amended 3-9-2004; 9-11-2007]
§ 176-9. Credit granted; purpose.
The Town of Farmington hereby enacts a tax credit for elderly homeowners
pursuant to § 12-129n of the Connecticut General Statutes, as it may be
amended from time to time, for eligible residents of the Town of Farmington,
on the terms and conditions provided herein. This program is enacted for
the purpose of assisting elderly homeowners with a portion of the costs of
real property taxation.
§ 176-10. Eligibility.
A. An applicant shall meet the following criteria to be eligible for this program:
(1) Such person is 65 years or over at the close of the preceding calendar
year, or whose spouse, residing with said person, is 65 years of age or
over at the close of the preceding calendar year or 60 years of age or over
and the surviving spouse of a taxpayer qualified in Farmington under this
program at the time of his or her death, or any person, regardless of age
who is permanently and totally disabled as determined in accordance with
§ 12-129n of the Connecticut General Statutes; and
(2) Such person owns real property as of the assessment date in the Town
of Farmington or is liable for the payment of taxes thereon under § 12-48
of the Connecticut General Statutes, and occupies that property as his
or her principal residence for more than 182 days per year. [Amended
2-10-2009]
(3) Such person is not delinquent in the payment of property taxes to the
Town as of June 30th, the end of the most recent fiscal year. [Amended
2-10-2009]
B. The above shall be eligible for real property tax relief as set forth in
§ 176-10B(3) below, provided all of the following conditions are met:
(1) Such person has been a taxpayer of the Town of Farmington for a period of
three years immediately preceding taxpayer's receipt of tax benefits under
this section, and meets the maximum allowable income requirements as stated
in § 176-10B(3) below during the calendar year preceding the year in which
application is made for the tax relief provided by this section.
(2) Such person has applied for and is eligible for the elderly tax relief program
available from the State of Connecticut pursuant to Connecticut General
Statutes § 12-170aa, as it may be amended from time to time. Also provided
that one who is eligible for the state program in all respects except that his
or her income exceeds the income limits of the state program may qualify in
accordance with Subsection B(3) below. [Amended 2-10-2009]
(3) For the purpose of this program, the income limits and corresponding tax relief
benefits shall be on a sliding scale to match the State of Connecticut tax relief
program as follows: [Amended 2-9-2016]
37.Editor's Note: Former Art. IV, Day-Care Exemption, adopted 11-27-1990 by Ord. No. 94,
was repealed 3-9-2004. This ordinance also renumbered former Art. V, §§ 176-16 through
176-20, as Art. IV, §§ 176-9 through 176-13.
§ 176-9 SWIMMING POOLS, PRIVATE § 176-10
174:363
Married Joint Qualifying Income (Preceding Calendar Year)
Over Not Exceeding Tax Reduction
$0 $17,600 $1,250 to $400
$17,600 $23,600 $1,000 to $350
$23,600 $29,500 $750 to $250
$29,500 $35,200 $500 to $250
$35,200 $42,900 $250 to $150
$41,200* $48,900* $250 to $150*
Individual Qualifying Income (Preceding Calendar Year)
Over Not Exceeding Tax Reduction
$0 $17,600 $1,000 to $350
$17,600 $23,600 $750 to $250
$23,600 $29,500 $500 to $150
$29,500 $35,200 $250 to $150
$35,200* $41,200* $250 to $150*
*Effective with the October 1, 2015 Grand List, the income limits shall be
adjusted to be the same as for the state program, except that the maximum
state income levels shall be increased by $6,000.
§ 176-11. Application.
Applications for benefits under this program shall:
A. Be made on forms provided by the Town Assessor or the Town of
Farmington and shall be accompanied by a copy of the applicant's most
recent federal tax returns or other documentation of all income.
B. Be filed with the Assessor of the Town of Farmington at any time between
February 1 and May 15 of each year to obtain a tax credit for the next
fiscal year. All approved applicants will be required to reapply biennially
with the Town Assessor.
§ 176-12. Computation of benefits.
A. The Assessor of the Town of Farmington shall determine whether each
applying taxpayer is entitled to a tax credit under this program and
shall compute the amount of tax credit to which each qualified taxpayer
is entitled and advise the Tax Collector in what amount to reduce the
amount of the tax levied against the taxpayer.
B. The total of all elderly tax credits granted on any one property shall not
exceed 75% of the annual property taxes levied on said property in any
fiscal year.
C. If, during a tax year, a qualifying taxpayer dies, leaving a spouse who
would also qualify under this program, the surviving spouse shall be
entitled to receive the remaining benefits for that tax year. Otherwise,
§ 176-10 FARMINGTON CODE § 176-12
174:364
the benefit shall be removed from the property at the time of death.
[Amended 2-10-2009]
D. If any person entitled to the tax credit pursuant to this program sells
the property on which the tax credit is granted, no additional tax credit
shall be allowed for his or her interest in the property for any fiscal
years commencing after the date of such sale of the property, and
provided further that the purchaser of the property shall pay the Town
of Farmington a prorated share to the tax credit on an October 1 Grand
List basis. [Amended 2-10-2009; 2-9-201638]
§ 176-13. Administration of program and amendments.
A. The Town Assessor is hereby authorized to implement this program, and
to adopt such rules and regulations as may be necessary for the proper
administration of this program, with the consent and approval of the
Town Manager. He or she may designate agents to act in his or her name
in collecting applications for this program.
B. The Town of Farmington hereby waives any lien rights given to it by
§ 12-129n of the Connecticut General Statutes.
C. Persons aggrieved by any act or determination of the Town Assessor
under this program may appeal to the Board of Assessment Appeals.
D. The Town Assessor, with the approval of the Town Manager, is hereby
authorized to adopt regulations modifying this program so as to conform
with changes in state law as it affects this program, without returning to
the Town legislative body, providing the Town Assessor may not reduce
or eliminate benefits as herein provided, and shall publish changes in the
same manner as prescribed by law for the publication of programs, and
those changes shall become effective 30 days after such publication.
E. This program will be effective with the Grand List of October 1, 2007,
and thereafter.39
§ 176-14. (Reserved)40
38.Note: This amendment to the Town Property Tax Relief for Elderly Homeowners (Local
Option) shall be effective for the Grand List of 2015 and thereafter.
39.Editor's Note: Former § 176-21, Sunset termination of program, which immediately
followed this subsection, was repealed 6-26-2001.
40.Editor's Note: Former § 176-14, Additional tax credit reduction, was repealed 2-10-2009.
§ 176-12 SWIMMING POOLS, PRIVATE § 176-14
174:365

ARTICLE V
Property Tax Relief for Volunteer Fire Fighters
[Adopted 1-28-2003; amended 1-27-2004]
§ 176-15. Abatement granted; purpose.
The Town of Farmington hereby enacts a tax abatement for volunteer fire
fighters in the Town of Farmington, on the terms and conditions provided
herein. This program is enacted for the purpose of encouraging
volunteerism as members of the Fire Department, assisting eligible
volunteer fire fighter property owners with a portion of the costs of property
taxation.
§ 176-16. Eligibility; amount of abatement.
A. A volunteer fire fighter shall attend and participate in at least 15 drills
and have successfully completed training in all of the OSHA-mandated
subject areas listed below:
(1) Incident command.
(2) Hazardous materials.
(3) Infectious disease control.
(4) Safety and protective equipment.
(5) Chemistry of fire and behavior.
(6) Self-contained breathing apparatus.
(7) Fire streams.
(8) Hose.
(9) Pumping fire apparatus.
(10) Ladders.
(11) Rescue.
(12) Forcible entry.
(13) Ventilation.
(14) Emergency vehicle operations.
(15) Live fire training.
B. Volunteer fire fighters who meet the above-listed training requirements
and respond to:
(1) One hundred eighty (180) to two hundred forty-nine (249) calls
during the year would be eligible for a tax abatement of $500.
(2) Two hundred fifty (250) or more calls during the year would be
eligible for a tax abatement of $1,000.
C. For the purposes of such calculations, call totals and drill attendance
shall be determined on the period of time commencing on November 1
and running through October 31 of each year.
§ 176-17. Application.
Applications for benefits under this program shall be:
A. Made on forms provided by the Tax Collector of the Town of Farmington
and shall include the permanent ID # for all real estate for which taxes
shall be abated. Fire fighters without real estate tax liability shall include
§ 176-15 SWIMMING POOLS, PRIVATE § 176-17
174:367
the year, make, model, and plate number of any motor vehicle for which
they have tax liability.
B. Certified by the Director of Fire and Rescue Services between January
1 and February 28 of each year and filed with the Tax Collector of the
Town of Farmington at any time between February 1 and March 31 of
each year in order to obtain a tax abatement for the next fiscal year.
§ 176-18. Administration of program and amendments; effective
date.
A. The Tax Collector is hereby authorized to implement this program, and
to adopt such rules and regulations as may be necessary for the proper
administration of this program, with the consent and approval of the
Town Manager.
B. The Tax Collector, with the approval of the Town Manager, is hereby
authorized to adopt regulations modifying this program so as to conform
with changes in state law as it affects this program, without returning to
the Town legislative body, providing the Tax Collector may not increase,
reduce or eliminate benefits as herein provided, and shall publish
changes in the same manner as prescribed by law for the publication of
such programs, and those changes shall become effective 30 days after
such publication.
C. This amended program will be effective with the tax bill of July 1, 2005,
and thereafter.
§ 176-19. Reciprocity.
The Town Manager is authorized to enter into interlocal agreements with
other municipalities for the purpose of providing tax relief to volunteer fire
fighters who live in one municipality but who volunteer their services in
another municipality.
§ 176-17 FARMINGTON CODE § 176-19
174:368
ARTICLE VI
Property Tax Exemption for Qualifying Veterans and Their Surviving
Spouses
[Adopted 3-9-2004]
§ 176-20. Purpose. [Amended 2-9-2016]
The purpose of this article is to authorize the additional property tax
exemptions permitted by C.G.S. § 12-81f and C.G.S. § 12-81g(b) for
qualifying veterans and their surviving spouses.
§ 176-21. Exemption authorized. [Amended 2-9-2016]
A. Effective for the assessment year commencing October 1, 2004, and
each assessment year thereafter, the additional property tax exemption
permitted by C.G.S. § 12-81f applicable to the assessed value of property
up to the amount of $5,000 is hereby authorized for veterans and their
spouses described herein. Any veteran entitled to an exemption from
property tax in accordance with C.G.S. § 12-81(19) or any veteran's
surviving spouse entitled to an exemption from property tax in
accordance with C.G.S. § 12-81(22) shall be entitled to an additional
exemption applicable to the assessed value of property up to the amount
of $5,000, provided such veteran or such surviving spouse meets all of
the requirements of C.G.S. §§ 12-81f and 12-81l.
B. Effective for the assessment year commencing October 1, 2015 and
each assessment year thereafter, any veteran entitled to an exemption
from property tax in accordance with C.G.S. § 12-81g(b), who has a
disability rating of one hundred percent, as determined by the United
States Department of Veterans Affairs, shall be entitled to an additional
exemption from such tax in an amount equal to three times the amount
of exemption pursuant to C.G.S § 12-81(20), provided such veteran's
total adjusted gross income as determined for purposes of the federal
income tax, plus any other income not included in such adjusted income,
excluding veterans' disability payments, individually if unmarried, or
jointly with spouse if married, during the calendar year ending
immediately preceding the filing of a claim for any such exemption, is
not more than twenty-one thousand dollars if such veteran is married or
not more than eighteen thousand dollars if such veteran is not married.
§ 176-22. through § 176-23. (Reserved)41
41.Editor’s Note: Former § 176-22, Grand List effective date, was repealed 2-9-2016.
§ 176-20 SWIMMING POOLS, PRIVATE § 176-22
174:369

ARTICLE VII
Elderly Tax Freeze Program
[Adopted 9-11-2007]
§ 176-24. Establishment of elderly tax freeze program and
qualifications.
A tax freeze program is hereby established pursuant to the provisions of
Sections 1 and 2 of Public Act No. 06-176, effective October 1, 2006, and
applicable to assessment years commencing on or after October 1, 2007, as
follows:
A. Any owner as of October 1 of real property or any tenant for life or for a
term of years liable for property taxes under § 12-48 of the Connecticut
General Statutes who meets the qualifications stated in Subsection B
of this section, shall be entitled to pay the tax levied on such property,
calculated in accordance with the provisions of § 176-25 for the first
year the claim for such tax relief is filed and approved in accordance
with the provisions of this section, and such person shall be entitled to
continue to pay the amount of such tax or such lesser amount as may be
levied in any year, during each subsequent year that such person meets
such qualifications, and the surviving spouse of such owner or tenant,
qualified in accordance with the requirements pertaining to a surviving
spouse in this section, or any owner or tenant possessing a joint interest
in such property with such owner at the time of such owner's death
and qualified at such time in accordance with the requirements in this
section, shall be entitled to continue to pay the amount of such tax
or such lesser amount as may be levied in any year, as it becomes
due each year following the death of such owner for as long as such
surviving spouse or joint owner or joint tenant is qualified in accordance
with the requirements in this section. After the first year a claim for
such tax relief is filed and approved, application for such tax relief
shall be filed biennially on a form prepared for such purpose by the
Assessor of the Town of Farmington. Any such owner or tenant who is
qualified in accordance with this section and any such surviving spouse
or joint owner or joint tenant surviving upon the death of such owner
or tenant, shall be entitled to pay such tax in the amount as provided in
§ 176-25, for so long as such owner or tenant or such surviving spouse
or joint owner or joint tenant continues to be so qualified. [Amended
2-10-2009]
B. To qualify for the tax relief provided in this section a taxpayer shall meet
all the following requirements:
(1) On December 31st of the calendar year preceding the year in which
a claim is filed, be:
(a) Eighty years of age or over;
(b) The spouse of a person, 80 years of age or over, provided such
spouse is domiciled with such person; or
(c) Sixty-two years of age or over and the surviving spouse of a
taxpayer who at the time of such taxpayer's death had qualified
and was entitled to tax relief under this section, provided such
§ 176-24 SWIMMING POOLS, PRIVATE § 176-24
174:371
surviving spouse was domiciled with such taxpayer at the time of
the taxpayer's death;
(2) Occupy such real property as his or her home;
(3) Either spouse shall have been a taxpayer of the Town of Farmington
for at least three years before filing the claim under this section; and
[Amended 2-10-2009]
(4) The taxable and nontaxable income of such taxpayer, the total of
which shall hereinafter be called "qualifying income", in the tax
year of such homeowner ending immediately preceding the date of
application for benefits under the program in this section, was not in
excess of limits set forth in § 12-170aa of the 2006 supplement to the
Connecticut General Statutes, and as is thereafter adjusted annually,
evidence of which income shall be submitted to the Assessor of the
Town of Farmington in such form and manner as the Assessor may
prescribe. The amount of any Medicaid payments made on behalf
of such homeowner or the spouse of such homeowner shall not
constitute income. The income of the spouse of such homeowner
shall not be included in the qualifying income of such homeowner for
purposes of determining eligibility for tax relief under this section if
such spouse is a resident of a health care or nursing home facility in
this state and such facility receives payment related to such spouse
under the Title XIX Medicaid program.
§ 176-25. Calculation of tax freeze benefit. [Amended 2-10-2009;
2-9-2016]
A. The freeze benefit is available to married applicants with a total gross
income not to exceed the maximum income levels as indicated in the
Town's Tax Credit Program. For initial year applicants, the benefit is
calculated by first applying the total percentage of property ownership
multiplied by the property's gross assessment, minus all exemptions to
the property, then multiplying by the mil rate to arrive at the base benefit
amount. Once the base rate is set, the tax on the real property for which
the benefits under this section are claimed shall be the lower of: the tax
due with respect to the homeowner's residence for the assessment year
commencing October first of the year immediately preceding the year in
which the initial application for tax relief is made, or the tax due for any
subsequent assessment year not to exceed the annual maximum benefit
set by the State of Connecticut Elderly Tax Relief Program. If title to real
property is recorded in the name of the person or the spouse making a
claim and qualifying under this section and any other person or persons,
the claimant hereunder shall be entitled to pay the claimant's fractional
share of the tax on such property calculated in accordance with the
provisions of this section, and such other person or persons shall pay
the person's or persons' fractional share of the tax without regard for
the provisions of this section. For the purposes of this section, a "mobile
manufactured home", as defined in § 12-63a of the Connecticut General
Statutes, shall be deemed to be real property.
B. If any person with respect to whom a claim for tax relief in accordance
with § 176-24 of this article has been approved for any assessment year
§ 176-24 FARMINGTON CODE § 176-25
174:372
dies, transfers, assigns, grants or otherwise conveys during such Grand
List year, the interest in real property to which such claim for tax relief
is related, regardless of whether such death, transfer, assignment, grant
or conveyance is voluntary or involuntary, the amount of such tax relief
benefit, determined as the amount by which the tax payable without
benefit of this section exceeds the tax payable under the provisions
of this section, shall be a pro rata portion of the amount otherwise
applicable in such Grand List year to be determined by a fraction the
numerator of which shall be the number of full months from the first day
of October in such Grand List year to the date of such conveyance and
the denominator of which shall be twelve. If such conveyance occurs in
the month of September, the grantor shall be disqualified for such tax
relief in such Grand List year. The grantee shall be required within a
period not exceeding ten days immediately following the date of such
conveyance to notify the Assessor thereof, or in the absence of such
notice, upon determination by the Assessor that such transfer,
assignment, grant or conveyance has occurred, the Assessor shall
determine the amount of tax relief benefit to which the grantor is entitled
for such assessment year with respect to the interest in real property
conveyed and notify the Tax Collector of the reduced amount of such
benefit. Upon receipt of such notice from the Assessor, the Tax Collector
shall, if such notice is received after the tax due date in the municipality,
no later than ten days thereafter, mail or hand a bill to the grantee
stating the additional amount of tax due as determined by the Assessor.
Such tax shall be due and payable and collectible as other property
taxes and subject to the same liens and processes of collection, provided
such tax shall be due and payable in an initial or single installment not
sooner than thirty days after the date such bill is mailed or handed to the
grantee and in equal amounts in any remaining, regular installments as
the same are due and payable.
§ 176-26. Application procedures.
A. No tax relief shall be accepted under § 176-24 unless the taxpayer or
authorized agent of such taxpayer files an application with the Assessor
of the Town of Farmington, in such form and manner as the Assessor may
prescribe, during the period from February first to and including May
fifteenth of any year in which benefits are first claimed, including such
information as is necessary to substantiate such claim in accordance
with requirements in such application. A taxpayer may make application
to the Assessor prior to April 15th of the claim year for an extension
of the application period. The Assessor may grant such extension in
the case of extenuating circumstance due to illness or incapacitation as
evidenced by a physician's certificate to that extent, or if the Assessor
determines there is good cause for doing so. The taxpayer shall present
to the Assessor a copy of such taxpayer's federal income tax return
and the federal income tax return of such taxpayer's spouse, if filed
separately, for such taxpayer's taxable year ending immediately prior to
the submission of the taxpayer's application, or if not required to file
a federal income tax return, such other evidence of qualifying income
§ 176-25 SWIMMING POOLS, PRIVATE § 176-26
174:373
in respect to such taxable year as the Assessor may require. Each
such application, together with the federal income tax return and any
other information submitted in relation thereto, shall be examined by
the Assessor and a determination shall be made as to whether the
application is approved. Upon determination by the Assessor that the
applying homeowner is entitled to tax relief in accordance with the
provisions of § 176-24, the Assessor shall notify the homeowner and
the Municipal Tax Collector of the approval of such application. The
Municipal Tax Collector shall determine the maximum amount of the
tax due with respect to such homeowner's residence and thereafter
the property tax with respect to such homeowner's residence shall not
exceed such amount. After a taxpayer's claim for the first year has been
filed and approved such taxpayer shall file such an application biennially.
In respect to such application required after the filing and approval for
the first year the Assessor shall notify each such taxpayer concerning
application requirements by regular mail not later than February 15th
of the assessment year in which such taxpayer is required to reapply,
enclosing a copy of the required application form. Such taxpayer may
submit such application to the Assessor by mail provided it is received
by the Assessor not later than March 15th in the assessment year with
respect to which such tax relief is claimed. Not later than April 15th
of such year the Assessor shall notify, by mail, any such taxpayer for
whom such application was not received by said April 15th concerning
application requirements and such taxpayer shall submit not later than
May 15th such application personally or for reasonable cause, by a
person acting in behalf of such taxpayer as approved by the Assessor.
[Amended 2-10-2009]
B. Any person knowingly making a false application for the purpose of
claiming property tax relief under § 176-24 and this section shall be fined
not more than five hundred dollars. Any person who fails to disclose
all matters relating thereto or with intent to defraud makes a false
statement shall refund to the municipality all tax relief improperly taken.
§ 176-27. Establishment of lien and interest for unpaid taxes.
The Town of Farmington may establish a lien on such property in the
amount of the total tax relief granted, plus interest applicable to the total
of unpaid taxes represented by such tax relief, at a rate to be determined
by such municipality. Any such lien shall have a priority in the settlement of
such person's estate.
§ 176-28. Eligibility for other benefits. [Amended 2-10-2009]
Any property tax relief granted to any resident of the Town of Farmington
in accordance with the provisions of § 176-24 et seq., shall not disqualify
such resident with respect to any benefits for which such resident shall
be eligible under the provisions of §§ 12-129b to 12-129d, inclusive, of the
2006 supplement to the Connecticut General Statutes, and § 12-170aa of
the 2006 supplement to the Connecticut General Statutes and any such
property tax relief provided under this article shall be in addition to any
§ 176-26 FARMINGTON CODE § 176-28
174:374
such benefits for which such resident shall be eligible under said §§ 12-129b
to 12-129d, inclusive, and § 12-170aa.
However, any person eligible for a benefit under § 176-9 and a benefit
under § 176-24 must choose which benefit they wish to receive as only one
program is allowed per qualified applicant.
§ 176-28 SWIMMING POOLS, PRIVATE § 176-28
174:375

ARTICLE VIII
Waivers and Excess Payments
[Adopted 2-9-2016]
§ 176-29. Waiver of property tax under five dollars.
Pursuant to § 12-144c of the Connecticut General Statutes, effective with
the Grand List of 2000, any property tax or special service charge due to
the Town of Farmington in an amount less than five dollars ($5.00) shall be
waived.
§ 176-30. Retention of excess payment.
Pursuant to § 12-129 of the Connecticut General Statutes, the Tax Collector
for the Town of Farmington may retain on behalf of the Town any tax
payment or special service charge in excess of the amount due, provided
the amount of the excess payment is less than five dollars ($5.00).
§ 176-29 SWIMMING POOLS, PRIVATE § 176-30
174:377
Chapter 182
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Citation hearing procedure — See Ch. 91.
Parking lots — See Ch. 140.
Junked vehicles — See Ch. 186.
Motorized vehicles — See Ch. 189.
§ 176-30 FARMINGTON CODE § 176-30
182:378
ARTICLE I
Parking
[Adopted 2-26-1974 by Ord. No. 71]
§ 182-1. Parking restrictions.
No motor vehicle, as defined by the Connecticut General Statutes, shall be
parked within the traveled portion of any Town road within the limits of the
Town:
A. Except upon the right-hand side of such road in the direction in which
such vehicle is headed.
B. Within 25 feet of an intersection or marked crosswalk or properly
erected stop sign.
C. Within 150 feet of a curve or turn or crest of a grade.
D. Within 50 feet of the point where another vehicle is stationary on the
opposite side of the traveled portion of such road.
E. Within 10 feet of any fire hydrant.
F. So that the right wheels are more than 12 inches from the curb, if such
road is curbed.
G. So as to constitute a traffic hazard or obstruct the free movement of
traffic on such road, except if such vehicle is disabled for a reasonably
brief time.
H. In any area on such road properly designated, as provided in § 182-3
hereof, as a no-parking area.
I. During any temporary emergency parking restriction or prohibition as
provided in § 182-4 hereof.
J. So as to prevent or obstruct the ingress or egress to any driveway.
§ 182-2. Encroachment on sidewalk prohibited.
No motor vehicle shall be parked in such a manner as to encroach upon a
sidewalk or to interfere with free and normal use of a sidewalk.
§ 182-3. No-parking zones.
The Town Manager is authorized to establish zones in which the parking of
motor vehicles is prohibited in order to facilitate vehicular and pedestrian
traffic and for safety purposes.
§ 182-4. Temporary restrictions during emergencies.
The Town Manager is authorized, during the period of an emergency, severe
weather conditions, snow removal operations or maintenance or repair of
a Town road, to restrict and prohibit temporarily the parking of motor
vehicles within the bounds of any or all Town roads.
§ 182-5. Towing of illegally parked vehicles.
Any motor vehicle parked in violation of any temporary emergency parking
restriction or in a no-parking zone marked as a "tow zone" may, under
§ 182-1 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 182-5
182:379
the direction of the Police Department and at the expense of the owner
thereof, be removed or conveyed by towing or otherwise to a vehicle pound
or storage area.
§ 182-6. Fire lanes. [Added 1-27-1976]
A. In order to assure reasonable access of emergency fire apparatus to
buildings, structures or areas within the Town, the Fire Marshal of the
Town may establish lanes or areas, to be known as "fire lanes," on public
or private property, in which lanes the parking of motor vehicles shall be
prohibited.
B. Fire lanes established pursuant to Subsection A above shall be clearly
designated, marked and posted as a fire lane no-parking area in such
manner as will reasonably come to the attention of persons likely to park
motor vehicles in such area. The cost of such designating, marking and
posting on private property shall be the responsibility of the property
owner.
C. No motor vehicle shall be parked in any area marked or posted as a fire
lane.
§ 182-7. Handicapped parking spaces. [Added 9-23-1980]
A. Whenever there is an application before the Town Plan and Zoning
Commission requiring the submission of a development plan on which
provision for public parking is made, the Town Manager or his designee
may recommend to said Commission that, as a condition of approval of
said application, the Commission require the establishment of specific
parking spaces for handicapped persons. All such parking spaces for
handicapped persons shall be designated by a sign reading RESERVED
FOR HANDICAPPED - STATE PERMIT REQUIRED, which sign shall
also display the symbolic representation of a handicapped person in a
wheelchair. No motor vehicle shall be parked in such parking spaces
designated for handicapped persons except such vehicles displaying a
special identification card issued by the Commissioner of Motor Vehicles
showing a symbolic representation of a handicapped person in a
wheelchair or displaying a special set of license plates which shall bear
numerals preceded by the letters "HP," as provided in C.G.S. § 14-253a,
as amended.
B. In the case of an existing public building or private building devoted to
public use with a parking lot capacity of 10 or more motor vehicles, the
Town Manager may require specified parking spaces for handicapped
persons to be established. A written order signed by the Town Manager
establishing such parking places for handicapped persons shall be
delivered to the owner or agents of said property. Said owner or agent
of the owner shall, within 15 days after receipt of said order, designate
such parking spaces for handicapped persons in the manner provided
above. Thereafter, no motor vehicle shall be parked in such parking
space for handicapped persons except such vehicles displaying a special
identification card or a special set of license plates as described above.
C. In all instances where parking spaces for handicapped persons are
established pursuant to the provisions of this article, the owner of the
§ 182-5 FARMINGTON CODE § 182-7
182:380
property or his agent shall be responsible for installing and maintaining
signs required to designate such areas and shall be responsible for
keeping said areas free of snow, ice and debris. All such expenses shall
be at the expense of the owner.
§ 182-8. Parking on private property. [Added 9-23-1980]
No motor vehicle shall be parked on private property without the
permission of the owners of said property. If an owner of private property or
his agent complains to the Town Police Department of a motor vehicle being
parked on said owner's property without permission, the Police Department
shall proceed forthwith to take appropriate action with respect to said
violation. To avoid misidentification of the vehicle parked in violation of this
provision, the owner of private property or his agent calling the police shall
specifically identify the vehicle.
§ 182-9. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 4-17-1990]
The registered owner of any motor vehicle parked in violation of the
provisions of § 182-1 through 182-5 and § 182-8 of this article shall be
subject to a fine of $25. The registered owner of any motor vehicle parked
in violation of the provisions of § 182-6 of this article shall be subject to a
fine of $50. The registered owner of any motor vehicle parked in violation
of the provisions of § 182-7 of this article shall be subject to a fine of $85.
All fines shall be payable within 30 days from the time of issuance of the
violation notice. In the event that such fine is not paid within the period of
30 days, the amount of the fine shall be doubled. If the fine remains unpaid
after 60 days from the date of issuance of the violation notice, the amount
of the fine shall increase by $10 each thirty-day period thereafter until a
maximum amount of $200 is reached.
§ 182-10. Review of parking tickets by Chief of Police. [Added
4-17-1990]
The Chief of Police shall review parking tickets remaining unpaid after 60
days from the date of the violation and shall take appropriate action with
respect to said unpaid parking tickets, to include canceling the ticket in the
event that it is found to be uncollectible.
§ 182-10.1. Enforcement. [Added 3-28-1995]
This article has been specifically designated for enforcement by citations
issued by designated municipal officers or employees, and the citation
hearing procedure established by Chapter 91 of the Farmington Code shall
be followed.
§ 182-7 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 182-10.1
182:381

ARTICLE II
Use of Taine Mountain Road
[Adopted 3-24-1981 by Ord. No. 80]
§ 182-11. Closure. [Amended 7-28-1992]
In accordance with the Town Council's authority under Chapter 98 of the
Connecticut General Statutes, use by motor vehicles of that portion of
so-called Taine Mountain Road between the westerly end of the cul-desac
and the Farmington-Burlington Town line is prohibited and the Town
Manager is hereby directed to cause the so-called Taine Mountain Road at
the Farmington-Burlington Town line to be closed to vehicular traffic.
§ 182-11 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 182-11
182:383

ARTICLE III
Crosswalks
[Adopted 6-27-1995]
§ 182-12. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to regulate pedestrians and motor vehicles at
crosswalks in order to provide maximum safety.
§ 182-13. Background.
Crosswalks are recognized as potential areas of danger. To improve the
ability of pedestrians to use sidewalks and streets safely, the Town is
installing signs to alert motorists of crosswalks and their duty to yield to
pedestrians in crosswalks. The Town has marked crosswalks more boldly
than in the past. Adoption of this article will facilitate enforcement of
crosswalk violations.
§ 182-14. Obligation of motorists.
At any crosswalk each operator of a motor vehicle shall yield the right-ofway
and slow or stop such vehicle, if necessary, in order to yield the rightof-
way to any pedestrian crossing the roadway within such crosswalk. No
operator of a vehicle approaching from the rear shall overtake and pass
any vehicle, the operator of which has stopped at any crosswalk to permit a
pedestrian to cross the roadway. No vehicle shall enter a marked crosswalk
until there is sufficient space beyond the crosswalk to accommodate the
vehicle.
§ 182-15. Obligation of pedestrians.
No pedestrian shall enter a crosswalk when there is an approaching vehicle
within such distance or traveling at such speed that by the use of reasonable
care it may not be able to stop short of the crosswalk. Each pedestrian
crossing a roadway within a crosswalk shall travel whenever practicable
upon the right half of such crosswalk. Each pedestrian crossing a roadway
at any point other than within a crosswalk shall yield the right-of-way to
each vehicle upon such roadway. Whenever practicable, pedestrians within
500 feet of a crosswalk shall cross a roadway within the crosswalk. Each
pedestrian crossing a roadway within a signaled crosswalk shall travel
whenever practicable when the signal is in his or her favor.
§ 182-16. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be subject to
a penalty not to exceed $100 for each such violation.
§ 182-17. Enforcement.
This article has been specifically designated for enforcement by citations
issued by designated municipal officers or employees, and the citation
§ 182-12 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 182-17
182:385
hearing procedure established by Chapter 91 of the Farmington Code shall
be followed.
§ 182-17 FARMINGTON CODE § 182-17
182:386
Chapter 186
VEHICLES, JUNKED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Citation hearing procedures — See Ch. 91.
Parking lots — See Ch. 140.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 182.
Motorized vehicles — See Ch. 189.
Zoning regulations — See Ch. 197.
§ 186-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLE — A motor vehicle not under cover, located on
private property for more than 30 cumulative days over any six-consecutivemonth
period or located on public property for more than 24 consecutive
hours that:
MOTOR VEHICLE — Any vehicle propelled or drawn by any power other
than muscular, to include but not limited to automobiles, trucks, station
wagons, tractors, trailers, motorcycles, buses, mobile homes, campers,
boats, aircraft or other like vehicles in whole and/or in part, including the
storage of the parts thereof.
MOTOR VEHICLE PARTS — Any component, section or waste such as old
iron, metal, glass, rubber or other material that has been or is intended to
be part of a motor vehicle.
STATE OF DISASSEMBLY — A motor vehicle that has been dismantled to
accommodate repairs or dismantled for the purpose of the sale and/or use
of motor vehicle parts.
STATE OF DISREPAIR — A motor vehicle that has been rendered unsafe
through neglect or is a hazard to the public, or creates a blighting effect on
the property or surrounding properties.
UNDER COVER — Completely enclosed (not visible from any adjoining
properties, public or private) in a garage or other permanent structure
serving the purpose of a garage.
UNSAFE FOR USE ON PUBLIC HIGHWAYS — A motor vehicle is deemed
unsafe when the motor vehicle is in violation of the State of Connecticut
A. Is unsafe for use on public highways;
B. Is in a state of disrepair or disassembly; or
Through neglect, accident, age or vandalism, is a blight on such
property or abutting properties.
C.
§ 182-17 VEHICLES, JUNKED § 186-1
186:387
Department of Motor Vehicles standards and regulations for motor vehicle
safety.
§ 186-2. Penalties for offenses.
Junked motor vehicles are prohibited within the limits of the Town. Anyone
responsible for causing or permitting a junked motor vehicle to exist on
public property for more than 24 consecutive hours, or on private property
for a period longer than 30 cumulative days in any six-month period, shall
be subject to a fine of $150 per day for each day or part thereof. Each
additional day or part thereof shall constitute a new and separate offense,
punishable hereunder.
§ 186-3. Procedure for removal.
A. When it is determined that a junked motor vehicle is located on a public
highway or public property, the Town shall cause said motor vehicle to be
removed to a motor vehicle junkyard and shall notify, by certified mail,
the owner of the motor vehicle if he/she is known, and shall have the
right to collect from said owner the cost of removal. The Town shall have
the right to collect the cost incurred in removing and disposing of such
motor vehicle from the owner of the vehicle. If such cost is not paid, the
cost shall be charged on the next tax bill forwarded by the Town to such
owner if he/she is a taxpayer of the Town.
B. When it is determined that a junked motor vehicle, an abandoned motor
vehicle or two or more unregistered motor vehicle(s) is/are located on
private property, the Town shall give written notice, by certified mail, to
the person in possession or control of such property and shall publish a
notice in a local newspaper with substantial circulation in Farmington,
requiring the owner of such property and the owner of such vehicle,
if known, to remove said motor vehicle. If such owner or person has
not caused removal of such vehicle within 30 days after receipt of said
notification, the Town may cause said motor vehicle to be removed to
a motor vehicle junkyard. The Town shall have the right to collect the
cost incurred in removing and disposing of such motor vehicle from the
owner of the vehicle or from the person in control of the property from
which the motor vehicle was removed, unless it shall be determined that
the person in possession or control of such property or the owner of
the property or any member of their respective families was in no way
responsible for causing or permitting the junked motor vehicle to be
located on the property. Such costs, if not paid, shall be charged to the
responsible person on the next regular tax bill forwarded by the Town to
such person if he/she is a taxpayer of the Town.
C. Abandoned and unregistered motor vehicles will be removed as set forth
in Connecticut General Statutes, Sections 14-150 and 14-150a.
§ 186-4. Exemptions.
A. This chapter shall not apply to junked motor vehicles located in a motor
vehicle junkyard licensed in accordance with Chapter 406 of Title 21 of
§ 186-1 FARMINGTON CODE § 186-4
186:388
the State of Connecticut General Statutes, as amended,42 or permitted
under any exceptions as to licensing requirements.
B. This chapter shall not apply to businesses that are permitted by the Town
of Farmington's Plan and Zoning Commission or the Town of Farmington
Zoning Regulations to service, repair or sell motor vehicles, but shall not
exceed the limitations of the permit and/or expand the established use of
the property.
C. This chapter shall not apply to construction equipment when in use on a
construction project, when the project has been permitted by the Town
of Farmington and/or the State of Connecticut.
§ 186-5. Lien.
A bill for the cost of the removal and disposal shall be promptly sent by
the Town to the appropriate person. Where the full amount of costs due the
Town is not paid by the appropriate person within 30 days after the bill for
costs has been submitted, the Police Chief or Zoning Enforcement Officer
shall cause to be recorded in the Town Clerk's office a sworn statement
showing the cost and expense incurred for the removal and disposal of
the vehicle. The recordation of such sworn statement shall constitute a
lien and privilege on the property of said resident and shall remain in
full force and effect for the amount due in principal and interest, plus
reasonable attorney's fees and court costs, if any, for the collection, until
final payment has been made. Said costs and expenses shall be collected in
the manner fixed by law for the collection of taxes and shall be subject to
a delinquent penalty of 18% in the event that the same is not paid in full
on or before the date the tax bill upon which said charges appears becomes
delinquent. Sworn statements recorded in accordance with the provisions
hereof shall be prima facie evidence that all legal formalities have been
complied with and that the removal and disposition has been done properly
and satisfactorily, and shall be full notice to every person concerned that
the amount of the statement, plus interest, constitutes a charge against the
property designated or described in the statement and that the same is due
and collectible as provided by law.
§ 186-6. Notice to Commissioner of Motor Vehicles.
When any junked motor vehicle is found, the Town shall give written notice
to the Commissioner of Motor Vehicles, which notice shall include the
location of the motor vehicle, the time the vehicle was first discovered and
such data and description of the vehicle which would be helpful to the
Commissioner in identifying the vehicle and the owner of the vehicle.
§ 186-7. Enforcement.
This chapter has been specifically designated for enforcement by citations
issued by designated municipal officers or employees, and the citation
42.Editor's Note: Chapter 406 of Title 21 was transferred; see now Chapter 246 of Title 14.
§ 186-4 VEHICLES, JUNKED § 186-7
186:389
hearing procedures established by Chapter 91 of the Farmington Town
Code shall be followed.
Chapter 189
VEHICLES, MOTORIZED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Citation hearing procedure — See Ch. 91.
Parking lots — See Ch. 140.
Parking — See Ch. 182, Art. I.
Junked vehicles — See Ch. 186.
§ 189-1. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement
of this chapter:
MOTORIZED VEHICLE — Any vehicle, except Town-owned vehicles,
propelled or drawn by any power other than muscular power, and shall
include but is not limited to automobiles, trucks, buses, motorcycles,
minibikes, go-carts, snowmobiles, three-wheel vehicles, trailers and
campers.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, association, partnership, company,
firm or other aggregation of individuals.
TOWN PROPERTY — Any and all real property owned by, leased to or in
the possession and/or under the control of the Town of Farmington or any
agency, board, commission or committee of the Town.
§ 189-2. Operation on Town property restricted. [Amended
9-23-1980; 7-28-1992]
No person shall permit or cause a motorized vehicle to be on Town property,
and no person shall operate or cause to be operated a motorized vehicle
on Town property between the hours of sunset and sunrise, except in
authorized areas and except that a motor vehicle properly registered with
the Motor Vehicle Department may be on or may be operated on roads and
parking lots designated by the Town for which said roads and parking lots
were intended to be utilized.
§ 189-3. Snowmobiles.
Notwithstanding any other provisions hereof, snowmobiles may be operated
on those areas of Town property designated by the Town Manager for the
operation of snowmobiles at such times as three or more inches of snow
covers the area.
§ 186-7 FARMINGTON CODE § 189-4
189:390
§ 189-4. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 9-23-1980; 7-28-1992]
Any owner or operator of any motorized vehicle violating the provisions of
this chapter shall be fined not more than $25.
§ 189-5. Enforcement. [Added 3-28-1995]
This chapter has been specifically designated for enforcement by citations
issued by designated municipal officers or employees, and the citation
hearing procedure established by Chapter 91 of the Farmington Code shall
be followed.
Chapter 193
WATER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building Code — See Ch. 83, Art. II.
Citation hearing procedure — See Ch. 91.
Private swimming pools — See Ch. 174.
§ 189-4 WATER § 189-5
193:391

ARTICLE I
Private Water Supplies
[Adopted 11-1-1960 by Ord. No. 39]
§ 193-1. Certificate of approval required.
No person, partnership or corporation shall construct any dwelling,
apartment, boardinghouse, hotel or any other type of building having a
private water supply without first obtaining a certificate of approval from
the FVHD of the location, construction and installation of such water supply.
§ 193-2. Fee. [Amended 7-28-1992]
There shall be a fee of $25 for each certificate of approval applied for, said
fee to be paid by the person, partnership or corporation applying for said
certificate.
§ 193-3. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 7-28-1992]
Any person, partnership or corporation which shall violate the provisions of
this article shall be fined not to exceed $100.
§ 193-1 WATER § 193-3
193:393

ARTICLE II
Use During Emergencies
[Adopted 2-27-1990 by Ord. No. 90]
§ 193-4. Findings. [Amended 7-28-1992]
There is a reasonable likelihood that in certain areas of the Town there may
be shortages of public drinking water as a result of drought, equipment
outages and/or pollution of water supplies. In order to avoid the harmful
consequences of such shortages it is necessary to have a means of
restricting certain uses of water not essential to the health, welfare and
safety of the residents of the Town prior to enduring periods of threatened
shortages or actual shortages.
§ 193-5. Declaration of water emergency.
The Town Manager is authorized to declare a water emergency and to take
appropriate action, such as that provided in § 193-7 below. Such declaration
of a water emergency may be made at such times as deemed necessary by
the Town Manager and shall be made upon reasonable request by one or
more of the water utilities providing water in the Town.
§ 193-6. Notice of emergency.
The declaration of a water emergency shall become effective at 12:00 noon
on the day following the publication of the declaration in a newspaper
having a circulation in the Town. The declaration shall clearly set forth
the restrictions and prohibitions being imposed. If the restrictions and
prohibitions are to apply to only certain areas of the Town and not to the
entirety of the Town, the declaration shall specify the areas affected by the
declaration.
§ 193-7. Restricted or prohibited activities.
A. When, after reviewing data received from water utilities serving the
Town and other appropriate data, the Town Manager determines that
there has been a diminishing of the water supply available and that
precautionary procedures are appropriate, the Town Manager is
authorized to prohibit or restrict all or part of the following activities
which use water provided by a public supply system of a water company:
(1) Watering of shrubbery, trees, lawns, grass, plants or any other
vegetation, except indoor plants, nursery stock, crops by commercial
agricultural operations, golf course greens, newly planted vegetation
and lawns and plants grown in containers watered by a hand-held
watering can.
(2) Washing of automobiles, trucks, trailers, boats, airplanes or any
other types of mobile equipment, except in the case of commercial
wash facilities.
(3) Washing of streets, driveways, parking lots, service station aprons,
residential and nonresidential buildings or other outdoor surfaces.
§ 193-4 WATER § 193-7
193:395
(4) Operation of any fountain or other structure making similar use of
water, except where such fountain or other structure is part of an
air-conditioning system, contains a recycling system or uses stormor
processed water.
(5) Filling of swimming and/or wading pools which were drained after
the effective date of the order. This restriction shall not apply to
public pools.
(6) Any other use of water for outdoor recreation.
(7) The use of water from fire hydrants for any purpose other than fire
suppression or other public emergency.
(8) The serving of drinking water in restaurants or any other food
establishment, unless requested by the individual customer.
B. When, after reviewing data received from water utilities serving the
Town and other appropriate data, the Town Manager determines that
the water supply has diminished substantially and the supply of water is
critically limited, the Town Manager is authorized to order or continue
the restrictions and prohibitions under Subsection A above and to
prohibit or restrict the following activities:
(1) Watering of golf course greens and operating air-conditioning units
where the interior temperature is less than 78º F., except in totally
closed systems to which no water is required to be added.
§ 193-8. Appeals Board.
A. An Appeals Board consisting of the Town Manager, Town Engineer and
a representative of each water utility operating in the Town shall be
established to hear petitions for exemption from the provisions of the
emergency order.
B. All petitions for exemption shall be submitted, in writing, to the office
of the Town Manager and a decision rendered within 10 days of receipt.
The Appeals Board shall not grant an exemption unless it finds that
the hardship incurred would exceed the harm to the public health and
welfare.
§ 193-9. Termination of emergency.
When a water emergency has been declared and restrictive and prohibitive
actions have been taken, the declaration and actions taken shall continue
in full force and effect until terminated by the Town Manager after
consultation with the appropriate water utilities.
§ 193-10. Enforcement.
The Assistant Town Planner shall respond to complaints regarding
violations of this article and, if such complaints are verified, shall contact
the Police Department of the Town, which shall enforce the provision of this
article.
§ 193-7 FARMINGTON CODE § 193-11
193:396
§ 193-11. Penalties for offenses.
Violation of this article shall be punishable by a fine of $100 for each
offense. Each act or each day's continuation of a violation shall be
considered a separate offense.
§ 193-11 WATER § 193-11
193:397

ARTICLE III
Enforcement
[Adopted 3-28-1995]
§ 193-12. Enforcement.
This chapter has been specifically designated for enforcement by citations
issued by designated municipal officers or employees, and the citation
hearing procedure established by Chapter 91 of the Farmington Code shall
be followed.
§ 193-12 WATER § 193-12
193:399
Chapter 197
ZONING REGULATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Adult-oriented establishments — See Ch. 73.
Building construction — See Ch. 83.
Historic areas — See Ch. 111.
Inland wetlands and watercourses — See Ch.
125.
Scenic roads — See Ch. 151.
Signs — See Ch. 159.
Subdivision regulations — See Ch. 172.
§ 193-12 FARMINGTON CODE § 193-12
197:400

TOWN OF FARMINGTON 

REGULATIONS 
FOR 
ZONING 

(Amended to May 17, 2019) 

FARMINGTON TOWN HALL 
One Monteith Drive 
Farmington, Connecticut 06032-1053 




FARMINGTON, 
CONNECTICUT 

ZONING REGULATIONS 
(Amended to May 17, 2019) 

SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 
(Amended to February 8, 2019) 

INLAND WETLANDS AND 
WATERCOURSES REGULATIONS 
(Amended to April 27, 2018) 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 
ZONING REGULATIONS ARTICLE I.  PURPOSE AND INTENT 
Section l.    Purpose . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6 Section 2.    Basic Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7 Section 2A. Prohibited Uses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7 Section 3.    Application Of Regulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7 Section 4.    Interpretation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8 Section 5.    Establishment Of Zones . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . 8 Section 6.    Zoning Map . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8 Section 7.    Zone Boundaries   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8 Section 8.    Definitions, General . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9 Section 9.    Definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10 Section 10.  Use Of Land For Access Or Parking . . . . . . . . . . . 19 
ARTICLE II.  USE REGULATIONS Residential Zones Section l.     R80, R40, R30  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20 Section 2.    R20 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24 Section 3.    R12 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25 Section 4.    R12 Lake Garda -R12LG . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26 Section 5.    R9  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27 Section 6.  R9 Lake Garda -R9LG . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28 Section 6A. R9 Oakland Gardens –R9OG  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29 Section 7.    RA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30 Section 8.    RDM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30 Section 9.    Senior –Active Adult Housing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35 Business Zones Section 10.  PR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40 Section 11.  BR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43 Section 12.  B1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47 Industrial Zones Section 13.  CR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50 Section 14.  C1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51 Section 15.  Flood Protection Zone (FP) and Flood Perimeter Overlay Zone –(FPO) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56 Section 16.  Flood Protection Zone -FP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67 Section 17.  Flood Perimeter Overlay Zone – FPO . . . . . . . . . . 69 Section 18.  Aquifer Protection Zone –AP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 73 Section 19.  Cluster Development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 76 Section 20.  R9 Multifamily Cluster . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 81 Section 21.  Unionville Center Zone . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 83 Section 21A. Unionville Village District Zone . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 89 Section 22.  Earth Excavation Zone -EE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 93 
ARTICLE II.  USE REGULATIONS (Cont.) Section 23. Earth Removal for Purposes of Site Improvement. 96 Section 24. Placement of Fill on Site . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 96 Section 25. AffordableHousing Zone . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 96 Section 25A.  Housing Opportunity District (HOD) . . . . . . . . . . 103 Section 26.      Ridgeline Protection Zone . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 107 Section 27.      Airport Approach Overlay Zone  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 114 Section 28.  Medical Office Campus Zone (MOC) . . . . . . . . . . 115 Section 29.  Farmington Center Zone(FC) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 120 Section 29A.  Farmington Village District Zone (FV) . . . . . . . . . 124 Section 30. Medical Office /Research Floating Zone (MORF). 135 Section 31 Special Innovation Floating Zone . . . . . . . . . . . . .      139 
ARTICLE III.  HEIGHT AND AREA REGULATIONS Section 1. Schedule of Zone Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 140 Section 2. Floor Area Requirements for Residences  . . . . . . . 140 Section 3. Yard Exceptions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 141 Section 4. Interior Lots . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 141 Section 5. Fences in Other Than Front Yard  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 142 Section 6. Height and Area Schedule . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 143 
ARTICLE IV.  SPECIAL REGULATIONS Section 1.  Nonconforming Structures, Lots and Uses . . . . . . 144 Section 2.  Buildings and Structures Accessory to One and 146 Four Family Homes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Section 3.  Public Garages and Service Stations . . . . . . . . . . . 148 Section 4.  Visibility atIntersection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 149 Section 5.  Sale of Alcoholic Beverages . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 149 Section 6.  Loading Space . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 150 Section 7.  Signs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 150 Section 8.  Off Street Parking Standards . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 156 Section 8.A.  Off Street Bicycle Parking Standards . . . . . . . . . . 161 Section 9.  Storage Containers, Dumpsters, Trailers, 162 Mobile Homes and Recreational Vehicles  . . . . . . Section 10. Horses and Stables . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 165 Section 11. Erosion and Sediment Control Plan . . . . . . . . . . . . 165 Section 12. Special Permits, Site Plans, Intent and 168 Application Requirements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Section 13 LandscapeRegulations. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 170 Section 14. Lighting  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 174 Section 15. Fire Protection  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 174 Section 15.A. Reasonable Consideration – Historic Factors . . . . . 175 Section 16. Traffic Management Regulation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 177 Section 17. Sidewalks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 178 Section 18. Outdoor Display, Sales or Storage of 178 Goods or Materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Section 19. Rooftop Utilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 178 
Section 20. Heliports/Landing and Takeoff of Aircraft  . . . . . . 178 Section 21. AccessoryApartments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 179 Section 22. AffordableHousing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 181 Section 23. Commercial Wireless Telecommunication Sites . . 181 Section 24. Adult-Oriented Establishments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 189 Section 25.      Stormwater Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 198 Section 26.  Conservation Easements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 198 Section 27  Regulation of Intensive Construction Activities 198 Section 28.  Standards for Accessible and Universal Design 202 Section 29. Non-Commercial Wind Energy Conversion  205 Systems Section 30. New and Expanded Homes within Existing 210 Neighborhoods Section 31. Moratorium on Palliative Marijuana Production 212 and Dispensaries 
ARTICLE V.  ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT Section 1. Interpretation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 213 Section 2. Zoning Permits and Certificates of Zoning Compliance  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 213 Section 3. Enforcement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 214 Section 4. Zoning Board of Appeals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 214 
ARTICLEVI.  AMENDMENTS, VALIDITY. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 217 
ZONING REGULATIONS 
TOWN OF FARMINGTON, CONNECTICUT 

ARTICLE I.  PURPOSE AND INTENT 
Section l. PURPOSE 

These regulations are adopted under the General Statutes of the State of Connecticut, as amended, 
for the following purposes: 
To promote and to protect the public health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of Farmington, 

Connecticut, and of the public generally; 
To facilitate adequate transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks and other public benefits; 
To encourage the most appropriate use of land throughout the Town, thereby conserving the value of 

properties; 
To regulate the height, number of stories and size of buildings and other structures; the percentage of 

the area of the lot that may be occupied; the size of yards, courts and other open spaces; and the height, size and location of advertising signs; To regulate the density of population and the location and use of buildings, structures, and land for 
trade, industry, residence or other purposes; 
To divide the municipality into zones of such number, shape and area as may be best suited to carry out the purposes of these regulations; To regulate the erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration or use of buildings or structures and 
the use of land in such zones; 
To permit certain classes or kinds of buildings, structures or uses of land within the Town only after 
obtaining a special permit or special exception; 
To lessen congestion in the streets; 
To secure safety from fire, panic, flood and other dangers; 
To provide adequate light and air; 
To prevent the overcrowding of land; 
To further the policies of the Plan of Development; 
To guide development in a manner which recognizes the importance of the natural environment; To guide development which minimizes impacts to wetlands, watercourses, flood prone areas, hillsides, ridgelines, surface water and groundwater resources and other sensitive and significant features of the natural landscape; and 
To encourage the preservation of historic structures. 
Section 2. BASIC REQUIREMENTS 
No land, building, structure or portion thereof shall hereafter be used, and no building, structure or portion thereof shall be constructed, reconstructed, located, extended, enlarged, demolished or substantially altered, except in conformity with these regulations. 
These regulations are intended to state the uses of land and/or buildings and structures, which are permitted within the Town.  Uses not stated are not permitted. 
Section 2a. PROHIBITED USES 
1. 	
No land or building, or any portion thereof, shall be used in the Town of Farmington, as a principal or accessory use, for any prohibited use.  Prohibited uses shall include any use not specified as a permitted use, special permit use or accessory use and those uses specified in subsection (2) below as well as any use which can be reasonably considered to cause, despite existing environmental safeguards, hazardous or noxious conditions. 

2. 	
Prohibited uses specifically include, but are not limited to:  1) The incineration of solid waste; 2) Private correctional facilities; 3) Alternative incarceration centers; 4) Methadone clinics; 5) Halfway houses; 6) The sale of drug paraphernalia as defined by C.G.S. § 21a-240(A)(20); 7) Rooming houses; 8) Tattoo and/or body piercing studios; 9) Conducting business as a pawn broker or secondhand dealer as defined by C.G.S. § 21-39a; 10) Check cashing establishments; 11) On site gambling (any form of gambling legally existing as of January 1, 2015 other than lottery) including manually or automatically operated gambling devices, video or otherwise, including, but not limited to slot machines; 12) Any type of vending machine which dispenses products which cannot be legally dispensed to persons under the age of 18; 13) Junk dealers and motor vehicle junk yards; 


14) Hookah lounge; 
15) Billiard parlor. 

Section 3. APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS 
No conveyance of land shall be made that reduces the remaining land of the grantor below the applicable minimum area, frontage, bulk and yard requirements. No building permit, zoning permit, certificate of occupancy or certificate of zoning compliance shall be issued for the erection or occupancy of a building or structure on land conveyed in violation of this section. 
Section 4. INTERPRETATION 
In interpreting and applying these regulations, the regulations shall be considered as the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety and general welfare. 
When these regulations impose a greater restriction on the use of buildings or require larger yards, courts or other open spaces, or require a greater percentage of lots to remain unbuilt, or impose other standards higher than those imposed by any law, ordinance, regulation or private agreement, these regulations shall control. When restrictions are imposed by any law, ordinance, regulation or private agreements which are greater than those required by these regulations, such greater restrictions shall not be affected by these regulations. 
When one section of these regulations imposes standards greater than those of another section, the standards of the more restrictive section shall control, however, it should be recognized that a use of property as set forth under Article II Sections 19 – 27 and Article IV shall be permitted in the respective underlying zone as established by right or by special permit. 
Section 5. ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONES 
The Town of Farmington is divided into fourteen residential zones, designated herein as R80, R40, R30, R20, R12, R12LG, R9, R9LG, RDM, AH, HOD and SA; three business zones, designated herein as PR, BR and B1; three industrial zones, designated herein as CR, C1 and EE; a Unionville Center Zone, designated herein as UC and associated overlay Unionville Village District Zone; a flood protection zone, designated herein as FP; and four overriding zones, designated herein as Flood Perimeter Overlay, Aquifer Protection, Airport Protection and Ridgeline Protection Zone. 
Section 6. ZONING MAP 
The boundaries of zones are established as shown on the “Official Zoning Map.” The Official Zoning Map shall be at a scale of 1” = 1000’ and identified by the signature of the Chairman of the Town Plan and Zoning Commission, and shall bear the date of the most recent zoning amendment. 
When, in accordance with the provisions of these regulations, changes are made in district boundaries or other matters portrayed on the Official Zoning Map, such changes shall be made on the Official Zoning Map together with an entry on the Official Zoning Map as follows: “As amended to (date). (Such date to be that of the most recent amendment) 
The Official Zoning Map shall be filed in the office of the Town Clerk and an updated copy shall be displayed in the office of the Town Planning Department. 
Section 7. ZONE BOUNDARIES 
A. 	When uncertainly exists in the opinion of the Zoning Enforcement Officer as to the boundaries of zones as shown on the Official Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply: 
1. 	
Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of streets, highways or alleys shall be construed as following such center lines; 

2. 	
Boundaries indicated as approximately following lot lines shall be construed as following such lines; 

3. 	
Boundaries indicated as approximately following Town limits shall be construed as following Town limits; 

4. 	
Boundaries indicated as following railroad rights-of-way shall be construed as the center of said rights-of-way; 

5. 	
Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of streams, brooks or other bodies of water shall be construed as following such center lines; 

6. 	
If a situation arises not covered by the above, the Zoning Enforcement Officer may establish the location of a zoning boundary by scaling the Official Zoning Map, reviewing previous official zoning maps or by applying the boundaries established by the report entitled Description of Zone Districts on file in the Planning and Zoning Office; and 

7. 	
In any case of uncertainty not resolved by the above, the Commission shall determine the location of the boundary. 


B. 	Where a zone boundary divides a lot in one ownership into two or more residential zones, the area, frontage, bulk and yard requirements for that lot shall comply with those set forth for the zone, which comprises a majority of the area of said lot. 
C. 	Where a zone boundary divides a lot in one ownership into a residential and a nonresidential zone (industrial or business) or into two nonresidential zones, the area and frontage requirements for that lot shall comply with those that are more restrictive as set forth for such zones. All other building requirements shall correspond with those of the particular zone in which a use, structure or building is established or constructed. 
D. 	The use of a lot under one ownership divided into two or more zones shall be controlled by the requirements of the zone designation for that particular portion of said lot except as otherwise permitted by Article V. Section 4. of these regulations. 
Section 8. DEFINITIONS, GENERAL 
In the construction of these regulations, the rules and definitions contained in this section shall be observed and applied, except where the context clearly indicates otherwise. 
Words used in the singular shall include the plural, and words used in the plural shall include the singular; words used in the present tense shall include the future tense. 
The word “shall” is mandatory and not discretionary. 
The word “may” is permissive and discretionary. 
The word “lot” shall include the words “piece” and “parcel.” 
The words “zone,” “zoning district” and “district” have the same meaning. 
The phrase “used for” shall include the phrases “arranged for,” “designed for,” “intended for,” “maintained for” and “occupied for.” 
The phrase “these regulations” shall refer to the entire Zoning Regulations. 
The word “Commission” unless otherwise specifically noted shall refer to the Town Plan and Zoning Commission. 
Uses of land, buildings or structures not clearly permitted in the various zones are prohibited. 
Section 9. DEFINITIONS 
ACCESSORY BUILDING OR USE: A building or use which is subordinate and customarily incidental to the main building and use on a lot, providing that unless otherwise noted in these regulations any building accessory to a residential building shall not exceed 15 feet in height. The term “accessory building” when used in connection with a farm shall include all structures customarily used for farm purposes and such structures shall not be limited in height. No accessory building or use shall be established in the absence of a principal building or use.  The Zoning Enforcement Officer in consultation with the Commission shall determine which uses shall be permitted as accessory uses to a principal special permit use in any zone. 
ACTIVE ADULT HOUSING:  A housing development where 100 percent of all dwelling units fully comply with the provisions of the United States Fair Housing Act as amended, as it pertains to “housing for older persons.” This includes compliance with any and all rules promulgated by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development which govern the implementation of such Act. 
AMATEUR RADIO TOWER: A freestanding, attached or guy-supported device used in conjunction with noncommercial radio operations for which a resident operator holds an Amateur Radio License consisting of both an operator license and a station license. 
AMUSEMENT GAME: A video game, pinball machine, air hockey game or other similar coin-operated machine. 
AQUIFER: A water bearing rock or stratum of sufficient size to provide a source of water to the Town. 
BED AND BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENT: A single-family residence in which no more than six rooms are rented for compensation to transient guests. None of the rented rooms shall contain kitchen facilities as defined as having a standard sized range and refrigerator. 
BILLIARD PARLOR: An establishment for the playing of billiards or pool of no more than 3,500 square feet, including accessory uses, containing no more than one billiard table per 200 square feet of floor space. 
BUFFER: A strip of land which, unless otherwise permitted by the Commission, is limited to planting and the maintenance of shrubs, bushes and trees and within which no road, parking area, structure or building is allowed, other than a fence or utility structure. 
BUILDING: An independent structure having a roof supported by columns or walls resting on its own foundation or on the ground and includes a shed, garage, stable, greenhouse or other accessory building. 
BUILDING HEIGHT 

BUILDING, HEIGHT OF: The vertical distance measured from the average level of the ground along all walls of the building to the highest point of the roof for flat roofs; to deck line for mansard roofs, to the mean height between the highest eave and ridge for gable, hip or gambrel roofs and to the highest point of any other type of roof. Chimneys, spires, masts, elevator penthouses, tanks and similar projections shall not be included in the height provided that any such projections shall not have an aggregate area greater than 25 percent of the roof area. 
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY: A document issued by the Building Inspector allowing the occupancy or use of a building and certifying that the structure or use has been constructed in compliance with applicable building regulations and approvals. See Article V. Section 2. 
CERTIFICATE OF ZONING COMPLIANCE: A document issued by the Zoning Enforcement Officer which indicates that a structure, use of land or building is on compliance with the Farmington Zoning Regulations. 
CLUB OR FRATERNAL ORGANIZATION: An organization of persons which is the owner, lessee or occupant of an establishment operated solely for a recreational, social, patriotic, political, benevolent or athletic purpose, but not for pecuniary gain, and includes the establishment so operated. 
COMMISSION: The Town Plan and Zoning Commission. 
CONVENIENCE STORE: A general merchandise and grocery store usually with less than 3,000 square feet of gross floor area and open for business for extended hours. A Convenience Store generally attracts patrons because of the speed in which items may be purchased and because of the extended hours for which such stores are open for business. 
COUNTRY CLUB: A private or public organization for outdoor recreation, including but not limited to, tennis, swimming, golf or other similar recreational activities. 
DORMITORY: A building or group of buildings designed or altered for the purpose of accommodating students in educational institutions or members of religious orders with sleeping quarters with or without communal kitchen facilities and administered by bona fide educational or religious institutions. Dormitory includes fraternity and sorority houses, convents and monasteries, but does not include clubs or lodges. 
DWELLING: A building or portion thereof designed exclusively for residential occupancy, including one family, two family and multiple family dwellings, but not including hotels, motels and inns. 
DWELLING UNIT: A housing unit containing a single room or group of rooms intended for occupancy as separate living quarters by one family. Separate living quarters are those which have a sleeping area and kitchen facilities as defined as having a standard sized range and refrigerator. Separate living quarters may have either direct access from the outside or access through a common hall. 
ELDERLY HOUSING:  A dwelling unit exclusively designed for the needs of single people age 62 or over, or couples with at least one member over age 62. 
ASSISTED ELDERLY: An Assisted Elderly Housing facility shall provide centralized areas including rooms for, but not limited to, examination, physical therapy, recreation and common dining, serving three meals per day. An Assisted Elderly Housing unit shall not provide a kitchen or allow for meal preparation, but may include a pantry, with a dormitory refrigerator and up to two surface cooking burners, and/or a microwave oven. 
ELEVATION:  1) A view of a side of a structure as seen from a horizontal direction; 2) Height above a reference plane, as mean sea level. 
FAMILY: A family shall be defined as either: 1) one or more persons living together as a single housekeeping unit, who are all related by blood, marriage or adoption, including foster children; or 2) a group consisting of not more than four (4) persons, living together as a single housekeeping unit, who are unrelated by blood, marriage or adoption. This number may be increased to six (6) by special permit; or 3) a combination of 1 and 2 above, provided that such persons shall live together as a single housekeeping unit. 
FAMILY DAY CARE HOME:  A private family home caring for not more than six children including the provider’s own children not at school full-time, where the children are cared for not less than three nor more than twelve hours during a 24-hour period and where care is given on a regularly recurring basis. This use shall not change the residential character of the home and shall be clearly secondary to the use of the home for residential purposes. 
FARM:  A parcel of land containing not less than five acres and principally used for either the commercial raising of livestock, poultry or crops including tree nurseries and greenhouses. 
FARM STAND:  A structure used principally for the sale of agricultural products grown on the premises. Farm stands located on a farm shall be considered an accessory use to such farm. 
FLOOR AREA RATIO:  The ratio of the gross floor area of a building(s) to the lot area on which the building(s) is located. 
FRONTAGE:  The distance of an unbroken line measured directly along an improved street or streets (street line(s)) between the sidelines of a lot or in the case of a corner lot between the sideline and rear property line. Where this line is an arc or the side lot lines converge towards this line, the distance may be measured along the minimum front yard setback line. For the purpose of this definition the term “street” shall be an existing public right-of-way used for travel or private right­of-way historically recognized as a street by the Town of Farmington or a right-of-way used for travel otherwise approved by the Commission as part of a subdivision plan. 
GARAGE, PRIVATE: A detached or accessory building or portion of a main building for the parking and storage of automobiles belonging to the occupants of the premises. 
GARAGE, PUBLIC:  A building, other than a private garage, used for the parking or storage of automobiles. 
GARDEN SUPPLY CENTER: An agricultural and associated retail operation where the primary use is the growing and/or sale of flowers, plants, shrubs or trees. This use may also include the sale of related garden merchandise. 
GROSS PARKING AREA:  The square footage of all parking stalls, aisleways and driveways including any landscaping contained within.  However, driveways which connect a parking area to a street or other distinct parking area shall be exempt from this calculation. 
GROSS USABLE FLOOR AREA: The horizontal area of all floors of a building measured from exterior of outside walls.  Gross Usable Floor Area shall not include common hallways, elevators, stairs, common lobbies, terraces not used for customer service, utility rooms, rest rooms, maintenance shops and basements or cellars intended and designed only for storage.  Cafeterias may not be deemed as Gross Usable Floor Area at the discretion of the Commission. 
GROUP DAY CARE HOME: A private family home which offers or provides a program of supplementary care to not less than seven nor more than twelve related or unrelated children on a regular basis for a part of the 24 hours in one or more days in the week. 
GUEST HOUSE: A residential building located on the same lot as an existing single family dwelling, 1) for use solely for housing either guests or relatives of, or persons performing domestic services for, the family residing in the principal single family dwelling on the lot, and 2) not to be leased for compensation or otherwise occupied by anyone other than those persons referred to in 1 above. A Guest House shall not exceed 15 feet in height and 900 square feet in living area and shall not be located (nor shall any garage in connection with said guest house) within any required side, rear or front yard set forth in the table of “Height and Area Schedule.” 
HEALTH CLUB or SPORTS FACILITY:  A club or facility designed to offer athletic activities, physical conditioning and/or diet and nutritional counseling.  Such facility may include but not be limited to the following activities: tennis, handball, racquetball, squash, aerobic dancing, basketball, running track, swimming, weight lifting and use of Nautilus-type equipment. 
HOME OCCUPATION:  An activity carried out within a dwelling for financial gain.  A home occupation shall be accessory to the primary use of the dwelling as a residence. For purposes of this regulation home occupations shall be divided into the following categories: 
HOME OFFICE:  A home occupation which utilizes only equipment and materials typical to an office such as, but not limited to, typewriters, word processors, computers, writing or drafting instruments or telephones.  Home office shall comply with all of the standards found elsewhere in these regulations. 
HOME BUSINESS:  A home occupation otherwise permitted by these regulations. 
HOSPITAL:  A structure or structures used for the diagnosis, treatment or other care of human ailments, and containing inpatient beds. 
HOTEL, MOTEL or INN:  A building designed and used primarily for temporary occupancy by travelers, which provides or offers accommodations for a consideration for ten (10) or more persons exclusive of employees living on the premises, and which may provide rooms for public assembly and may include the serving of food. 
IMPERVIOUS SURFACES:  Surfaces that do not readily absorb water; including but not limited to building footprints, parking areas, driveways, roads, sidewalks and any areas in concrete or asphalt, not including retention basins.  Building footprints are defined as the area of the greatest horizontal length and width of a building at or above ground level but not including roof overhangs or elevated pedestrian connectors between buildings.  Surface areas consisting of stone or gravel shall be deemed impervious unless such areas are strictly used for landscaping in place of lawn or mulch or are unavailable to pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
INLAND WETLANDS AND WATERCOURSES: Areas as defined in Sections 22a-36 through 22a-45 of the Connecticut General Statutes. 
JUNKYARD: More than fifty (50) square feet of space used for the accumulation or storage of paper, rags, scrap, metal or discarded or used materials of any kind. 
KENNEL: An establishment in which more than six dogs over the age of six months are housed or an establishment in which three dogs over the age of six months are groomed, bred, boarded, trained or sold. Except in conjunction with an animal hospital, kennels shall not be permitted. 
LIVING QUARTERS, LIVING AREA:  The portion of a building, which is constructed with finished ceilings, walls and floors. In computing the floor area for living quarters, rooms for heating equipment, garage, outside vestibules and open or closed porches shall not be included. Measurements shall be taken from outside walls. 
LOT:  A parcel of land occupied or approved to be occupied by a building or buildings which meets the minimum requirements for frontage, lot width and lot area for the zone in which it is located or which meets the definition of nonconforming lot as defined in these regulations. 
LOT AREA:  The total area within the lot lines of a lot. 
LOT COVERAGE:  That percentage of the lot area that is covered by the building footprint and all other impervious surfaces on the lot. 
LOT LINE: A line of record bounding a lot. 
MIXED USE DEVELOPMENT: For the purpose of the C1 Zone, a use of land, buildings or structures with a combination of commercial facilities and residential dwelling units. 
NONCONFORMING LOT: A lot legally existing at the adoption of these regulations, or legally existing prior to an amendment to these regulations, which does not conform to the minimum lot area or frontage requirements for the zone in which it is located. 
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE:  Any building or structure legally in existence at the time of these regulations, or legally existing prior to an amendment to these regulations, which does not conform to the yard, height or bulk requirements for the zone in which it is located. 
NONCONFORMING USE:  A use legally existing at the adoption of these regulations, or legally existing prior to an amendment to these regulations, which does not conform to the use regulations for the zone in which it is located. 
NURSING OR CONVALESCENT HOME: Any establishment where persons suffering or convalescing from illness due to infirmity, disease or ailment are boarded or housed. 
OPEN SPACE:  Land which is preserved in its natural state; landscaped or developed for recreational use as approved by the Commission. 
OUTBUILDING:  An accessory structure containing a roof and at least three sides which uses include, but are not limited to, storage or the conduct of a hobby. Outbuildings shall not be used for living quarters or contain kitchen or sleeping facilities. 
PARKING AREA:  An area used for parking and movement but not the repair of motor vehicles, and in which no merchandise or materials are stored or sold and no business conducted. Such area shall not be used for the parking or storage of trailers nor the parking or storage of vehicles unrelated to the use of the subject property. 
PEDIATRIC OR YOUTH BEHAVIORAL HEALTH CENTER:  An office or facility used for the diagnosis and/or intensive outpatient treatment of pervasive, lifelong neurodevelopmental disorders to produce meaningful changes in human behavior, with emphasis on adaptive functioning, communication, behavioral, and social skills treatment.  Inpatient services are permitted. 
PUBLIC OR PRIVATE SCHOOL:  Any building or part thereof the use of which meets State requirements for primary or secondary education. 
RECREATIONAL FACILITY:  An area principally dedicated to outdoor recreational activities but may include buildings for maintenance, indoor sports, food service or caretaker’s residence. 
REHABILITATION CENTER:  A facility used for the diagnosis, treatment or other care of human ailments which may or may not contain beds or living quarters. 
RESTAURANT, FAST FOOD, DAIRY BAR, GRILL, COFFEE SHOP:  An establishment which exhibits one or more of the following characteristics: 1) Serves ready-to-eat foods, frozen deserts, or beverages in edible or paper, plastic or disposable containers; 2) Usually serves food over a general service counter that customers carry to the restaurant’s seating facilities, to motor vehicles or off premises; or 3) Devotes 45 percent or more of the establishment’s gross floor area to food service preparation, storage or related activities. 
RESTAURANT, LOW TURNOVER:  A public eating establishment, which provides table service and not meeting the criteria of a Restaurant, Fast Food. 
ROOMING OR BOARDING HOUSE:  A building in which rooms for living purposes are rented for compensation, with or without meals, to more than six but less than ten persons other than members of the family of the proprietor. 
SCHOOL:  Any building or part thereof, excluding public and private schools as defined in these regulations, which is designed, constructed or used for education or instruction in any branch of knowledge. 
SCREENING:  The use of fences, trees or shrubbery separately or in combination and of sufficient height and density, the purpose of which is to hide an area from view or to diminish, obscure or veil the view of an area. 
SHOPPING CENTER: A group of commercial establishments totaling more than 20,000 square feet in area and managed as a single operating unit. 
SIGN:  Any natural or artificial structure, device, light, material or object which shall use any letter, word, number, banner, flag, pennant, insignia, logo or device to attract attention to identify, advertise, announce or represent any object, product, place, activity, person, institution, organization, firm, group, commodity, profession, enterprise, business or industry and which is intended to be seen from a street or highway, parking area, driveway or sidewalk. 
SIGN, DETACHED:  A sign supported by one or more supports placed in or upon the ground. 
SIGN, GROSS AREA:  The combined area of all existing signs on a lot. 
SIGN, ROOF:  Any sign erected and maintained upon or above the main roof of a building. 
SIGN, WALL:  A sign which is attached to any surface or plane of a building and which does not extend more than 12 inches beyond the perimeter of the building or above the roof line. 
STREET LINE:  The line between the lot and the street. 
STRUCTURE:  Anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on the ground or attached to something having a location on the ground and extending at least 12 inches above the surrounding finished grade. 
STRUCTURAL ALTERATION: Any change in or addition to the structural or supporting members of a building such as bearing walls, columns, beams or girders. 
TEMPORARY USE OR STRUCTURE: A use of a structure, building or property or the establishment of a structure on a parcel of land which is approved by the Commission for a period of time not to exceed 180 days within a calendar year.  Such temporary use or structure shall not be established in violation of the use requirements of these regulations.  The Commission may grant an extension of the above mentioned time period to a total of 270 days. 
TOXIC OR NOXIOUS MATTER:  Any solid, liquid or gaseous matter, including but not limited to gases, vapors, radiation, dusts, fumes and mists, containing properties which are inherently harmful and likely to destroy life, impair health or damage property. 
VARIANCE:  A relaxation of the terms of the Zoning Regulations where such a variance will be in harmony with the general purpose and intent of the regulations and with due consideration for conserving the public health, safety, convenience, welfare and property values solely with respect to a parcel of land where, owing to conditions especially affecting such a parcel but not affecting generally the district in which it is situated, a literal enforcement of such bylaws, ordinances or regulations would result in exceptional difficulty or unusual hardship so that substantial justice will be done and the public safety and welfare secured. Pursuant to the authority under CGS § 8-6, these Regulations do not permit the ZBA to grant use variances as specified below: 
i. The use of any residentially zoned premised for uses other than for residential purposes; 
ii. 	The use of a premises within the UC/UV, FC/FV and AP zone for any purpose not specifically permitted by the Zoning Regulations governing said districts; and 
iii. 	The use of premises within single-family residential districts for other than single family residential purposes. 
VENDING MACHINE: A coin-operated machine that dispenses food and nonfood products, including but not limited to beverages, snacks and candy. 
WETLAND:  Land, including submerged land, which consists of any of the soil types designated as poorly drained, very poorly drained, alluvial or floodplain by the U. S. Department of Agriculture Soil Conservation Service. 
YARD, MINIMUM FRONT:  A space extending across the full width of the lot between the front property line and a parallel line set back a distance equal to the front yard requirement. 
YARD, MINIMUM REAR:  A space extending across the full width of the lot between the rear lot line and a parallel line set back a distance equal to the rear yard requirement. On a lot with no rear yard, the side yard shall extend to the opposite lot line. 
YARD, MINIMUM SIDE:  A space extending from the minimum front yard to the minimum rear yard between the side lot line and a parallel line set back a distance equal to the side yard requirement.  On a lot with no rear yard, the side yard shall extend to the opposite lot line. 
YARD, FRONT:  A space extending across the full width of the lot between the street line and the closest wall of a principal building.  On lots having property lines along more than one street, there shall be only one front yard.  
YARD, REAR:  A space extending across the full width of the lot between the rear lot line and the closest wall of a principal building. 
YARD SALE:  The occasional sale of household goods or handcrafted items conducted on the premises of the owner and/or craftsman of the goods to be sold at a maximum frequency of two times per calendar year for a maximum of three consecutive days. 
ZONE:  An area of land set aside on the Zoning Map having separate requirements as established by these regulations. 
Section 10. USE OF LAND FOR ACCESS OR PARKING 
Access to or parking in connection with a use shall be considered to be accessory to such use and controlled by the same requirements as such use; but this provision shall not prohibit access across a lot in a business zone to a use lying in an industrial zone nor access across a lot in an industrial zone to a use lying in a business zone.  Nothing herein shall prohibit access across a lot in a business or industrial zone to a use lying in a residential zone. 
ARTICLE II.  USE REGULATIONS 

Section l. RESIDENTIAL 80, 40, 30 ZONES (R80, R40, R30) 
A. PERMITTED USES. The following uses requiring only a Zoning Permit as specified in Article 
V. 
1. 	
Single Family Dwelling, one per lot. 

2. 	
Family Day Care Home. 

3. 	
Accessory Uses and Buildings provided the location of all buildings complies with Article 


IV.
 Section 2. of these regulations including but not limited to the following: 

a. 	
Private garage(s). 

b. 	
Tool shed and outbuilding. 

c. 	
Swimming pool, tennis court or other similar recreational structure. 

d. 	
Satellite receiving antenna. 

e. 	
Parking or storage of no more than one commercial motor vehicle of not more than one and one-half (1-1/2) ton capacity (manufacturer’s rating) and/or designed to have no more than four wheels. For purposes of this section commercial motor vehicles shall include those vehicle having commercial or combination license plates. This regulation shall apply to all land within residential zones. For regulations concerning the parking or storage of trailers, mobile homes and recreational vehicles, see Article IV. Section 9. 

f. 	
Indoor or outside storage of objects or materials for use on the premises only. No outdoor storage shall be conducted within the required front yard. 


4. 	Home Office provided: 
a. 	
The office is situated in the principal building which is used as the dwelling and shall occupy no more than 25 percent of the total living area of the dwelling unit. 

b. 	
Only those residing in the dwelling may engage in the home office use. 

c. 	
No clients, customers or outside employees may visit or work from the premises in which the home office is located. 

d. 	
No business shall be conducted from the premises except by phone, computer, facsimile machine or mail. 

e. 	
The outside residential appearance of the dwelling is not changed. 

f. 	
No goods, chattels, materials, supplies or items of any kind shall be delivered either to or 


from the premises in connection with the home office except in a passenger automobile. 
g. 	No goods, chattels, materials, supplies or other items of any kind related to the home office shall be stored outside of the building containing the home office. 
5. 	
Farm, solely for the raising of crops. 

6. 	
Vehicle Sales in Residential Zones The sale of motor vehicles, trailers, and recreational vehicles shall include but not be limited to mobile homes, camper trailers, cars, light trucks, motorcycles and boats, and such items may be displayed for sale on a property in a residential zone provided the vehicle conforms to the provisions under Article II Section 


1.A.3.e and Article IV Section 9 of these regulations.  The property upon which the item is displayed must be owner occupied and the item displayed for sale must be owned by the owner(s) of said property.  Only one item for sale can be displayed at a time and can be displayed for no more than 90 cumulative days per calendar year.  No commercial vehicles, equipment or parts thereof may be sold or displayed in a residential zone.  Vehicles for sale shall be displayed in such a manner as to not create a hazard to vehicular or pedestrian traffic and must not be displayed on Town or State property.  All signs associated with the sale of vehicles shall be displayed from inside the vehicles. 
7. 	The maximum area of all attached and/or detached non-habitable areas (calculated cumulatively but excluding basements located within the principle dwelling) shall not exceed more than 75% of the habitable area (exclusive of finished basement) within the principle dwelling. For the purpose of applying the provisions of this subsection, the term non-habitable area shall include all area within any detached building as well as the area within the principle dwelling that is unfinished and unheated.  Habitable area shall be defined as an area that is both finished and heated.  The area of both habitable and non-habitable spaces shall be calculated measuring from the outside of exterior walls. 
B. USES ALLOWED ONLY BY SPECIAL PERMIT. In addition to specific requirements listed here, the standards provided in Article IV. Section 12. shall also apply to applications submitted under this section. Article IV. Section 12. shall also apply to application procedures, hearing and notice requirements and site plan information. 
1. 	
School. 

2. 	
Day Camp. 

3. 	
Hospital. 

4. 	
Nursing Home. 

5. 	
Charitable and Philanthropic Institution. 

6. 	
Group Day Care Home. 

7. 	
Bed and Breakfast Establishment. 

8. 	
Public Utility Building or Structure not including service or storage yard. 

9. 	
Cemetery provided no burial plot shall be within 75 feet of any property line. 

10. 
Country Club and Fraternal Organization, except where the chief activity is a service carried on as a business such as catering or renting of a function hall. 

11. 
Municipal Land Use and owned or leased buildings and structures used in connection with the governmental or proprietary functions of the Town of Farmington or of any other government, and such uses of land as may be made by the Town or any other government in connection with any of its governmental or proprietary needs and functions. 

12. 
Radio and Television Tower, (commercial) provided the base of the tower is located a minimum distance from any property line at least equal to the height of the tower. Any guy wires used to support the tower shall be at least 100 feet from any property line. 

Communication Facility including satellite receiving or transmitting station. 

13. 
Community Building for	 use by the residents of the community or neighborhood and maintained and operated for community purposes. 

14. 
Farm, provided: 


a. 	
All farm buildings except dwellings shall be located not less than 100 feet from any street line; 

b. 	
Only the slaughtering of livestock and poultry raised on the premises shall be permitted; and 

c. 	
Commercial piggeries are prohibited. 


15. 
Church, College, Library. 

16. 
Poultry raising of less than 20 fowl providing they are suitably confined. 

17. 
Public or Private School. 

18. 
Guest House in the R80 Zone only. 

19. 
Day Care Center, Nursery School. 

20. 
Farm Stand (not otherwise located on a farm). 

21. 
Home Business provided: 


a. 	The home business is situated in the principal building which is used as the dwelling and shall occupy no more than 25 percent of the total living area of the dwelling unit. 
b.  Only those residing in the dwelling and up to two nonresident employees may be engaged in the home business.  
c.  Only articles made, raised or grown on the premises may be sold on the premises. This provision shall not apply to goods sold by catalogue and otherwise not directly sold and shipped or carried from the premises.  
d.  No display of articles shall be visible from outside the building in which the home business is conducted.  
e.  The outside residential appearance of the dwelling is not changed.  
f.  Signage shall be limited to one non-illuminated sign no more than two square feet in area as approved by the Commission.  
g.  Any instructional classes shall be limited to no more than five students at one time.  
h.  Barbers, beauticians and other personal services shall be limited to the installation and use of one chair (station).  
i.  No goods, chattels, materials, supplies or items of any kind related to the home business shall be stored outside of the building containing the home business.  
j.  A number of parking spaces, as determined by the Commission, shall be provided on the site on which the home business is located.  
k.  No equipment or process shall be used which creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical interference detectable to the normal senses off the lot which is detrimental to the neighborhood.  
As part of the special permit the Commission may attach conditions to an approval regulating the business hours and days of operation, the time period such special permit shall remain in effect and the manner in which items related to the home business may be transported to and from the premises. The Commission may also limit the grant of such approval to one individual applicant.  

22. 
Rehabilitation Center. 

23. 
Recreational Facility including park. 

24. 
Garden Supply Center. 

25. 
Raising of Fur Bearing Animals. 


C. HOURS OF OPERATION FOR SPECIAL PERMIT USES. At the time of public hearing the Commission may require the submission of projected hours of operation. The Commission shall review the impact of such schedule of hours on the immediate neighborhood as well as current and projected traffic circulation patterns. As part of the special permit, reasonable limitations on hours of operation may be imposed. 
D. EXPIRATION OF PERMIT. The approval of an application for special permit shall be void and of no effect unless construction of the project commences within one year from the date of the approval granted by the Commission. For purposes of this regulation the term construction shall be defined as the installation of a permanent building foundation. The Commission may grant up to two six-month extensions of this period upon written request by the applicant. The Commission shall withhold approval of any or all extensions unless the development plan is brought into conformance with any relevant zoning regulations which have been amended subsequent to the original approval and if the applicant fails to provide adequate evidence that construction is able to begin within the extended time period sought. This evidence shall include, but not be limited to, the acquisition of any or all required government approvals and project financing. Any appeals of such special permit, site plan, inland wetlands or subdivision approval shall extend the aforementioned one-year period the length of such appeal. 
Section 2. RESIDENTIAL 20 ZONE (R20) 
A. PERMITTED USES. The following uses requiring only a Zoning Permit as specified in Article 
V. 
1. 	
All permitted uses in the R80, R40 and R30 Zones. 

2. 	
The maximum area of all attached and/or detached non-habitable areas (calculated cumulatively but excluding basements located within the principle dwelling) shall not exceed more than 75% of the habitable area (exclusive of finished basement) within the principle dwelling. For the purpose of applying the provisions of this subsection, the term non-habitable area shall include all area within any detached building as well as the area within the principle dwelling that is unfinished and unheated.  Habitable area shall be defined as an area that is both finished and heated.  The area of both habitable and non-habitable spaces shall be calculated measuring from the outside of exterior walls. 


B. USES ALLOWED ONLY BY SPECIAL PERMIT. In addition to specific requirements listed here, the standards provided in Article IV. Section 12. shall also apply to applications submitted under this section. Article IV. Section 12. shall also apply to application procedures, hearing and notice requirements and site plan information. 
1. 	
All uses allowed by special permit in the R80, R40 and R30 Zones, except Guest House and except Group Day Care Home unless in compliance with 2. below. 

2. 	
Group Day Care Home provided: 


a. 	
The lot contains a minimum of 30,000 square feet; and 

b. 	
All play areas shall meet all front, side and rear yard setback requirements of the R20 


Zone. 
C. HOURS OF OPERATION FOR SPECIAL PERMIT USES. At the time of public hearing the Commission may require the submission of projected hours of operation. The Commission shall review the impact of such schedule of hours on the immediate neighborhood as well as current and projected traffic circulation patterns. As part of the special permit, reasonable limitations on hours of operation may be imposed. 
D. EXPIRATION OF PERMIT. The approval of an application for special permit shall be void and of no effect unless construction of the project commences within one year from the date of the approval granted by the Commission. For purposes of this regulation the term construction shall be defined as the installation of a permanent building foundation. The Commission may grant up to two six-month extensions of this period upon written request by the applicant. The Commission shall withhold approval of any or all extensions unless the development plan is brought into conformance with any relevant zoning regulations which have been amended subsequent to the original approval and if the applicant fails to provide adequate evidence that construction is able to begin within the extended time period sought. This evidence shall include, but not be limited to, the acquisition of any or all required government approvals and project financing. Any appeals of such special permit, site plan, inland wetlands or subdivision approval shall extend the aforementioned one-year period the length of such appeal. 
Section 3. RESIDENTIAL 12 ZONE (R12) 
A. PERMITTED USES. The following uses requiring only a Zoning Permit as specified in Article 
V. 
1. 	
All permitted uses in the R80, R40, R30 and R20 Zones. 

2. 	
The maximum area of all attached and/or detached non-habitable areas (calculated cumulatively but excluding basements located within the principle dwelling) shall not exceed more than 75% of the habitable area (exclusive of finished basement) within the principle dwelling. For the purpose of applying the provisions of this subsection, the term non-habitable area shall include all area within any detached building as well as the area within the principle dwelling that is unfinished and unheated.  Habitable area shall be defined as an area that is both finished and heated.  The area of both habitable and non-habitable spaces shall be calculated measuring from the outside of exterior walls. 


B. USES ALLOWED ONLY BY SPECIAL PERMIT. In addition to specific requirements listed here, the standards provided in Article IV. Section 12. shall also apply to applications submitted under this section. Article IV. Section 12. shall also apply to application procedures, hearing and notice requirements and site plan information. 
1. 	
All uses allowed by special permit in the R80, R40, R30 and R20 Zones, except Guest House and except Group Day Care Home unless in compliance with 3. below. 

2. 	
Two Family Dwelling, one per lot. 

3. 	
Group Day Care Home provided: 


a. 	
The lot contains a minimum of 20,000 square feet; and 

b. 	
All play areas shall meet all front, side and rear yard setback requirements of the R12 Zone. 


4. 	Offsite parking to serve a business use located on a separate lot which has frontage on a state highway and under the same ownership as the use being served.  The provisions of Article IV, Section 12.B. shall be applied. 
C. HOURS OF OPERATION FOR SPECIAL PERMIT USES. At the time of public hearing the Commission may require the submission of projected hours of operation. The Commission shall review the impact of such schedule of hours on the immediate neighborhood as well as current and projected traffic circulation patterns. As part of the special permit, reasonable limitations on hours of operation may be imposed. 
D. EXPIRATION OF PERMIT. The approval of an application for special permit shall be void and of no effect unless construction of the project commences within one year from the date of the approval granted by the Commission. For purposes of this regulation the term construction shall be defined as the installation of a permanent building foundation. The Commission may grant up to two six-month extensions of this period upon written request by the applicant. The Commission shall withhold approval of any or all extensions unless the development plan is brought into conformance with any relevant zoning regulations which have been amended subsequent to the original approval and if the applicant fails to provide adequate evidence that construction is able to begin within the extended time period sought. This evidence shall include, but not be limited to, the acquisition of any or all required government approvals and project financing. Any appeals of such special permit, site plan, inland wetlands or subdivision approval shall extend the aforementioned one-year period the length of such appeal. 
Section 4. RESIDENTIAL 12 LAKE GARDA ZONE (R12LG) 
A. PERMITTED USES.  The following uses requiring only a Zoning Permit as specified in Article 
V. 
1. 	
All permitted uses in the R80, R40, R30, R20 and R12 Zones. 

2. 	
The maximum area of all attached and/or detached non-habitable areas (calculated cumulatively but excluding basements located within the principle dwelling) shall not exceed more than 75% of the habitable area (exclusive of finished basement) within the principle dwelling. For the purpose of applying the provisions of this subsection, the term non-habitable area shall include all area within any detached building as well as the area within the principle dwelling that is unfinished and unheated.  Habitable area shall be defined as an area that is both finished and heated.  The area of both habitable and non-habitable spaces shall be calculated measuring from the outside of exterior walls. 


B. USES ALLOWED ONLY BY SPECIAL PERMIT.	  In addition to specific requirements listed here, the standards provided in Article IV. Section 12. shall also apply to applications submitted under this section. Article IV. Section 12. shall also apply to application procedures, hearing and notice requirements and site plan information. 
1. 	
All uses allowed by special permit in the R80, R40, R30, R20 and R12 Zones, except Two Family Dwelling, Guest House and except Group Day Care Home unless in compliance with 

2.
 below. 


2. 	Group Day Care Home provided: 
a. 	
The lot contains a minimum of 20,000 square feet; and 

b. 	
All play areas shall meet all front, side and rear yard setback requirements of the R12 Zone. 

C. 
HOURS OF OPERATION FOR SPECIAL PERMIT USES. 	At the time of public hearing the Commission may require the submission of projected hours of operation.  The Commission shall review the impact of such schedule of hours on the immediate neighborhood as well as current and projected traffic circulation patterns.  As part of the special permit, reasonable limitations on hours of operation may be imposed. 

D. 
EXPIRATION OF PERMIT. 	The approval of an application for special permit shall be void and of no effect unless construction of the project commences within one year from the date of the approval granted by the Commission.  For purposes of this regulation the term construction shall be defined as the installation of a permanent building foundation.  The Commission may grant up to two six-month extensions of this period upon written request by the applicant. The Commission shall withhold approval of any or all extensions unless the development plan is brought into conformance with any relevant zoning regulations which have been amended subsequent to the original approval and if the applicant fails to provide adequate evidence that construction is able to begin within the extended time period sought. This evidence shall include, but not be limited to, the acquisition of any or all required government approvals and project financing.  Any appeals of such special permit, site plan, inland wetlands or subdivision approval shall extend the aforementioned one-year period the length of such appeal. 

A. 
PERMITTED USES.  The following uses requiring only a Zoning Permit as specified in Article 

V. 


Section 5. RESIDENTIAL 9 ZONE (R9) 
1. 	
All permitted uses in the R80, R40, R30, R20 and R12 Zones. 

2. 	
The maximum area of all attached and/or detached non-habitable areas (calculated cumulatively but excluding basements located within the principle dwelling) shall not exceed more than 75% of the habitable area (exclusive of finished basement) within the principle dwelling. For the purpose of applying the provisions of this subsection, the term non-habitable area shall include all area within any detached building as well as the area within the principle dwelling that is unfinished and unheated.  Habitable area shall be defined as an area that is both finished and heated.  The area of both habitable and non-habitable spaces shall be calculated measuring from the outside of exterior walls. 


B. USES ALLOWED ONLY BY SPECIAL PERMIT. In addition to specific requirements listed here, the standards provided in Article IV. Section 12. shall also apply to applications submitted under this section. Article IV. Section 12. shall also apply to application procedures, hearing and notice requirements and site plan information. 
1. 	
All uses allowed by special permit in the R80, R40, R30, R20 and R12 Zones, except Guest House and except Group Day Care Home unless in compliance with 3. below. 

2. 	
Three and Four Family Dwelling, one per lot. 

3. 	
Group Day Care Home provided: 


a. 	
The lot contains a minimum of 15,000 square feet; and 

b. 	
All play areas shall meet all front, side and rear yard setback requirements of the R9 Zone. 


4. 	R9 Multi Family Cluster (See Article II. Section 20.). 
C. HOURS OF OPERATION FOR SPECIAL PERMIT USES. 	At the time of public hearing the Commission may require the submission of projected hours of operation.  The Commission shall review the impact of such schedule of hours on the immediate neighborhood as well as current and projected traffic circulation patterns. As part of the special permit, reasonable limitations on hours of operation may be imposed. 
D. EXPIRATION OF PERMIT. 	The approval of an application for special permit shall be void and of no effect unless construction of the project commences within one year from the date of the approval granted by the Commission.  For purposes of this regulation the term construction shall be defined as the installation of a permanent building foundation.  The Commission may grant up to two six-month extensions of this period upon written request by the applicant.  The Commission shall withhold approval of any or all extensions unless the development plan is brought into conformance with any relevant zoning regulations, which have been amended subsequent to the original approval and if the applicant fails to provide adequate evidence that construction is able to begin within the extended time period sought. This evidence shall include, but not be limited to, the acquisition of any or all required government approvals and project financing.  Any appeals of such special permit, site plan, inland wetlands or subdivision approval shall extend the aforementioned one-year period the length of such appeal. 
Section 6. RESIDENTIAL 9 LAKE GARDA ZONE (R9LG) 
A. PERMITTED USES.  The following uses requiring only a Zoning Permit as specified in Article 
V. 
1. 	
All permitted uses in the R80, R40, R30, R20 and R12 Zones. 

2. 	
The maximum area of all attached and/or detached non-habitable areas (calculated cumulatively but excluding basements located within the principle dwelling) shall not exceed more than 75% of the habitable area (exclusive of finished basement) within the principle 


dwelling. For the purpose of applying the provisions of this subsection, the term non-habitable area shall include all area within any detached building as well as the area within the principle dwelling that is unfinished and unheated.  Habitable area shall be defined as an area that is both finished and heated.  The area of both habitable and non-habitable spaces shall be calculated measuring from the outside of exterior walls. 
B. USES ALLOWED ONLY BY SPECIAL PERMIT. In addition to specific requirements listed here, the standards provided in Article IV. Section 12. shall also apply to applications submitted under this section. Article IV. Section 12. shall also apply to application procedures, hearing and notice requirements and site plan information. 
1. 	All uses allowed by special permit in the R12LG Zone. 
C. HOURS OF OPERATION FOR SPECIAL PERMIT USES. 	At the time of public hearing the Commission may require the submission of projected hours of operation.  The Commission shall review the impact of such schedule of hours on the immediate neighborhood as well as current and projected traffic circulation patterns.  As part of the special permit, reasonable limitations on hours of operation may be imposed. 
D. EXPIRATION OF PERMIT. 	The approval of an application for special permit shall be void and of no effect unless construction of the project commences within one year from the date of the approval granted by the Commission. For purposes of this regulation the term construction shall be defined as the installation of a permanent building foundation.  The Commission may grant up to two six-month extensions of this period upon written request by the applicant.  The Commission shall withhold approval of any or all extensions unless the development plan is brought into conformance with any relevant zoning regulations, which have been amended subsequent to the original approval and if the applicant fails to provide adequate evidence that construction is able to begin within the extended time period sought.  This evidence shall include, but not be limited to, the acquisition of any or all required government approvals and project financing.  Any appeals of such special permit, site plan, inland wetlands or subdivision approval shall extend the aforementioned one-year period the length of such appeal. 
Section 6A. RESIDENTIAL OAKLAND GARDENS ZONE (R9OG) 
A. PERMITTED USES. The following use requiring a Zoning Permit as specified in Article V. 
1. 	
All permitted uses in the R80, R40, R30, R20, R12 and R9 Zones. 

2. 	
The maximum area of all attached and/or detached non-habitable areas (calculated cumulatively but excluding basements located within the principle dwelling) shall not exceed more than 75% of the habitable area (exclusive of finished basement) within the principle dwelling.  For the purpose of applying the provisions of this subsection, the term non-habitable area shall include all area within any detached building as well as the area within the principle dwelling that is unfinished and unheated.  Habitable area shall be defined as an area that is both finished and heated.  The area of both habitable and non-habitable spaces shall be calculated measuring from the outside of exterior walls. 


B. USES ALLOWED ONLY BY SPECIAL PERMIT. In addition to specific requirements listed here, the standards provided in Article IV. Section 12. shall also apply to applications submitted under this section. Article IV. Section 12. shall also apply to application procedures, hearing and notice requirements and site plan information. 
1. 	
All uses by special permit in the R80, R40, R30, R20, R12 and R9 zone, except Two, Three and Four Family Dwelling, Guest House and except Group Day Care Home unless in compliance with 2. below. 

2. 	
Group Day Care Home provided: 


a. 	
The lot contains a minimum of 20,000 square feet; and 

b. 	
All play areas shall meet all front, side and rear yard setback requirements of the R9 Zone. 

C. 
HOURS OF OPERATION FOR SPECIAL PERMIT USES. 	 At the time of public hearing, the Commission may require the submission of projected hours of operation.  The Commission shall review the impact of such schedule of hours on the immediate neighborhood as well as current and projected traffic circulation patterns.  As part of the special permit, reasonable limitations on hours of operation may be imposed.  

D. 
EXPIRATION OF PERMIT. 	The approval of an application for special permit shall be void of no effect unless construction of the project commences within one year from the date of the approval granted by the Commission.  For purposes of this regulation, the term construction shall be defined as the installation of a permanent building foundation.  The Commission may grant up to two six-month extensions of this period upon written request by the applicant.  The Commission shall withhold approval of any or all extensions unless the development plan is brought into conformance with any relevant zoning regulations, which have been amended subsequent to the original approval and if the applicant fails to provide adequate evidence that construction is able to begin within the extended time period sought.  This evidence shall include, but not be limited to, the acquisition of any or all required government approvals and project financing.  Any appeals of such special permit, site plan, inland wetlands or subdivision approval shall extend the aforementioned one-year period the length of such appeal.  


Section 7. RESIDENTIAL APARTMENT ZONE (RA) 
INACTIVE -See Section 8. RDM Zone (no application under RA Zone accepted after February 7, 1969). Requirements of the former apartment zone are available from the Planning Department. Modifications may be made to an existing housing development within the RA Zone including the expansion or addition of structures providing such modifications comply with the height, setback and bulk requirements of the RA Zone and no additional units are created. 
Section 8. DESIGNED MULTIPLE RESIDENCE ZONE (RDM) 
A. PERMITTED USES. The following use requiring a Zoning Permit as specified in Article V. 
1. 	Home Office as defined in Article I. Section 9. and Article II. Section l. 
B. USES ALLOWED ONLY BY SPECIAL PERMIT.	  In addition to specific requirements listed here, the standards provided in Article IV. Section 12. shall also apply to applications submitted under this section. Article IV. Section 12. shall also apply to application procedures, hearing and notice requirements and site plan information. 
1. 	
Individual Family Residential Units under a single common ownership within a single structure or structures. 

2. 	
Apartments with Single Family Units combined in a single structure or structures under single common ownership. 

3. 	
Condominiums consisting of apartments with single-family units combined in a single structure or structures as permitted under the Common Interest Ownership Act of the Connecticut General Statutes. 

4. 	
Parking, Recreation and Accessory Structures limited to the use of the residents of the units permitted above. 

5. 	
Combinations of the above. 

6. 	
Separate Single Family Lots may be approved for use with a dwelling within an RDM Zone as part of the buffer area outlined in Paragraph C.5. below, provided that such lots be a part of an approved development plan on file. Note: The total number of single-family lots permitted under this section shall not exceed ten percent of the total number of dwelling units authorized under the special permit. Where applicable, all requirements for subdivision shall be complied with. 

7. 	
Home Business as defined in Article I. Section 9. and Article II. Section l. 

8. 	
All uses allowed by special permit in the R80, R40 and R30 Zones, except Guest House and except Group Day Care Home unless in compliance with Section 8.B.9. 

9. 	
Group Day Care Home provided such facility is located within a single-family dwelling situated on an individual lot or within a community building. All play areas shall meet all front, side and rear yard setback requirements for the building in which such facility is proposed. 

10. 
Day Care Center provided such facility is located within a single-family dwelling situated on an individual lot or within a community building. All play areas shall meet all front, side and rear yard setback requirements for the building in which such facility is proposed. 

11. 
Communication Facility including satellite receiving or transmitting station. 


C. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 
1. 	
Area: A minimum of five acres of contiguous land is required for establishment of an RDM Zone. 

2. 	
Density: The maximum number of dwelling units shall not exceed five per net acre. In computing the number of net acres for the purposes of this paragraph, the number of square feet in a buffer area in excess of 50 feet pursuant to Paragraph 5 below shall be excluded, as well as 75 percent of all areas of inland wetlands and watercourses and slopes in excess of 33 percent (as calculated by two foot contour intervals).  The overall site plan which is approved by the Commission shall be controlling as to the total number of dwelling units that may be 

constructed within a project. Phased construction of a project shall be designed in a manner consistent with this requirement. The number of single-family lots permitted in the buffer area may be in addition to the maximum number of dwelling units established by the preceding formula. 

3. 	
Grouping: The shortest distance between any two structures shall be not less than the height of the taller structure, as measured to the highest point of the roof from the ground elevation of the closest wall to the adjacent structure, with a minimum of twenty-four (24) feet. Each structure shall consist of no more than 12 units. No building may exceed 160 feet in length. The length of a building shall be defined as the longest horizontal dimension of a building following a wall which is unbroken by an intersecting wall at least fifty (50) feet in length and having an angle of 135 degrees or less.  Maximum height of residences and clubhouses shall be 35 feet. All other buildings and structures shall not exceed 15 feet in height. The Commission may waive the separation requirement if the design of the proposed development is benefited by closer spacing. 

4. 	
Open Area: (Formerly Recreation Space, Living Space and Open Space.) There shall be set aside, not to be built upon, unpaved and landscaped with an acceptable balance of viable trees, shrubs and grass, site area equal to 3,500 square feet per unit. The area contained within the front yard and side and rear yard buffers, except for buffer areas contained within single-family lots, may be used to satisfy this requirement. 

5. 	
Front Yard and Buffer Area: There shall be provided along the perimeter of a development a front yard with a minimum width of 50 feet and side or rear yard buffer areas of at least 50 feet in width. Front yards shall be designated along all perimeter property lines contiguous to a street. The Commission may require that front yards be planted in accordance with the specifications of an “A” or “B” Bufferyard (40-foot width). No buildings, structures or parking areas including stalls or aisleway are permitted within the front yard. One or more driveways may run perpendicular (approximations expected) to the required front yard. In the event that adjacent properties are zoned in any of the zoning classifications shown below, the buffer area shall be of the width shown in the column captioned “Buffer Width.” Where one RDM Zone is adjacent to another or to an AH or nonresidential zone, required buffer areas may be reduced to as little as 25 feet by a five-sixths vote of the full Commission. The Commission may require that side or rear bufferyard areas be planted in accordance with the specifications of a “B” Bufferyard (35-foot width). 


Zone 	Buffer Width 
R80, R40    	100 feet 
R30, R20    	70 feet 
R12, R9      	50 feet 
If, in the opinion of the Commission, the individual topography or natural features of the site should suggest that this buffer width is not appropriate, the Commission reserves the right to increase the buffer by up to twice the required width by a vote of five-sixths of the full Commission. 
6. 	Single Family Homes Within the Buffer Area: In accordance with Section 8.B.6. land within the buffer area may be wholly or in part used for single family homes situated on separate lots where such lots and house development shall conform to the following standards: 
Zone Abutting Buffer Area Standards for Lot and Home* R80, R40 R40 R30, R20 R20 All Other Zones R20 
* In no case shall the required side or rear yard setbacks from an RDM Zone boundary line be less than 25 feet. 
7. 	
Parking: Two and three-tenths parking spaces shall be provided for each dwelling unit. Such spaces shall be within 200 feet of the intended users.  No parking shall be permitted within the buffer area or required front yard, except for buffer areas contained within single-family lots. 

8. 	
Dwelling Size: Each dwelling unit shall consist of at least two rooms, exclusive of hall and bathroom, and there shall be at least 500 square feet of living area for a two-room unit and at least 600 square feet for a three-room unit.  Each additional room shall have at least 100 square feet. Each detached dwelling unit not in the buffer area must consist of at least 900 square feet of living area. 

9. 	
Access Streets and Sidewalks: The placement, size, arrangement and use of access routes to public or private streets shall be adequate to service residents and provide no hindrance to the safety of existing or proposed streets.  Pedestrian sidewalks with all weather surfacing may be required where the density of population or school bus routes make such advisable for convenience and safety.  Street and parking lot grading, drainage and surfacing shall comply with the specifications of the Town. 

10. 
Firewalls and Sound Control: 	Each grouping of four dwelling units (combined in one structure) shall be separated by a two-hour firewall. Construction of dwelling units shall include (i) control of airborne sound transmission, and (ii) impact noise reduction assemblies equal to F.H.A. minimum property standards for multifamily housing, current edition. A two-hour firewall shall not be required where a building is equipped with a fire suppression system per NFPA R 13 guidelines. 

11. 
Staging: The Commission may approve a development plan to be completed in stages.  	The minimum amount of land to be included within any single stage of development shall be five acres.  The Commission may grant a special permit limited to each such stage of development. Each stage shall be capable of independent existence without the completion of the succeeding stages.  Buffer requirements shall not apply to the common line between stages of development. 

12. 
All development within RDM Zones shall be served by public water and sewers. 	For the purpose of this section, public water shall not include a community well. 

13. 
All utility wires shall be placed underground. 

14. 
Discretionary Waivers for Rental Housing proposals where the site in question is adjacent in 


part to property with a zoning classification of RDM, RA, SA, PR, BR or B1 and at least (i) 50% of the dwelling units are one bedroom units, and (ii) 40% of the dwelling units within each building have internal garages. 
Notwithstanding anything contained in this Section 8 to the contrary, the Commission may grant any or all of the following waivers: 
(i) 	
Density:  up to a maximum of six dwelling units per net acre if not more than 10 bedrooms per net acre is proposed. 

(ii) 	
Grouping: up to a maximum of 20 dwelling units per building if the building length does not exceed 160 feet.  A maximum height of residences of 40.5 feet. 


(iii) 	Front Yard and Buffer Area: A prescribed Buffer Width can be reduced by half if it abuts dedicated open space of a depth equal to or greater than the prescribed Buffer Width. 
(iv) 	
Parking: a minimum of two parking spaces per dwelling unit may be provided. 

D. 
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 


1. 	
A Certificate of Occupancy shall not be issued by the Building Inspector for more than 85 percent of the dwelling units of the approved development plan or of the approved stage of the development until all details of the approved development plan or of the approved stage of the development plan shall have been fully completed or bonded. 

2. 	
The approval of an application for an RDM Zone shall be void and of no effect unless construction of the project commences within one year from the effective day of the zone change granted by the Commission.  For purposes of this regulation the term construction shall be defined as the installation of a permanent building foundation.  The Commission may grant up to two six-month extensions of this period upon written request by the applicant.  The Commission shall withhold approval of any or all extensions unless the development plan is brought into conformance with any relevant zoning regulations which have been amended subsequent to the original approval and if the applicant fails to provide adequate evidence that construction is able to begin within the extended time period sought. This evidence shall include, but not be limited to, the acquisition of any or all required government approvals and project financing.  Any appeals of such zone change, site plan, inland wetlands or subdivision approval shall extend the aforementioned one-year period the length of such appeal. 


E. Nothing herein shall prevent the construction of a development approved within an RDM Zone prior to March 24, 1995 which does not conform to the density standards set forth in this section. 
F. 	PROTECTION AND CONVEYANCE OF UNDEVELOPED LAND: Areas of the development that are not proposed to be disturbed shall be encumbered by a conservation easement at the request of the Commission. Such areas or portions thereof may be conveyed with the express approval of the Commission to the Town of Farmington, nonprofit land trust or other organization dedicated to the preservation of land subject to the following: 
1. 	
Land to be conveyed shall be in excess of the area reserved and designated as open area under paragraph C.4 of this regulation unless otherwise approved by the Commission. 

2. 	
Generally front yards, side and rear yard buffer areas as required by paragraph C.5 of this regulation shall not be conveyed except in cases where such yard or buffer area is situated contiguous to an existing or proposed area of open space offsite or contains one or more natural or man-made resources as defined in Article II Section 19.B.2 of these regulations. Land to be conveyed shall be preserved in an undisturbed state, used for passive recreation, used for active recreation or other community facilities as established by the Commission. Such use or uses of this land shall be determined at the time the RDM zone becomes effective.  In cases where an RDM zone contains land which is to be conveyed for the above-mentioned purpose(s), the approval of such zone and development plan shall not become effective until a map of the final development plan indicating the location and use of such land to be conveyed is filed in the Farmington Land records.  Unless otherwise approved by the Commission, no building permit shall be issued for an RDM zone until the designated land conveyance has been executed. 

3. 	
The conveyance of land under this section shall not constitute a violation of the area, setback, density or bulk requirements of the RDM zone.  Required front, side or rear yards (buffers) which may have been conveyed shall continue to be recognized and function under these regulations as such. 


Section 9. SENIOR – ACTIVE ADULT HOUSING ZONE (S-A) 
A. PURPOSE. 	The purpose of this section is to permit the development of elderly, assisted elderly and active adult housing as defined in these regulations.  No provision of this regulation shall be applied, enforced or implemented in a manner which is inconsistent with or prohibited by the fair housing laws of the United States and the State of Connecticut. 
B. PERMITTED USES.  The following use requires a Zoning Permit as specified in Article V. 
1. 	Home Office as defined in Article I. Section 9. and Article II Section 1. 
C. USES ALLOWED ONLY BY SPECIAL PERMIT.	  In addition to specific requirements listed here, the standards provided in Article IV, Section 12 shall also apply to applications submitted under this section.  Article IV, Section 12 shall also apply to application procedures, hearing and notice requirements and site plan information. 
1. 	
Municipal and nonprofit housing for the elderly. 

2. 	
For profit housing for the elderly. 

3. 	
Assisted elderly housing. 

4. 	
Active adult housing. 

5. 	
Home business as defined in Article I. Section 9. and Article II. Section 1. 

6. 	
Parking, Recreation and Accessory Structures limited to the use of the residents of the above. 

7. 	
Memory Care Housing for the elderly, and others who qualify, for the care of residents with reversible and irreversible forms of Dementia including Alzheimer’s disease and related Dementias. Residents shall be 55 years of age or older, unless an application is made to request that the Town Plan and Zoning Commission permit a younger person to reside in such housing at its sole discretion.  Companions who are non-qualified residents may be permitted with the permission of the owner and/or operator of the facility.  Such 


developments shall conform to the standards of Section 9.E. Development Standards for Housing for the Elderly and Assisted Elderly Housing. 
D. PROCEDURE. 	An application for a Senior-Active Adult Housing Zone may be submitted to the Commission by a public, nonprofit or for-profit housing developer for a parcel of land or part thereof located in any business, industrial or residential zone and which contains the minimum area set forth in this regulation.  All development within the Senior-Active Adult Housing Zone shall be constructed strictly in accordance with the maps and drawings approved by the Commission.  Any additions or modifications to such approved plans shall be approved by the Commission, however minor additions or modifications shall not require a public hearing.  The Commission shall make the determination as to whether an addition or modification shall be considered as minor. 
No application for a Senior-Active Adult Housing Zone shall be approved by the Commission unless if finds that in addition to the standards contained in Article IV. Section 12.B. the application and plans conform to the standards contained in this section.  The Commission may attach conditions to an approval of a Senior – Active Adult Housing Zone in order to assure compliance with the above-mentioned standards. 
No application for a Senior – Active Adult Housing Zone shall be approved by the Commission unless it finds that a need exists within the Town of Farmington for the specific housing type proposed and the Commission finds that the topography and other natural features of the property are capable of accommodating increased building density without detrimental impact.  
E. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR HOUSING FOR THE ELDERLY AND ASSISTED ELDERLY HOUSING 
1. 	
The maximum number of units per acre for municipal, nonprofit and for profit housing for the elderly is 10.  In computing the number of acres for the purposes of this paragraph, 75% of the area of the site consisting of soils regulated as inland wetlands and watercourses as well as 75% of slopes over 33 % (as determined by two foot contour intervals) shall be excluded. 

2. 	
The maximum number of beds per acre for assisted elderly housing and Memory Care Housing is 15.  In computing the number of acres for the purposes of this paragraph, 75% of the area of the site consisting of soils regulated as inland wetlands and watercourses as well as 75% of slopes over 33% (as determined by two foot contour intervals) shall be excluded. 

3. 	
Each dwelling unit in an elderly housing development shall contain a minimum of 415 square feet of living area, inclusive of bathrooms and exclusive of halls. 

4. 	
Each dwelling unit in an assisted elderly housing development shall contain at least 315 square feet and not more than 1,000 square feet of living area, inclusive of bathrooms and exclusive of halls.  The living area may be increased by up to 250 square feet when a one-bedroom unit with a den or a two-bedroom unit is provided. Each private dwelling unit in Memory Care Housing shall contain at least 250 square feet and not more than 700 square feet of living area, inclusive of bathrooms and exclusive of halls. 

5. 	
The shortest distance between any two structures shall be not less than the height of the taller structure as measured to the highest point of the roof from the ground elevation of the closest wall to the adjacent structure, with a minimum of twenty-four (24) feet.  Courts shall be completely open on one side.  Maximum height of any principal building shall be thirty-six 


(36) feet.  Accessory buildings and structures shall be limited to fifteen (15) feet in height. The maximum height and minimum distance between buildings may be waived upon a five-sixths vote of the full Commission if the design of the development is benefited by greater height or closer spacing. 
6. 	
One parking space shall be provided for each dwelling unit, except in the case of Assisted Elderly Housing and Memory Care Housing where one parking space for every three beds shall be provided.  This number may be reduced upon a five-sixths vote of the full Commission.  

7. 	
There shall be provided along the perimeter of a development a front yard with a minimum width of 50 feet and side or rear buffer areas of at least 50 feet in width.  Front yards shall be designated along all perimeter property lines contiguous to a street.  The Commission may require that front yards be planted in accordance with the specifications of an “A” Bufferyard (40-foot width) and side or rear buffer yards be planted in accordance with a “B” Bufferyard (35-foot width). No buildings, structures (other than utility structures) or parking areas including stalls or aisle way are permitted within the front yard.  No driveway, parking area (including stalls and aisle way) shall be permitted within 25 feet of the side and rear lot lines. One or more driveways may run perpendicular (approximations expected) to the required front yard. The required front yard and buffer areas may be reduced to as little as 25 feet by a five-sixths vote of the full Commission where the project is adjacent to an AH, RDM, RA or nonresidential zone or where it is found that such reduced width is consistent with other properties in the area and is adequate to provide an effective buffer to neighboring properties.  


F. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR ACTIVE ADULT HOUSING 
1. 	Each active adult housing unit shall be occupied by: 
a. 	
Persons who are 55 years of age or older. 

b. 	
A spouse of an occupant pursuant to a. above.  

c. 	
Occupant pursuant to b. above whom survives his or her spouse. 

d. 	
Occupant pursuant to b. above whose spouse has entered into a long-term continuing care facility. 


In c. and d. above, remaining spouses who remarry or cohabitate must meet all occupancy requirements. 
e. 	A personal care attendant who is in service to a resident 55 years of age or older, to attend to that resident(s) medical and/or health needs, provided that (i) the personal care attendant is: 21 years of age or older, registered with the Town Planner’s office, and not paying the resident any form of rent, (ii) the resident(s) in question has a note from his/her doctor stating that the condition of the resident is such that a personal care attendant is warranted, (iii) if the resident in need of a personal care attendant is not in occupancy of his/her home for a period in excess of one month, unless extended by the Commission, the personal care attendant shall not live in the home. 
2. 	
One child 21 years of age or older may reside with his or her parent(s). 

3. 	
In no event shall an active adult housing unit be occupied by more than three residents. 

4. 	
A proposed active adult housing development shall be a Common Interest Ownership Community as defined in Chapter 828 of the Connecticut General Statutes. 

5. 	
A minimum of ten acres of contiguous land is required for establishment of an active adult housing development. 

6. 	
The maximum number of units per acre is four.  In computing the number of acres for the purposes of this paragraph, 75% of the area of the site consisting of soils regulated as inland wetlands or watercourses as well as 75% of slopes over 33% (as determined by two-foot contour intervals) shall be excluded. 

7. 	
No more than 40 percent of the lot area may be covered with impervious surfaces. 

8. 	
Only single-family detached units shall be allowed. 

9. 	
The minimum living area of each dwelling unit, inclusive of bathrooms and exclusive of hallways, shall be 900 square feet. 

10. 
The maximum height of any building in an active adult housing development shall be 24 feet. 

11. 
The minimum distance between sidewalls of units shall be 20 feet. 	Where the distance between units is less than 24 feet, adjacent walls shall be angled to prevent parallel sidewalls. The minimum distance between rear walls of units shall be 40 feet. 

12. 
There shall be at least two parking spaces provided for each dwelling unit.  	At least one of these parking spaces shall be provided within an attached garage.  A minimum of 25 percent of the units shall accommodate a two-car attached garage. The Commission may require the provision of guest parking spaces in addition to aforementioned required parking. All unit driveways shall be a minimum of 20 feet in length. 

13. 
Each dwelling unit shall contain a basement or attic for storage. 

14. 
The Commission may require along the perimeter of the development a front buffer yard up to 40 feet in width and a side or rear buffer yard up to 40 feet in width.  Front buffer yards shall be planted in accordance with the specifications of an “A” Bufferyard (40-foot width) and side or rear buffer yards shall be planted in accordance with the specification of a “B” Bufferyard (35-foot width). 

15. 
The purchase of a dwelling unit for investment purposes, i.e. by a person or entity not intending to occupy the unit, is prohibited except that a nonresident family member may purchase up to one unit for persons who will reside in the unit and who otherwise comply with the provisions of this regulation. 

16. 
An owner of a dwelling unit may rent his or her unit for a term(s) of not less than one year provided that the tenant fully complies with all of the conditions of this regulation. 

17. 
There shall be set aside open space area equal to 2,500 square feet per unit.  	Such open space area shall not include any watercourse, water body, wetland soils classified as poorly drained or very poorly drained or slopes in excess of 33% (as determined by two foot contour intervals). 

18. 
The Commission may require the provision of a walking trail system within the proposed development.  Unpaved walking trails may be counted as open space under Section 9.F.17 of this regulation. 


G. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 
1. 	
All developments approved in the S-A zone shall be served by public sewer and water.  For the purpose of this section, public water shall not include a community well. 

2. 	
All utility wires shall be placed underground. 

3. 	
A Certificate of Occupancy shall not be issued by the Building Inspector for more than 85 percent of the dwelling units of the approved development plan or of the approved stage of the development until all details of the approved development plan or of the approved stage of the development plan shall have been fully completed or bonded.   

4. 	
The approval of an application for elderly housing, assisted elderly housing and active adult housing shall be void and of no effect unless construction of the project commences within one year from the date the approval is granted by the Commission.  For purposes of this regulation the term construction shall be defined as the installation of a permanent building foundation.  The Commission may grant up to two six-month extensions of this period upon written request by the applicant.  The Commission shall withhold approval of any or all extensions unless the development plan is brought into conformance with any relevant zoning regulations which have been amended subsequent to the original approval and if the applicant fails to provide adequate evidence that construction is able to begin within the extended time period sought.  This evidence shall include, but not be limited to, the acquisition of any or all required government approvals and project financing.  Any appeals of such special permit, site plan, inland wetlands or subdivision approval shall extend the aforementioned one-year period the length of such appeal. 

5. 	
Nothing herein shall prevent the construction or completion of a development approved under Article II Section 9, 9A of these regulations prior to the effective date of adoption of this zoning district (February 15, 2002). 

6. 	
Areas of any development within an S-A zone that are not proposed to be disturbed shall at the request of the Commission be encumbered by a conservation easement.  Such areas or portions thereof may be conveyed with the express approval of the Commission to the Town of Farmington, a nonprofit land trust or other organization dedicated to the preservation of land subject to the following: 


a. 	
Land to be conveyed shall be in excess of the required area reserved and designated as open space.  

b. 	
Generally front yards, side and rear yard buffer areas as required or established shall not be conveyed except in cases where such yard or buffer area is situated contiguous to an existing or proposed area of open space offsite or contains one or more natural or man-made resources as defined in Article II Section 19.B.2 of these regulations. 


7. 	
Land to be conveyed shall be preserved in an undisturbed state, used for passive recreation, or used for active recreation or other community facilities, as established by the Commission. In cases where an S-A zone contains land which is to be conveyed for the above-mentioned purpose(s), the approval of such zone and development plan shall not become effective until a map of the final development plan indicating the location and use of such land to be conveyed is filed in the Farmington Land Records.  Unless otherwise approved by the Commission, no building permit shall be issued for an S-A zone until the designated land conveyance has been executed. 

8. 	
The conveyance of land under this section shall not constitute a violation of the area, setback, density or other development standards of the S-A zone.  Required front, side or rear yards or buffers, which may have been conveyed, shall continue to be recognized and function under this regulation as such.  


Section 10. PROFESSIONAL OFFICE ZONE (PR) 
A. PERMITTED USES. The following uses requiring only a Zoning Permit as specified in Article 
V. 
1. 	
Signs. Signs shall be permitted as specified in Article IV. Section 7. 

2. 	
Accessory Uses in conjunction with an approved special permitted use in Section B. 


B. USES ALLOWED ONLY BY SPECIAL PERMIT. In addition to specific requirements listed here, the standards provided in Article IV. Section 12. shall also apply to applications submitted under this section. Article IV. Section 12. shall also apply to application procedures, hearing and notice requirements and site plan information. 
1. 	
Bank. 

2. 	
General and Professional Offices, Research and Development. 

3. 	
Medical Offices and Laboratories. 

4. 	
Public Utility Building or Structure not including service or storage yard. 

5. 	
Municipal Land Use and owned or leased buildings and structures used in connection with the governmental or proprietary functions of the Town of Farmington or of any other government, and such uses of land as may be made by the Town or any other government in connection with any of its governmental or proprietary needs and functions. 

6. 	
Day Care Center. 

7. 	
Radio and Television Studio. 

8. 	
Private or Public Parking Facility. 

9. 	
School, College, Public and Private School. 

10. 
Animal Day Care Center. 


The boarding of animals in conjunction with such animal day care use shall only be permitted by special permit, shall be ancillary to the animal day care use and shall conform to the following standards: 
a. 	
The maximum number of animals boarded on the premises shall not exceed 50 

b. 	
All animals must be boarded within an enclosed building 

c. 	
Such building shall be noise proofed 

d. 	
No animal day care center which contains the boarding of animals shall be located within a 400-foot radius of any residential zoning boundary as measured from the property line of the animal day care center 

e. 	
The hours of operation for the pickup and drop off of animals boarded shall be limited to between 6 a.m. and 10 p.m. 


As a condition of the special permit the Commission may further limit the number of animals boarded and the hours of operation. 
11. 
Hotel, Motel and Inn 

12. 
Pediatric or Youth Behavioral Health Center (effective 9/30/17) 


C. HEIGHT AND AREA REQUIREMENTS. 
1. 	Maximum height of buildings:  36 feet 
a. 	
Maximum height may be increased by vote of five-sixths of the full Commission if it is found that reasonable grounds exist for such increase. Reasonable grounds shall include such factors as the natural topography of the site and design of the building and the limited impact of the building’s height on surrounding properties. Any proposal to increase the height of a building above 36 feet shall be referred to the Fire Marshal for his review. In no case shall the approved height exceed 45 feet. 

a. 
Where any Professional Office Zone adjoins any residential zone (excluding RDM and 


2. Yards:  Front yard:   65 feet  
Rear yard:  30 feet  
Side yards:  50 feet each  

AH) the minimum requirements for rear and side yards shall be doubled on the boundary adjacent to the residential zone. The minimum side yard along a street across from or adjacent to a residential zone shall be 65 feet. 
b. 	
All principal buildings in a Professional Office Zone shall be no less than 50 feet from each other. 

c. 	
Where any Professional Office Zone adjoins Interstate Highway 84 the side or rear yard setback from the highway line shall be 150 feet. All development including buildings, structures, driveways and parking areas is prohibited within this yard area with the exception of signs, utility lines or utility structures. 


3. 	Minimum lot size -80,000 square feet* 
Minimum frontage -200 feet* 
*
 Nothing herein shall prevent the construction, alteration or use of a building or premises upon a legally established lot shown on a map or described in any instrument of conveyance filed in the office of the Town Clerk and located in a PR Zone prior to December 23, 1988 which does not conform to the minimum lot size or minimum frontage requirements listed above. 

D. 
OFF STREET PARKING. Off street parking shall be provided in conformance with Article IV. Section 8. 

E. 
LIGHTING. Exterior lighting shall be of such intensity, or located or directed in such a way, so as not to produce glare on public streets or neighboring property. The Commission may require a reduction in lighting after 10:00 P.M. or when otherwise found to be warranted in order to protect nearby residential properties. 

F. 	
HOURS OF OPERATION FOR SPECIAL PERMIT USES. At the time of the public hearing the Commission may require the submission of projected hours of operation. The Commission shall review the impact of such schedule of hours on the immediate neighborhood as well as current and projected traffic circulation patterns. As part of the special permit, reasonable limitations on hours of operation may be imposed. 

G. 
LOT COVERAGE. 	No more than 40 percent of the lot may be covered with impervious surfaces. However, the Commission may by a five-sixths vote permit up to 50 percent lot coverage. In making such a decision the Commission shall be guided by Article IV. Section 12. 

H. 
EXPIRATION OF PERMIT. The approval of an application for special permit shall be void and of no effect unless construction of the project commences within one year from the date the approval is granted by the Commission. For purposes of this regulation the term construction shall be defined as the installation of a permanent building foundation. The Commission may grant up to two six-month extensions of this period upon written request by the applicant. The Commission shall withhold approval of any or all extensions unless the development plan is brought into conformance with any relevant zoning regulations which have been amended subsequent to the original approval and if the applicant fails to provide adequate evidence that construction is able to begin within the extended time period sought. This evidence shall include, 


but not be limited to, the acquisition of any or all required government approvals and project financing. Any appeals of such special permit, site plan, inland wetlands or subdivision approval shall extend the aforementioned one-year period the length of such appeal. 
Section 11. BUSINESS RESTRICTED ZONE (BR) 
A. PERMITTED USES. The following uses requiring only a Zoning Permit as specified in Article 
V. 
1. 	
Signs. Signs shall be permitted as specified in Article IV. Section 7. 

2. 	
Accessory Uses in conjunction with an approved special permitted use in Section B. 


B. USES ALLOWED ONLY BY SPECIAL PERMIT. In addition to specific requirements listed here, the standards provided in Article IV. Section 12. shall also apply to applications submitted under this section. Article IV. Section 12. shall also apply to application procedures, hearing and notice requirements and site plan information. 
1. 	
School, College, Public and Private School. 

2. 	
Public Utility Building and Structure not including service or storage yards. 

3. 	
Radio and Television Studio. 

4. 	
Municipally owned or leased Building and Structure used in connection with the governmental or proprietary functions of the Town of Farmington or any other government. 

5. 	
Community Building for use by residents of the community or neighborhood and maintained and operated for community purposes. 

6. 	
Hospital, Charitable and Philanthropic Institution except correctional institutions. 

7. 	
Convenience Store. 

8. 	
Retail Store and Personal Service Shop. 

9. 	
Fast Food Restaurant, Dairy Bar, Grill, Coffee Shop, except mobile type of eating and drinking place, place offering curb service and drive through windows. Where alcoholic beverages are sold, the limitations of Article IV. Section 5. shall apply. 

10. 
Restaurant (low turnover). Where alcoholic beverages are sold, the limitations of Article IV. Section 5. shall apply. 

11. 
Shop for making articles to be sold primarily at retail on the premises, provided that those engaged in making the articles shall not exceed five in number. 

12. 
Studio and Sample Room. 

13. 
Hotel, Motel and Inn. 

14. 
Nursing Home and Convalescent Home. 

15. 
Theater, except open-air drive-in theater. 

16. 
Newspaper and Job Printing. 

17. 
Funeral Home. 

18. 
Business Offices, Research and Development. 

19. 
Bank. 

20. 
Medical Offices. 

21. 
Animal Hospital provided the following conditions can be met: 


a. 	
No animal hospital may be open for business, except in the event of any emergency, prior to 8:00 A.M. or after 8:00 P.M.; 

b. 	
No outside kennels or runs for animals shall be allowed; 

c. 	
Overnight boarding shall be allowed only in enclosed buildings. No animal hospital shall board more than 100 animals; 

d. 	
Animal hospital structures shall be located not closer than 250 feet to any existing residential structures not used for commercial purposes, and shall be designed as to keep noises from emanating from the buildings, except that in times of emergency, such as electrical failure, natural ventilation may be used; and 

e. 	
Any animal hospital located within a Flood Perimeter Overlay Zone shall file with the Police Department, subject to its approval, an emergency evacuation plan for evacuation of all animals in the event of flood warnings issued by the National Weather Service or other appropriate authority. 


22. Laboratory for Medical Research 
This may include a compounding facility for the mixing and packaging of pharmaceutical product, with or without warehousing, provided the following conditions are met: a) No chemical reactions will take place in conjunction with any compounding activity 
which will result in the synthesis of a new product. b) There shall be no outside storage. c) The facility shall not produce chemicals or biological materials for sale except as 
otherwise approved by the Commission. d) The identity and estimated quantity of hazardous materials and waste used or produced, as defined by State or Federal law, shall be presented to the Commission for approval. 
e) 	No process shall be undertaken which will result in the emission of materials to air, subsurface or surface waters. 
23. 
Health Club and Sports Facility. 

24. 
Club and Fraternal Organization. 

25. 
Garden Supply Center. 

26. 
Banquet Hall or Catering Facility. 

27. 
Day Care Center. 

28. 
Private or Public Parking Facility. 

29. 
Billiard Parlor provided the following conditions are met: 


a. 	
No alcoholic beverages shall be sold or consumed within the establishment; 

b. 	
Notwithstanding Paragraph A. Subparagraph 2. above, any accessory use for a billiard parlor must be approved by the Commission as part of the special permit. 


30. 
Rehabilitation Center. 

31. 
Auction House. 

32. 
Animal Day Care Center. 


The boarding of animals in conjunction with such animal day care use shall only be permitted by special permit, shall be ancillary to the animal day care use and shall conform to the following standards: 
a. 	
The maximum number of animals boarded on the premises shall not exceed 50 

b. 	
All animals must be boarded within an enclosed building 

c. 	
Such building shall be noise proofed 

d. 	
No animal day care center which contains the boarding of animals shall be located within a 400-foot radius of any residential zoning boundary as measured from the property line of the animal day care center 

e. 	
The hours of operation for the pickup and drop off of animals boarded shall be limited to between 6 a.m. and 10 p.m. 


As a condition of the special permit the Commission may further limit the number of animals boarded and the hours of operation. 
C. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR ALL DEVELOPMENT WITHIN A BR ZONE. 
1. 	
A tract of land within the BR Zone may be developed in stages. However, The Commission may require that certain data be submitted for the entire tract. This may include site topography, natural resources data, traffic, parking and circulation, grading, erosion and sedimentation control and storm drainage. 

2. 	
Height and Area Requirements. 


a. 	
Maximum height of buildings:  36 feet 

b. 	
Yards: Front yard:  65 feet 
Rear yard: 50 feet (when abutting residential zone) 



30 feet (in all other cases) Side yards: 50 feet each 
Where any Business Restricted Zone adjoins Interstate Highway 84 the side or rear yard setback from the highway line shall be 150 feet. All development including buildings, structures, driveways and parking areas is prohibited within this yard area with the exception of signs, utility lines or utility structures. 
c. 	Minimum lot size -80,000 square feet * 
Minimum frontage -200 feet * 

* Nothing herein shall prevent the construction, alteration or use of a building or premises upon a legally established lot shown on a map or described in any instrument of conveyance filed in the office of the Town Clerk and located in a BR Zone prior to December 23, 1988 which does not conform to the minimum lot size or minimum frontage requirements listed above. 
3. 	Off Street Parking. Off street parking shall be provided in conformance with Article IV. Section 8. 
D. LIGHTING. Exterior lighting shall be of such intensity, or located or directed in such a way, so as not to produce glare on public streets or neighboring property.  The Commission may require a reduction in lighting after 10:00 P.M. or when otherwise found to be warranted in order to protect nearby residential properties. 
E. HOURS OF OPERATION FOR SPECIAL PERMIT USES. 	At the time of the public hearing the Commission may require the submission of projected hours of operation.  The Commission shall review the impact of such schedule of hours on the immediate neighborhood as well as current and projected traffic circulation patterns.  As part of the special permit, reasonable limitations on hours of operation may be imposed. 
F. 	LOT COVERAGE. No more than 40 percent of the lot may be covered with impervious surfaces. However, the Commission may by a five-sixths vote permit up to 50 percent lot coverage.  In making such a decision, the Commission shall be guided by Article IV, Section 12. 
G. EXPIRATION OF PERMIT. 	The approval of an application for special permit shall be void and of no effect unless construction of the project commences within one year from the date the approval is granted by the Commission.  For purposes of this regulation the term construction shall be defined as the installation of a permanent building foundation.  The Commission may grant up to two six-month extensions of this period upon written request by the applicant. The Commission shall withhold approval of any or all extensions unless the development plan is brought into conformance with any relevant zoning regulations which have been amended subsequent to the original approval and if the applicant fails to provide adequate evidence that construction is able to begin within the extended time period sought. This evidence shall include, but not be limited to, the acquisition of any or all required government approvals and project financing.  Any appeals of such special permit, site plan, inland wetlands or subdivision approval shall extend the aforementioned one-year period the length of such appeal. 
Section 12. BUSINESS B1 ZONE (B1) ** 
A. PERMITTED USES. The following uses requiring only a Zoning Permit as specified in Article 
V. 
1. 	
Signs. Signs shall be permitted as specified in Article IV. Section 7. 

2. 	
Accessory Uses in conjunction with an approved special permitted use in Section B. 


B. USES ALLOWED ONLY BY SPECIAL PERMIT. 	In addition to specific requirements listed here, the standards provided in Article IV. Section 12. shall also apply to applications submitted under this section. Article IV. Section 12. shall also apply to application procedures, hearing and notice requirements and site plan information. 
1. 	
All uses allowed by special permit in the R80, R40, R30, R20, R12 and R9 Zones, except Guest House and Two, Three and Four Family Dwelling. 

2. 	
Retail Store, Personal Service Shop. 

3. 	
Business Offices. 

4. 	
Medical Offices. 

5. 	
Bank. 

6. 	
Convenience Store 

7. 	
Fast Food Restaurant, Dairy Bar, Grill, Coffer Shop, except mobile type of eating and drinking place, place offering curb service and drive through windows. Where alcoholic beverages are sold, the limitations of Article IV. Section 5. shall apply. 

8. 	
Restaurant (low turnover). Where alcoholic beverages are sold, the limitations of Article IV. Section 5. shall apply. 

9. 	
Shop for making articles to be sold primarily at retail on the premises. 

10. 
Studio and Sample Room. 

11. 
Hotel, Motel and Inn. 

12. 
Theater, except open-air drive-in theater. 

13. 
Laundry employing not more than four persons. 

14. 
Newspaper and Job Printing. 

15. 
Radio and Television Broadcasting Studio. 

16. 
Funeral Home. 

17. 
Health Club and Sports Facility. 

18. 
Club and Fraternal Organization. 

19. 
Banquet Hall or Catering Facility. 

20. 
Day Care Center. 

21. 
Private or Public Parking Facility. 

22. 
Sale, Service, Storage and Repair of Motor Vehicles, including gasoline filling stations, subject to the following conditions: 


a. 	
Repairs, except for emergency repairs, shall be made within the building and only between the hours of 8:00 A.M. and 6: P.M.; 

b. 	
Vehicles which do not carry a license or which are so damaged as to be unfit for reconditioning for use on the streets shall be stored at least 100 feet from any street line and screened from view of the street; 

c. 	
The storage of commercial trucks, trailers, buses and contractors’ vehicles outside of a building is not permitted except in a parking lot which is at least 100 feet distant from any street line and is screened from view of said street or streets; and 

d. 	
Accessory retail sales in conjunction with an automotive service station are permitted providing the area on the site and within the building is clearly incidental to the use of the site for automotive service purposes. 


23. Billiard Parlor provided the following conditions are met: 
a. 	
No alcoholic beverages shall be sold or consumed within the establishment; 

b. 	
Notwithstanding Paragraph A. Subparagraph 2. above, any accessory use for a billiard parlor must be approved by the Commission as part of the special permit. 


24. 
Auction House. 

25. 
Animal Hospital provided the following conditions can be met: 


a. 	No animal hospital may be open for business, except in the event of any emergency, prior to 8:00 a.m. or after 8:00 p.m.; 
b. 	
No outside kennels or runs for animals shall be allowed; 

c. 	
Overnight boarding shall be allowed only in enclosed buildings.  No animal hospital shall board more than 100 animals; 

d. 	
Animal hospital structures shall be located not closer than 250 feet to any existing residential structures not used for commercial purposes, and shall be designed as to keep noises from emanating from the buildings, except that in times of emergency, such as electrical failure, natural ventilation may be used; and 

e. 	
Any animal hospital located within a Flood Perimeter Overlay Zone shall file with the Police Department, subject to it’s approval, an emergency evacuation plan for evacuation of all animals in the event of flood warnings issued by the National Weather Service or other appropriate authority. 


26. Animal Day Care Center. 
The boarding of animals in conjunction with such animal day care use shall only be permitted by special permit, shall be ancillary to the animal day care use and shall conform to the following standards: 
a. 	
The maximum number of animals boarded on the premises shall not exceed 50 

b. 	
All animals must be boarded within an enclosed building 

c. 	
Such building shall be noise proofed 

d. 	
No animal day care center which contains the boarding of animals shall be located within a 400-foot radius of any residential zoning boundary as measured from the property line of the animal day care center 

e. 	
The hours of operation for the pickup and drop off of animals boarded shall be limited to between 6 a.m. and 10 p.m. 


As a condition of the special permit the Commission may further limit the number of animals boarded and the hours of operation. 
C. HEIGHT AND AREA REQUIREMENTS. 
1. 	
Maximum height of buildings:  36 feet 

2. 	
Yards:  Front yard:  20 feet 
Rear yard:   15 feet 
Side yards: 15 feet each 


3. 	
Minimum lot size -20,000 square feet * 
Minimum frontage -100 feet * 



* Nothing herein shall prevent the construction, alteration or use of a building or premises upon a legally established lot shown on a map or described in any instrument of conveyance filed in the office of the Town Clerk and located in a BR Zone prior to December 23, 1988 which does not conform to the minimum lot size or minimum frontage requirements listed above. 
4. 	Lot Coverage: No more than 40 percent of the lot may be covered with impervious surfaces. However, the Commission may by a five-sixths vote permit up to 50 percent lot coverage. In making such a decision the Commission shall be guided by Article IV. Section 12. 
D. OFF STREET PARKING. Off street parking shall be provided in conformance with Article IV. Section 8. 
E. LIGHTING. Exterior lighting shall be of such intensity, or located or directed in such a way, so as not to produce glare on public streets or neighboring property.  The Commission may require a reduction in lighting after 10:00 P.M. or when otherwise found to be warranted in order to protect nearby residential properties. 
F. 	HOURS OF OPERATION FOR SPECIAL PERMIT USES. At the time of the public hearing the Commission may require the submission of projected hours of operation.  The Commission shall review the impact of such schedule of hours on the immediate neighborhood as well as current and projected traffic circulation patterns.  As part of the special permit, reasonable limitations on hours of operation may be imposed. 
G. EXPIRATION OF PERMIT. 	The approval of an application for special permit shall be void and of no effect unless construction of the project commences within one year from the date the Commission grants the approval. For purposes of this regulation the term construction shall be defined as the installation of a permanent building foundation.  The Commission may grant up to two six-month extensions of this period upon written request by the applicant.  The Commission shall withhold approval of any or all extensions unless the development plan is brought into conformance with any relevant zoning regulations, which have been amended subsequent to the original approval and if the applicant fails to provide adequate evidence that construction is able to begin within the extended time period sought. This evidence shall include, but not be limited to, the acquisition of any or all required government approvals and project financing.  Any appeals of such special permit, site plan, inland wetlands or subdivision approval shall extend the aforementioned one-year period the length of such appeal. 
** Revisions of 1987 incorporated into the B1 Zone all requirements of the B2 Zone. The B2 Zone as a separate section within the Zoning Regulations and separate district on the Zoning Map were thus discontinued at that time. 
Section 13. INDUSTRIAL CR ZONE (CR) 
A. 	The regulations pertaining to the CR Zone are identical to those pertaining to the C1 Zone (Section 14.) with the following exceptions: 
1. 	
The maximum height of buildings is 36 feet rather than 40 feet. However, the Commission may by a five-sixths vote permit a maximum building height of 40 feet. In making such a decision, the Commission shall be guided by Article IV, Section 12. 

2. 	
A buffer area 100 feet in width shall be provided along all side or rear lot lines, which border any residential zone.  The Commission may require the front yard or side yard along a street to be between 40 and 80 feet when across from or adjacent to a residential zone. 


Section 14. INDUSTRIAL C1 ZONE (C1) 
A. PERMITTED USES. The following uses requiring only a Zoning Permit as specified in Article 
V. 
1. 	
Signs. Signs shall be permitted as specified in Article IV. Section 7. 

2. 	
Accessory Uses in conjunction with an approved special permitted use in Section B. 


B. USES ALLOWED ONLY BY SPECIAL PERMIT. 	In addition to specific requirements listed here, the standards provided in Article IV. Section 12. shall also apply to applications submitted under this section.  Article IV. Section 12. shall also apply to application procedures, hearing and notice requirements and site plan information. 
1. 	
All uses allowed by special permit in the B1 Zone. 

2. 	
Any establishment, the principal use of which is manufacturing, fabricating, processing, producing, assembling, cleaning, servicing, testing or repairing of materials. 

3. 	
Laundry. 

4. 	
Warehousing Facility and Distribution Center. 

5. 	
Animal Hospital. 

6. 	
Bakery. 

7. 	
Place of Assembly, Health Club and Sports Facility. 

8. 	
Trucking Company. 

9. 	
Concrete Batching Operations including mixing and packaging of cement and aggregate and dehydrating components for such packaging. 

10. 
Research and Testing Laboratory. 

11. 
Yard for coal, coke, lumber and builders’ materials. 

12. 
Wholesaling Establishments. 

13. 
Mixed Use Developments, providing there is compliance with the following standards: 


a. 	Locational Requirements:  The proposed parcel is now or formerly regulated by one or more provisions of the Urban Renewal Plan (“Plan”) as adopted and amended by the Farmington Redevelopment Agency dated July 28, 1965 or is a parcel forming a part or lies contiguous to any parcel now or formerly regulated by the Plan. 
b. 	Residential Development:  The residential component of the development shall meet the following standards: 
i) 	Dwelling Size:  Each dwelling unit shall consist of at least two rooms, exclusive of hall and bathroom, and there shall be at least 500 square feet of living area for a two-room unit and at least 600 square feet for a three-room unit.  Each additional room shall have at least 100 square feet. 
ii) Floor Area Ratio:  The floor area ratio for the residential component of the project shall be at least 0.10 and shall not exceed 0.25. 
14. Animal Day Care Center. 
The boarding of animals in conjunction with such animal day care use shall only be permitted by special permit, shall be ancillary to the animal day care use and shall conform to the following standards: 
a. 	
The maximum number of animals boarded on the premises shall not exceed 50 

b. 	
All animals must be boarded within an enclosed building 

c. 	
Such building shall be noise proofed 

d. 	
No animal day care center which contains the boarding of animals shall be located within a 400 foot radius of any residential zoning boundary as measured from the property line of the animal day care center 

e. 	
The hours of operation for the pickup and drop off of animals boarded shall be limited to between 6 a.m. and 10 p.m. 


As a condition of the special permit the Commission may further limit the number of 
animals boarded and the hours of operation. 
15. Recreational and/or Medical Marijuana Dispensary Facility and Medical Marijuana 
Production Facility 

Recreational Marijuana Dispensary Facility means a place of business where marijuana may be dispensed or sold at retail to the general public in accordance with all applicable state laws. 
Medical Marijuana Dispensary Facility means a place of business where marijuana may be dispensed or sold at retail to qualifying patients and primary caregivers and for which the State has issued a dispensary facility license to an applicant under Public Act 12-55 and Section 21a-408-14 of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies. 
Medical Marijuana Production Facility means a secure, indoor facility where the production of marijuana occurs and that is operated by a person to whom the State has issued a producer license under Public Act 12-55 and Section 21a-408-20 of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies.  Production of marijuana shall include the manufacture, planting, preparation, cultivation, growing, harvesting, propagation, compounding, conversion or processing of marijuana, either directly or indirectly by extraction from substances of natural origin, or independently by means of chemical synthesis and includes any packaging or repackaging of the substance or labeling or relabeling of its container, except that this term does not include the preparation or compounding of marijuana by a patient or caregiver for the patient’s use. 
a.  No medical marijuana dispensary facility or production facility shall be permitted to locate within 500 feet from a public or private school, publicly owned recreational area, public library, child daycare center or place used primarily for religious worship or study.  This measurement shall be taken between the closest lot lines of properties containing such facilities.  
b.  No medical marijuana dispensary facility shall be permitted to locate within 5,000 feet from any other site containing or approved for a medical marijuana dispensary facility. No medical marijuana production facility shall be permitted to locate within 5,000 feet from any other site containing or approved for a medical marijuana production facility.  This measurement shall be taken between the closest lot lines of properties containing such facilities.  
c.  No recreational and /or medical marijuana dispensary facility or production facility shall be permitted to locate within 500 feet from a residential zoning district.  This measurement shall be taken from all lot lines of a property containing such facility to the closest residential zoning boundary.   
d.  The parking requirement for a recreational and /or medical marijuana dispensary facility or production facility shall be for that of a retail use and manufacturing use respectively.  
e.  Any application for the approval of a recreational and /or medical marijuana dispensary or production facility shall be accompanied by a security plan which will be referred to the Chief of Police for review and comment.  The Commission may withhold approval of such facilities following a finding that such security plan does not adequately protect the public health and safety.   
f.  Recreational and /or medical marijuana dispensary facilities shall maintain transaction records in a manner that meets FDA standards.  Such records shall be made available  
to the Commission or local police upon request in such form as to not violate State or Federal Law.  
g.  Recreational and /or medical marijuana dispensary facilities shall not contain a drive through feature.   
h.  The approval of a special permit for a medical marijuana dispensary or production facility must be submitted for renewal two years from the date of original approval  

and for between two and five year periods (at the discretion of the Commission) following such initial two year renewal period.  The Commission may withhold approval of such application for renewal upon making a finding that the operation of such dispensary or production facility has violated the provisions of this regulation or that such operation has negatively impacted the health and safety of the community in a substantial way.  In the case of an appeal of the special permit, the renewal shall extend the length of such appeal. 
i. 	
No recreational and /or medical marijuana dispensary facility or production facility shall operate until a zoning permit has been issued by the Planning Department.  Such zoning permit shall not be issued until a permit for such use has been issued by the State of Connecticut.  

j. 	
A special permit issued for a recreational and /or medical marijuana dispensary facility or production facility shall expire and be of no effect if the applicant fails to submit to the Town a copy of a permit for such use from the State within six months from the approval of such special permit.  Any appeal of such special permit, site plan, inland wetlands or subdivision approval shall extend the aforementioned six-month period the length of such appeal. 

k. 	
This regulation incorporates all of the rules, standards and requirements found in the regulations adopted by the State of Connecticut Department of Consumer Protection. 


Article II, Section 14.B.15 is amended effective July 15, 2018. 
C. HEIGHT AND AREA REQUIREMENTS. 
1. 	
Maximum height of buildings:  40 feet 

2. 	
Yards:  Front yard:  40 feet 
Rear yard: 25 feet 
Side yards: 50 feet for both; 20 feet minimum 


3. 	
Minimum lot size -40,000 square feet * 
Minimum frontage -150 feet * 



* Nothing herein shall prevent the construction, alteration or use of a building or premises upon a legally established lot shown on a map or described in any instrument of conveyance filed in the office of the Town Clerk and located in a BR Zone prior to December 23, 1988 which does not conform to the minimum lot size or minimum frontage requirements listed above. 
4. 	Lot Coverage: No more than 40 percent of the lot may be covered with impervious surfaces. However, the Commission may by a five-sixths vote permit up to 50 percent lot coverage. In making such a decision the Commission shall be guided by Article IV. Section 12. 
D. OFF STREET PARKING. Off street parking shall be provided in conformance with Article IV. Section 8. 
E. LIGHTING. Exterior lighting shall be of such intensity, or located or directed in such a way, so as not to produce glare on public streets or neighboring property.  The Commission may require a reduction in lighting after 10:00 P.M. 
F. 	HOURS OF OPERATION FOR SPECIAL PERMIT USES. At the time of the public hearing the Commission may require the submission of projected hours of operation.  The Commission shall review the impact of such schedule of hours on the immediate neighborhood as well as current and projected traffic circulation patterns.  As part of the special permit, reasonable limitations on hours of operation may be imposed. 
G. OPERATIONS, VIOLATIONS AND CHANGES OF USE, HOURS OF OPERATION AND OTHER RELATED ACTIVITIES. 
1. 	
Because of the nature of industrial operations, any violations of zoning regulations or any change, expansion or modification of use of the property, to include changes within the same category, such as a change in use involving a different type of manufacturing, is likely to have a substantially greater adverse impact upon neighboring properties than are violations and changes of use in residential or business zoning classifications.  It is important for the Commission to have in place a means of monitoring uses in industrial zones so as to forestall any such adverse consequences growing out of zoning violations or changes of use. Therefore, effective upon the adoption of these amended regulations, the Commission shall have continuing jurisdiction over the uses of all properties within any industrial CR Zone and industrial C1 Zone and the Zoning Enforcement Officer shall inspect and monitor the industrially zoned properties within the Town and submit a report advising the Commission of any zoning violations or changes of use as a result of an inspection or from any other source of information. Upon reviewing such reports, the Commission shall determine what, if any, corrective actions should be taken. As part of its continuing jurisdiction, the Commission shall retain the right, if the property owner does not take prompt remedial action, to rescind the special permit allowing the existing use to which the property is put. 

2. 	
Where the location of the property on which industrial operations are performed is close enough to residential areas that noise and light during nighttime hours might have an adverse impact on such residential areas, the Commission shall retain continuing jurisdiction over operations or any other activities performed on such industrially zoned properties and may, at any time, impose time limitations on when such operations and activities may be performed as are reasonable to protect persons living in nearby residential areas. 


H. EXPIRATION OF PERMIT. 	The approval of an application for special permit shall be void and of no effect unless construction of the project commences within one year from the date the approval is granted by the Commission.  For purposes of this regulation the term construction shall be defined as the installation of a permanent building foundation.  The Commission may grant up to two six-month extensions of this period upon written request by the applicant.  The Commission shall withhold approval of any or all extensions unless the development plan is brought into conformance with any relevant zoning regulations, which have been amended subsequent to the original approval and if the applicant fails to provide adequate evidence that construction is able to begin within the extended time period sought.  This evidence shall include, but not be limited to, the acquisition of any or all required government approvals and project financing.  Any appeals of such special permit, site plan, inland wetlands or subdivision approval shall extend the aforementioned one-year period the length of such appeal. 
Section 15. 	FLOOD PROTECTION ZONE (FP) AND FLOOD PERIMETER OVERLAY ZONE (FPO) 
GENERAL 
A. STATEMENT OF PURPOSE. The purpose of this regulation is to promote public health, safety and general welfare within the Town of Farmington by minimizing flood losses in designated Flood Protection and Flood Perimeter Overlay areas in the Town by: 
1. 	
Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increase in erosion or in flood heights or velocities; 

2. 	
Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 

3. 	
Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of flood waters; 

4. 	
Controlling filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase erosion or flood damage; and 

5. 	
Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers, which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands. 


B. DEFINITIONS. For the purpose of applying the provisions of Sections 15., 16. and 17. the terms below shall be defined as follows: 
BASE FLOOD means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) means the elevation of the crest of the base flood or 100­year flood.  The height in relation to mean sea level expected to be reached by the waters of the base flood at pertinent points in the floodplains of coastal and riverine areas. 
BASEMENT means an area of the building having its floor sub-grade (below ground level) on all sides. 
BUILDING (see definition for Structure) 
COST means, as related to substantial improvements, the cost of any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, alteration, repair or other improvement of a structure shall be established by a detailed written contractor’s estimate.  The estimate shall include, but not be limited to: the cost of materials (interior finishing components, structural components, utility and service equipment); sales tax on materials; building equipment and fixtures, including heating and air conditioning and utility meters; labor; built-in appliances; demolition and site preparation; repairs made to damaged parts of the building worked on at the same time; contractor’s profit; and grand total.  Items to be excluded include: cost of plans and specification; survey costs; permit fees; outside improvements such as septic systems, water supply wells, landscaping, sidewalks, fences, yard lights, irrigation systems, and detached structures such as garages, sheds, and gazebos. 
DEVELOPMENT means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations or permanent storage of materials. 
FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY (FEMA) means the federal agency that administers the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP). 
FLOOD or FLOODING means a general and temporary condition of partial of complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
1. 
the overflow of inland or tidal water; 

2. 
the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 


FLOOD BOUNDARY and FLOODWAY MAP means an official map of a community on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated the boundaries of the floodway. 
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) means an official map of a community on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the special flood hazard areas and the applicable risk premium zones. FIRMs published after January 1990 may also show the boundaries of the floodway. 
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY is the official report by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The report contains flood profiles, the water surface elevation of the base flood and other flood data. 
FLOODWAY means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. 
FLOOR means the top surface of an enclosed area in a building (including basement) i.e., top of slab in concrete slab construction or top of wood flooring in wood frame construction. The term does not include the floor of a garage used solely for parking of vehicles. 
FLOODPROOFING means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes or adjustments to structures, which reduces or eliminates flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE OR FACILITY means a use or facility that cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities. The term does not include seafood processing facilities, long-term storage, manufacturing, sales or service facilities. 
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE (HAG) means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
HISTORIC STRUCTURE means any structure that is: (a) Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; (b) Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historic significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(c) Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or (d) Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: (1) By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or (2) Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
HYDRODYNAMIC LOAD is the force exerted on a structure by the impact of moving water. The magnitude of the force varies with the affected surface area of the structure, the water velocity and the angle of impact. 
HYDROSTATIC LOAD is the force exerted on a structure by still water. The magnitude of the force varies with depth of water and affected surface area of structure. 
LOWEST FLOOR means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed (including basement). 
MANUFACTURED HOME means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. Recreational vehicles and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer shall be considered manufactured homes for the purpose of this regulation. 
MEAN SEA LEVEL (MSL) means the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) are referenced. 
NEW CONSTRUCTION means structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after August 15, 1977. 
OBSTRUCTION is any structure, matter or earthen alteration including, but not limited to, dams, levees, dikes, berms, embankments, conduits, culverts, bridges, abutments, walls, buildings, wharves, docks, wire, fences, projections, piles, fill, gravel, rock, excavation, channel work or rectification and vegetative plantings, in, along, across or projecting into any channel, watercourse or regulatory flood hazard area which may: impede, retard or otherwise change the direction of velocities of the flow of water, either in itself or by catching or collecting debris carried by such water; or be subject to being carried downstream and potentially threaten property or life. 
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE means a vehicle which is (i) built on a single chassis; (ii) 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections; (iii) designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and (iv) designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use. 
REGULATORY FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION (sometimes referred to as Base Flood Level). The Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation for properties located north and south of Farmington Avenue easterly of the railroad overpass and westerly of the intersection of Farmington Avenue and Garden Street is as follows: 
The area along Farmington Avenue between the railroad overpass and the intersection of Farmington Avenue and Garden Street is divided into two zones: Zone 1, consisting of the properties on the north and south sides of Farmington Avenue and properties lying immediately to the rear thereof, bounded on the west by the railroad overpass and bounded on the east by the easterly line the property referred to as the Comer Nursery property; and Zone 2, consisting of the properties on the north and south sides of Farmington Avenue and properties lying immediately to the rear thereof, bounded on the west by the easterly boundary of said Comer Nursery property and bounded on the east by an extension of a line forming the easterly boundary of Garden Street at its intersection with Farmington Avenue. 
The Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation for properties located within Zone 1 is 180 feet. 
The Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation for properties located within Zone 2 is 175 feet. 
For areas within the Flood Protection or Flood Perimeter Overlay Zones but not located along Farmington Avenue between the railroad overpass and the intersection of Farmington Avenue and Garden Street as described above, the Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation is either that elevation determined by the Town Engineer to constitute the base flood level for such area or the elevation published in the Flood Insurance Study, Town of Farmington, Connecticut, dated July 17, 1986 (or subsequent revision thereto), whichever elevation is greater. 
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA is the area with a community subject to one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year, as identified on the community’s FIRM. 
START OF CONSTRUCTION (for other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Art [P.L. 97-348]), includes substantial improvements, and means the date the building permit is issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. Should the permittee fail to commence work within this time frame a new permit shall be required. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of a structure (including a manufactured home) on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation of placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footing, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. 
STRUCTURE means a walled and roofed building, which is principally above ground, including a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank, or other man-made facilities or infrastructures. 
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT means any combination of repairs, reconstruction, alteration or improvements to a structure taking place during the life of a structure in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure. The market value of the structure should be (1) the appraised value of the structure using the square foot method prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or (2) in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. For the purposes of this definition, Substantial Improvement is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however, include any improvement project required to comply with existing health, sanitary or safety code specifications, which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions. 
VARIANCE means a grant of relief by a community from the terms of the floodplain management regulation that allows construction in a manner otherwise prohibited and where specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship. 
VIOLATION means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community’s floodplain management regulation.  A structure or other development without required permits, lowest floor elevation documentation, flood proofing certificates or required floodway encroachment calculations is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
WATER SURFACE ELEVATION means the height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. 
C. LAND TO WHICH REGULATIONS APPLIES; RULES FOR INTERPRETATION OF ZONE BOUNDARIES. This regulation shall apply to all lands within the Town of Farmington designated as either Flood Protection Zone or Flood Perimeter on the Official Zoning Map of the Town of Farmington. Additionally, this regulation shall apply to all areas indicated by the: Flood Insurance Rate Map; or flood profile data within the Flood Insurance Study; both published by the Federal Emergency Management Agency dated July 17, 1986 as amended or revised to September 26,2008 and any subsequent revisions thereto and adopted by reference. Where there is a conflict between all the aforementioned maps and sources, the more restrictive shall apply. The boundaries of the Flood Protection Zone and Flood Perimeter Zone shall be determined by: scaling distances on the official Zoning Map; or by utilizing flood elevation data from the flood profiles in conjunction with topographic contour intervals of at least two feet; whichever is more restrictive shall apply. Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the zones as shown on the Official Zoning Map, the Commission shall make the necessary interpretation. Any person requesting an interpretation as to the location of a zone boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to present his case to the Commission. Such request shall not require a public hearing. 
D. RULES FOR INTERPRETATION OF USES ALLOWED. With the Flood Protection and Flood Perimeter Overlay Zones all uses not specifically allowed as a permitted use or as a use allowed by special permit shall be prohibited. The Flood Perimeter Overlay Zone is an overlay zone and all development within this zone shall meet all the minimum requirements of both the Flood Perimeter Overlay Zone and the underlying zone. 
E. COMPLIANCE. 	No structure within the Flood Protection and Flood Perimeter Overlay Zones shall be located, extended, converted or structurally altered without full compliance with the terms of Article II. Sections 15., 16. and 17. of this regulation. 
F. 	NONCONFORMING USES. A structure or the use of a structure or premises which was lawful before the passage or amendment of this regulation, may be continued subject to the following conditions: 
1. 	Repairs and maintenance of a nonconforming structure located in the Flood Protection Zone may be made, provided that no structural alterations are made. Repairs and maintenance of a nonconforming structure located in the Flood Perimeter Overlay Zone may be made except that no repair or reconstruction involving a structural alteration can be made unless the structure is brought into conformance with all the standards set forth in Article II. Sections 
16. and 17. of this regulation. 
2. 	
No nonconforming structure located in a Flood Protection Zone or Flood Perimeter Overlay Zone may be expanded unless said addition conforms with all the standards set forth in Article II. Sections 16. and 17. of this regulation. 

3. 	
Nonconforming structures located within the Flood Protection or Flood Perimeter Overlay Zones, which have been substantially damaged must meet all the standards set forth in Article II. Sections 16. and 17. of this regulation. 

4. 	
See Article IV. Section 1. Subsection D. regarding discontinued or abandoned uses. 


G. INTERPRETATION. 	The provisions of this regulation shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall be reasonably construed in accordance with the purpose of this regulation and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other powers granted by State Statutes. 
H. WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY. The degree of flood protection required by this regulation is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes in light of the dangers of flood hazards. Flood larger than those against which these regulations are designed may occur on rare occasions. Further, flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes, such as ice jams and bridge openings restricted by debris. This regulation does not imply that areas outside the Flood Protection and Flood Perimeter Overlay Zones or land uses permitted within such zones will be free from flooding and flood damages. This regulation shall not create any liability on the part of the Town of Farmington for any flood damages that may result from reliance on this regulation or any administrative decision lawfully made there under. 
I. 	ESTABLISHMENT OF FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT. A Zoning Permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this regulation prior to the commencement of any development activities within the Flood Protection or Flood Perimeter Overlay Zones. 
J. 	DESIGNATION OF ADMINISTRATOR. The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall administer and enforce the provisions of Article II. Sections 15., 16. and 17. of this regulation. 
K. DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE ADMINISTRATOR. 	In the administration of this regulation the administrator shall perform the following duties, among others: 
1. 	
Review all permit applications to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. 

2. 	
Review all development permits to assure that the requirements of this regulation have been satisfied. 

3. 	
Advise permittee that additional Federal or State permits may be required, and if specific Federal or State permit requirements are known, require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file with the Zoning Permit. Such additional permit requirements may include, but not be limited to: Stream Channel Encroachment Line Permit, Coastal Area Management Permit, Water Diversion Permit, Dam Safety Permit, Corps of Engineers 401 and 404 Permits. 

4. 	
Notify adjacent communities and the Department of Environmental Protection, Inland Water Resources Management Division prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 

5. 	
Record the as built elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new construction or substantially improved structures in accordance with Sections 16. and 17. Record the elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which the new or substantially improved structures have been flood proofed in accordance with Sections 16. and 17. 

6. 	
Maintain all records pertaining to the provisions of this regulation. 


L. CERTIFICATION. Where	 required under Sections 16. and 17., a registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions of this regulation. Such certification must be provided to the administrator. Upon completion of the applicable portion of construction the applicant shall provide the administrator with verification of the as built lowest floor elevation, defined as the top of the lowest floor (including basement) or, in the case of flood proofed buildings, the elevation to which the flood proofing is effective. 
M.  	STANDARDS APPLYING TO LAND IN BOTH THE FLOOD PROTECTION ZONE AND FLOOD PERIMETER OVERLAY ZONE 
1. 	
The water holding capacity of the 100-year floodplain as designated on the Flood Insurance Rate Map shall not be reduced. Any reduction caused by filling, new construction, or substantial improvements involving an increase in footprint to the structure shall be compensated for by deepening and/or widening of the floodplain.  Storage shall be provided onsite, unless easements have been gained from adjacent property owners; it shall be provided within the same hydraulic reach and a volume not previously used for storage; it shall be hydraulically comparable and incrementally equal to the theoretical volume of flood water at each elevation, up to and including the 100-year flood elevation, which would be displaced by the proposed project.  Such compensatory volume shall have an unrestricted hydraulic connection to the same waterway or water body.  Compensatory storage can be provided offsite if approved by the Commission.  The calculations for determining the appropriate compensatory volume shall utilize the models employed by FEMA. 

2. 	
Within the 100-year floodplain as designated on the Flood Insurance Rate Map, encroachments resulting from filling, new construction or substantial improvements involving an increase in footprint of the structure, are prohibited unless the applicant provides certification by a registered professional engineer demonstrating, with supporting hydrologic and hydraulic analysis performed in accordance with engineering practices and models employed by FEMA, that such encroachments shall not result in any (0.00 feet) increase in flood levels (base flood elevation).  Work within the floodplain and the land adjacent to the floodplain, including work to provide compensatory storage shall not be constructed in such a way so as to cause an increase in flood stage or flood velocity. 


N. ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS. 	This regulation is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions.  However, where this regulation and another ordinance, regulation, easement, covenant or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
O. VARIANCE PROCEDURES. 	A request for variance or an appeal to this regulation hall be submitted and heard in accordance with Article IV Section 4 of these regulations. 
1.
 The Zoning Board of Appeals	 shall hear and decide requests for variances from the requirements of this regulation as well as hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision or determination made by Town Planner in the enforcement or administration of this regulation. 

2. 
Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals or any person owning land which abuts or is within a radius of one hundred feet of the land in question may appeal within fifteen days after such decision to the State Superior Court as provided in Section 8-8 of the General Statutes of Connecticut. 

3.	
  The Town Planner shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 

4. 	
Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures 

listed on the National Register of Historic Places, the State Inventory of Historic Places, or any locally adopted historic district without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this section and provided the proposed reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration will not result in the structure losing its historical designation. 

5.
 Variances 	may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements and other development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use or facility provided the structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage, creates no additional threat to public safety. 

6. 	
Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 

7. 	
In passing upon applications for variances, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all standards specified in other sections of this regulation and the following provisions.  Upon consideration of these factors and the purposes of this regulation, the Zoning Board of Appeals may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this regulation. 


a.  
The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 

b. 	
The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 


c.   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;  
d.  The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community;  
e.   The necessity of the facility to waterfront location, in the case of a functionally dependent facility;  
f.   The availability of alternative locations not subject to flooding or erosion damage for the proposed use;  
g.  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;  
h.  The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area;  
i.   The safety access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;  
j.   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the flood waters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and  
k.  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, and streets and bridges.  

8. 
Variances shall only be used upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary to afford relief considering the flood hazard; and in the instance of a historical building, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building and result in the loss of historic designation of the building.  Variances pertain to a piece of property and are not personal in nature.  A properly issued variance is granted for a parcel of property with physical characteristics so unusual that complying with the regulation would create an exceptional hardship to the applicant or the surrounding landowners.  Those characteristics must be unique to that property and not be shared by adjacent parcels.  For example, economic or financial hardship is not sufficient cause for a variance, nor are inconvenience, aesthetic considerations, physical handicaps, personal preferences or disapproval of one’s neighbors.  

9.
 Variances	 shall only be used upon (i) a showing of good and sufficient cause, (ii) a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship, and (iii) a determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, damage the rights or property values of other persons in the area, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws, ordinances or regulations.  Only hardships that are based on unusual or unique physical characteristics of the property in question, characteristics that are not shared by adjacent parcels, shall qualify to meet subsection (ii) above.  Claims of hardship based on the structure, on economic gain or loss, or on personal or self-created circumstances are not sufficient cause for the granting of a variance. 

10.
 No variance may be issued within a regulatory floodway that will result in any increase in the 100-year flood levels. A variance may be issued for new construction, substantial improvements and other development necessary for the conduct of a “functionally dependent use” provided that there is good and sufficient cause for providing relief; and the variance does not cause a rise in the 100-year flood level within a regulatory floodway.  The structure and other development must be protected by methods that minimize flood damages. 

11.
 Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with the lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation and the elevation, and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the lowest floor elevation. 


P. 	ENFORCEMENT. – The following provisions shall govern with regard to the enforcement of this regulation. 
1.
 Each Zoning Permit	 shall authorize, as a condition of approval, the Town Planner or designated agents to make regular inspections of the subject property.  The Town Planner or designated agents are also authorized to inspect any property in a Special Flood Hazard Area where it appears that violations of these regulations may be taking place. 

2. 	
If the Town Planner finds that any person in undertaking any construction, substantial improvement, filling, or any other activity or maintaining a condition which in violation of these regulations, the Town Planner shall: 


a.	
  Issue a written order by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the subject property owner, ordering that the activity cease and ordering the property owner to either seek to obtain a Zoning Permit prior to continuing with the activity or, if appropriate, ordering that all violations and/or obstructions be removed from the Special Flood Hazard Area immediately. 

b. 	
Notify the Building Inspector and request that any building permits in force be revoked or suspended and that a stop work order be issued. 

c. 	
The Town Planner may suspend or revoke a Floodplain Development Permit if it is found that the applicant has not complied with the terms, conditions or limitations set forth in the permit or has exceeded the scope of work as set forth in the application including application plans.  Prior to revoking any permit, the Town Planner shall issue notice to the permittee, personally or by certified mail, return receipt requested, setting forth the facts or conduct, which warrants the intended action. 

d. 
Failure to comply with any written order issued under this section shall be considered a violation of these regulations and is subject to the penalties described in Section Q. 

e. 	
In the event violations or obstructions are not promptly removed from the Special Hazard Area, the Town Planner may cause such removal and remediation work to be performed utilizing any bond money held in escrow or may direct the appropriate Town agent to cause such work to be done and to place a lien against the property. 

f. 
Any person subjected to enforcement action pursuant to this regulation, may appeal any requirement, decision, or determination of the Town Planner to the Zoning Board of Appeals.  Such person shall provide such information as necessary including appropriate certifications from a registered professional engineer or architect in order to substantiate the claim that the requirement, decision, or determination of the Town Planner was in error or unwarranted. 

g. 	
Nothing contained herein shall prevent the owner of a residential dwelling, commercial or industrial building existing at the time of the adoption of this regulation from repairing, replacing or restoring said building or the components thereof to substantially the same character and form as existed at the time of such adoption. 

Q. 
PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION. – Any violation of the provisions of this regulation or failure to comply with any of its requirements, including violation of conditions and safeguards established in connection with grant of variances or special permits or exceptions shall be subject to a fine or any other penalty prescribed by Town Ordinance.  Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Town from taking such lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 

R. 
EFFECTIVE DATE. 	The effective date of Sections 15,16 and 17 of these regulations is September 26, 2008. 


Section 16. FLOOD PROTECTION ZONE (FP) 
A. GENERAL PROVISIONS. The configuration of the Flood Protection Zone was developed from data obtained from the 1955 flood event as presented by the U. S. Army Corps of Engineers as well as information provided in the Flood Insurance Rate Map prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The purpose of the zone is to restrict or prohibit the development of uses or structures, which would endanger health and safety or property in times of flood or cause an increase in flood heights or velocities. 
B. LAND TO WHICH PROVISIONS OF THE FLOOD PROTECTION ZONE REGULATION APPLIES. All land within the Town of Farmington as indicated within the Flood Protection Zone as shown on the Official Zoning Map of the Town of Farmington. All land within the Town of Farmington, which is designated as floodway on a map entitled Flood Insurance Rate Map Hartford County, Connecticut. 
C. PERMITTED USES. The following uses, which generally have a low flood damage potential shall be permitted within the Flood Protection Zone requiring only a Zoning Permit as specified in Article V. However, the establishment, maintenance or improvement of such uses shall not involve the creation of any obstruction without the review and approval of the Zoning Enforcement Officer and in cases involving the placement of fill or the development of structures without the receipt of a special permit. 
1. 	
Agricultural Uses such as general farming, pasture, grazing, outdoor plant nurseries, horticulture, viticulture, truck Farmington, forestry, sod farming and wild crop harvesting. 

2. 	
Private and Public Recreational Uses including golf courses, outdoor tennis courts, driving ranges, archery ranges, picnic grounds, boat launching ramps, swimming areas, parks, wildlife and nature preserves, fish hatcheries, fishing areas, hiking and horseback riding trails. 

3. 	
Nonstructural Accessory Residential Uses such as lawns, gardens, parking areas and play areas. 

4. 	
Railroads, Streets, Bridges, Utility Transmission Lines, Pipelines and Wells. 


D. USES ALLOWED ONLY BY SPECIAL PERMIT. In addition to specific requirements listed here, the standards provided in Article IV. Section 12. shall also apply to applications submitted under this section. Article IV. Section 12. shall also apply to application procedures, hearing and notice requirements and site plan information. 
1. 	
Sand and Gravel Excavation, Extraction and Processing Operations may be performed in areas having a zoning classification of EE at the time of the adoption of this regulation and may be performed in other areas within the Flood Protection Zone provided all requirements of Section 22. of this Article are met. Any expansion to a preexisting operation shall have to meet the requirements of Section 17. 

2. 	
Municipal Land Use and owned or leased buildings and structures used in connection with the governmental or proprietary functions of the Town of Farmington or of any other 

government, and such uses of land as may be made by the Town or any other government in connection with any of its governmental or proprietary needs and functions. Uses to be limited to nonresidential uses only. 

3. 	
Accessory Structures and Fill for all permitted uses in Subsection C. above. 


E. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR PERMITTED USES AND SPECIAL PERMIT USES. Obstructions created in the establishment, maintenance or improvement of those permitted uses listed in Subsection C. or the development of those special permit uses listed in Subsection D. shall conform to the standards set forth in Article II. Sections 17D., 17E. and 17F. Structures shall not be designed or used for human habitation (i.e. residential). 
F. 	FACTORS UPON WHICH SPECIAL PERMIT DECISIONS OF THE COMMISSION SHALL BE BASED. In passing upon applications relating to the Flood Protection Zone, the Commission, in addition to the standards found in Article IV. Section 12., shall consider the following: 
1. 	
The danger to life and property due to increased flood heights or velocities caused by encroachments; 

2. 	
The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands or downstream to the injury of others; 

3. 	
The proposed and existing water supply and sanitation systems, the aquifer and the ability of existing and future systems to prevent disease, contamination and unsanitary conditions; 

4. 	
The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damages on the individual owner and others; 

5. 	
The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community; 

6. 	
The requirements of the facility for a waterfront location; 

7. 	
The availability of alternative locations not subject to flooding for the proposed use; 

8. 	
The compatibility of the proposed use with existing development and development anticipated in the foreseeable future; 

9. 	
The relationship of the proposed use to the Plan of Development; 

10. 
The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 

11. 
The expected elevations, 	velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters expected at the site; and 

12. 
Such other factors which are relevant to the purposes of this regulation. 


G. CONDITIONS ATTACHED TO SPECIAL PERMIT. Upon consideration of the criteria listed above and the purposes of this section, the Commission may attach such conditions to the granting of the special permits as it deems necessary. Such conditions, among others, may include: 
1. 	
Modification of waste disposal and water supply facilities; 

2. 	
Limitations on periods of use and operation; 

3. 	
Imposition of operational controls, sureties and deed restrictions; and 

4. 	
The following flood proofing measures may be required: 


a. 	
Anchorage to resist flotation and lateral movement; 

b. 	
Installation of watertight doors, bulkheads and shutters, or similar methods of construction; 

c. 	
Reinforcement of walls to resist water pressures; 

d. 	
Use of paints, sealants, membranes or mortars to reduce seepage of water through walls; 

e. 	
Addition of mass or weight to structures to resist flotation; 

f. 	
Installation of pumps to lower water levels in structures; 

g. 	
Construction of water supply and waste treatment systems so as to prevent the entrance of floodwaters; 

h. 	
Pumping facilities or comparable practices for subsurface drainage systems for buildings to relieve external foundation wall and basement floor pressures; 

i. 	
Construction to resist rupture or collapse caused by water pressure or floating debris; 

j. 	
Installation of valves or controls on sanitary and storm drains which will permit the drains to be closed to prevent backup of sewage and storm waters into the buildings or structures.  In place of a basement drain which works by gravity, a sump pump may be used; 

k. 	
Location of electrical equipment, circuits and installed electrical appliances in a manner which will assure they are not subject to flooding and to provide protection from inundation by the regulatory flood; and 

l. 	
Prohibition of storage or utilization of chemicals, buoyant materials, flammable liquids or other toxic materials which could be hazardous to public health, safety and welfare. 


Section 17. FLOOD PERIMETER OVERLAY ZONE (FPO) 
A. GENERAL PROVISIONS. The Flood Perimeter Overlay Zone overlays existing zoning designations. All uses permitted in the underlying zone shall continue to be allowed in the Flood Perimeter Overlay Zone provided the provisions of this section are complied with. 
B. LAND TO	 WHICH PROVISIONS OF THE FLOOD PERIMETER OVERLAY ZONE APPLIES. All land within the Town of Farmington which is located either within the Flood Perimeter Overlay Zone as shown on the Official Zoning Map of the Town of Farmington or within the numbered or unnumbered A zones as indicated on a map entitled “Flood Insurance Rate Map, Town of Farmington, Connecticut, Hartford County,” however excluding those lands otherwise designated as Flood Protection Zone by this regulations (See Article II. Section 16.). 
C. CHANGE OF UNDERLYING ZONE. 	The existing zoning classification of any parcel of land within the Flood Perimeter Overlay Zone may be changed to a different zoning classification in which event the provisions, conditions and restrictions in the regulations pertaining to such changed zoning classification and the provisions, conditions and restrictions pertaining to the Flood Perimeter Overlay Zone shall apply. 
D. GENERAL STANDARDS. 	In all of the Flood Perimeter Overlay Zone the following provisions shall apply: 
1. 	
New construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy; 

2. 	
New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage except where elevated above the Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation on fill; 

3. 	
New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 

4. 	
Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 

5. 	
New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system; 

6. 	
New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the system into flood waters; 

7. 	
On site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding; 

8. 	
In any portion of a watercourse which is altered or relocated the flood carrying capacity shall be maintained; 

9. 	
No development shall be undertaken which will adversely affect the capacity of channels or floodways of any tributary to the main stream, drainage ditch or any other drainage facility or 

system; 

10. 
Any fill proposed to be deposited shall be shown to be of hydrologically sound material and have some beneficial purpose; and the amount of fill used shall not be greater than is necessary to achieve that purpose as demonstrated by a plan submitted by the applicant showing the uses to which the filled land will be put and the final dimensions of the proposed fill or other materials; 

11. 
Such fill or other materials shall be protected against erosion by riprap, vegetative cover or bulkheading; 

12. 
Structures shall have a low potential for incurring flood damage and for causing flood damage; 

13. 
Structures not elevated above the Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation shall be constructed and placed on the building site so as to offer minimum obstruction to the flow of floodwaters; 


(i) so far as practicable, structures shall be constructed with the longitudinal axis parallel to the direction of flood flow, and (ii) so far as practicable, structures shall be placed approximately on the same flood flow lines as those of adjoining structures; 
14. 
Manufactured homes are prohibited within the Flood Perimeter Overlay Zone and Flood Protection Zone. 

15. 
For new construction or substantial improvements having fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor and subject to flooding and which are usable solely for the parking of vehicles, building access, or limited storage in an area other than a basement, shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of flood waters.  Design for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following criteria: a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. 

16. 
Subdivision proposals shall conform to the requirements and standards contained in Section 


4.19 of the Farmington Subdivision Regulations. 
17. 
Above-ground storage tanks (oil, propane, etc.) which are located outside or inside of the structure must either be elevated above the base flood elevation on a concrete pad, or be securely anchored with tie-down straps to prevent flotation or lateral movement, have the top of the fill pipe extended above the base flood elevation and have a screw fill cap that does not allow for the infiltration of flood water. 

18. 
If any portion of a structure lies within the Special Flood Hazard Area, the entire structure must meet the construction requirements of the flood zone. The structure includes any attached additions, garages, decks, sunrooms, or any other structure attached to the main structure.  Decks or porches that extend into a more restrictive flood zone will require the 

entire structure to meet the standards of the more restrictive zone. 

19.
 If a structure lies within two or more flood zones, the construction standards of the most restrictive zone apply to the entire structure (i.e. V zone is more restrictive than A zone; structure must be built to the highest base flood elevation).  The structure includes any attached additions, garages, decks, sunrooms, or any other structure attached to the main structure.  (Decks or porches that extend into a more restrictive zone will require the entire structure to meet the requirements of the more restrictive zone) 

20. 
New construction, substantial improvements and repair to structures that have sustained substantial damage cannot be constructed or located entirely or partially over water. 


E. STANDARDS FOR WATERCOURSES WITHOUT ESTABLISHED BASE FLOOD ELEVATIONS, FLOODWAYS AND/OR FLOOD MAPPING. 
a. 	
The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from the Federal or State government or other source, including data developed pursuant to Article IV. Section 4.09 of the Farmington Subdivision Regulations, as criteria for requiring that new construction, substantial improvements or other development in Zone A on the Farmington Flood Insurance Rate Map meet the standards in Section 17F. 

b. 	
In A zones where base flood elevations have been determined, but before a floodway is designated, no new construction, substantial improvement or other development (including fill) shall be permitted which will increase base flood elevations more than one (1) foot at any point along the watercourse when all anticipated development is considered cumulatively with the proposed development. 

c. 	
The Zoning Enforcement Officer may request floodway data of an applicant for watercourses without FEMA published floodways. When such data is provided by an applicant or whenever such data is available from any other source (in response to the Town’s request or not), the Town shall adopt a regulatory floodway based on the principle that the floodway must be able to convey the waters of the base flood without increasing the water surface elevation more than one (1) foot at any point along the watercourse. 

d. 	
The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a Federal, State or other source, as criteria for requiring that new construction, substantial improvements or other development in any area of potential, demonstrable or historical flooding within the community meet the standards in Section 17F. 

F. 	
STANDARDS FOR DEVELOPMENT WITHIN THE FLOOD PERIMETER OVERLAY ZONE WHERE FLOOD ELEVATIONS HAVE BEEN PROVIDED.  In areas of the flood Perimeter Overlay Zone where flood elevation data has been provided the following provisions shall apply in addition to all of the general standards contained in Section 17D. 


1. 	Residential Construction. New construction or substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated at least one (1.0) foot above the base flood elevation, except that in Zone 1 such structure shall be elevated to elevation 182 and in Zone 2 to elevation 177. 
a. 	Recreational vehicles placed on sites within the Flood Perimeter Overlay Zone shall either (i) be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days, (ii) be fully licensed and ready for highway use, or (iii) meet all the general standards of Section 17D. and E. and the elevation of and anchoring requirements of Section 17.F.1. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices and has no permanently attached addition. (Other requirements are contained in Article IV. Section 9.) 
2. Non-Residential Construction. 	All new construction, substantial improvements, and repair to structures that have sustained substantial damage which are commercial, industrial or non­residential structures shall: 
a. 	
Have the bottom of the lowest floor, including basement, elevated one (1.0) foot above the base flood elevation (BFE); or 

b. 	
In lieu of being elevated, non-residential structures may be dry flood-proofed to one (1.0) foot above the BFE provided that together with all attendant utilities and sanitary facilities the areas of the structure below the required elevation are watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and provided that such structures are composed of structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall review and/or develop structural design specifications and plans for the construction and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with acceptable standards of practice for meeting the provisions of this section. Such certification shall be provided to the Zoning Enforcement Officer on the FEMA Floodproofing Certificate, Form 81-65. 

c. 	
The bottom of all electrical, plumbing, machinery or other utility equipment that service the structure must be elevated one (1.0) foot above the BFE. 


A registered professional engineer or architect shall review and/or develop structural design specifications and plans for the construction and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with acceptable standards of practice for meeting the provisions of this subsection. Such certification shall be provided to the Zoning Enforcement Officer. 
3. 	If fill is required so that the lowest floor as defined above is at or above the regulatory flood protection elevation, it shall extend at least 15 feet beyond the limits of any building erected thereon but may be graded to provide for adequate drainage. 
Section 18. AQUIFER PROTECTION ZONE (AP) 
A. PURPOSE. 	This section is adopted pursuant to the authority conferred by Section 8-2 of the Connecticut General Statutes for the following purposes: to secure the public health, safety and general welfare; to preserve the quality and quantity of the Town’s ground-water resources in order to ensure a safe and adequate water supply for present and future generations; to preserve groundwater resources currently in use and those aquifers having a high potential for future use as a public water supply; and to regulate land uses in a manner consistent with the Water Quality Standards and Classification System adopted by the State Department of Environmental Protection (DEP). 
B. BOUNDARIES OF THE AQUIFER PROTECTION ZONE. 	All land within the Town of Farmington shall be included within the Aquifer Protection Zone. This section, then, shall be an “overlay zone” applicable to all properties within the Town of Farmington. 
C. GENERAL PROVISIONS. Within the Aquifer Protection Zone, no land shall be used and no structures erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered or used except in conformance with this section and all other requirements of the underlying zone. 
The provisions in this section are not intended to repeal, abrogate or annul any portion of these regulations, other Town regulations, existing State or Federal regulations, or existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions. In any case where there is a conflict, whichever imposes the more stringent restriction shall apply. 
D. INSPECTION. All nonresidential uses within this zone shall be subject to inspection by agents of the Town. Uses of particular concern, as they have a potential for contaminating the ground­water, include, but are not limited to the following: 
Veterinary hospitals and kennels 
Appliance service shops 
Junkyards and salvage operations 
Commercial lawn care businesses 
Furniture stripping 
Dry cleaning 
Photographic processing 
Automotive service operations 
Machine shops 
Metal heat-treating operations 
Metal rescaling operations 
Commercial painting and/or coating operations 
Agricultural operations 
Golf courses. 

E. GENERAL DESIGN REQUIREMENTS. The following general requirements shall apply in the Aquifer Protection Zone to all nonresidential uses which, given the nature of the use or of a process utilized, have a known potential for polluting the groundwater. Information necessary to ensure compliance with these regulations shall be included with any application to the Commission. Any modification to an approved site plan or existing use affecting any requirement of these regulations shall require approval by the Commission. 
1. 	Floor Drains 
a. 	No interior floor drains from any process areas where possible contaminants are handled shall be directed to any stream, storm drain or subsurface leaching system. 
b. 	No interior floor drains from any process areas where possible contaminants are handled shall be directed to a sanitary sewer without adequate pretreatment as required by DEP and the Farmington Water Pollution Control Authority. 
2. 	Chemical and Waste Storage and Disposal 
a. 	
Chemical and waste storage tanks located outside shall have an impervious containment berm surrounding them. Containment dikes for most chemicals should be coated concrete or coated metal and shall be of adequate holding capacity to retain at least 100 percent of the largest tank’s capacity. For outside storage the tank and dike shall either be protected from rainwater accumulation with a permanent roof, or the dike shall have a drain valve, which will allow clear storm water to be manually released as needed. Tanks shall be supplied with a mechanical type level gauge, not a sight tube, and may have a top vent pipe or overfill pipe which is directed to the inside of the contaminant area. 

b. 	
Drum or other container storage areas shall also have an impervious containment berm surrounding them with an impervious base. All drums shall be sealed or covered. For outside storage, drums or other containers shall either be protected from rainwater accumulation with a permanent roof, or the dike shall have a drain valve which will allow clear storm water to be manually released as needed. 

c. 	
Other storage areas not included in a. and b. above shall provide for acceptable containment. 

d. 	
Dumpsters utilized in conjunction with uses regulated under this section shall be covered or located within a roofed area and shall have drain plugs intact. 

e. 	
No underground container for the storage of liquid fuels or other hazardous liquids may be installed, repaired or replaced unless such installation, replacement or repair is done in accordance with current State and local code requirements. 

f. 	
Hazardous materials and waste, as defined by the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), that are to be utilized or generated by nonresidential uses shall be identified and their quantities noted on the site plan. 

g. 	
All generators of hazardous waste shall apply for and obtain all necessary permits and registrations required by EPA and DEP. 

h. 	
All generators of hazardous waste that are classified as “small generators” by EPA and DEP shall provide: (i) for the collection, transport and ultimate disposal of said waste, consistent with the best available management practices, by a registered hauler, as defined and licensed by EPA and DEP; and (ii) upon request of agents of the Town, documented records for the same. 

i. 	
Land disposal on the premises is prohibited except for instances where the DEP has issued a permit for disposal into a subsurface disposal system. 

j. 	
Disposal into the sanitary sewers, at the municipal landfill or other municipal facilities is prohibited except for instances where the required reviews and approvals are obtained. 


3. 	Underground Storage Tanks and Facilities 
All underground storage tanks and facilities shall conform to the following standards: 
a. 	Each underground tank or container shall: 
1. 	
be a fiberglass-reinforced plastic (FRP) tank which is equipped with contact plates under all fill and gauge openings and is chemically compatible with the contained product as determined by the tank or container manufacturer’s warranty; or 

2. 	
be a steel tank externally coated with a factory applied corrosion resistant coating approved by the manufacturer for the proposed use, and equipped with cathodic protection and permanent cathodic protection monitoring devices, and contact plates under all fill and gauge openings. 


b. 	All other underground facility components shall: 
1. 	
be protected against corrosion by use of noncorrosive materials or steel components with factory applied corrosion resistant coating and cathodic protection and permanent cathodic protection monitoring devices; 

2. 	
be designed, constructed and installed so as to allow failure determination of all underground piping without the need for substantial excavation; and 

3. 	
be chemically compatible with the intended use as determined by the manufacturer’s warranty. 


Section 19. CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT 
A. PURPOSE. The purpose of this section is to provide flexibility in the development of land in order to provide greater preservation and protection of open space and other valuable natural or man-made resources while permitting a variation in lot design and building requirements. 
B. 	PROCEDURE. Cluster development including cluster subdivisions and open space subdivisions is permitted in the R80, R40, R30 and R20 Zones by each of the following procedures: 
1. 	
Upon the approval by the Commission of an application for special permit as submitted by the owners of the land proposed to be developed or their representative. Consent shall be required from the legal owner of the premises when the applicant is other than the owner. In addition to the specific requirements listed in this section, the Commission must find that the application complies with the standards found in Article IV. Section 12. See Article IV. Section 12. also for application procedures, hearing and notice requirements. 

2. 	
As required by the Commission where it is desired to protect or conserve one or more of the 


following natural or man-made resources located on or contiguous to the property to be subdivided: 
a. 	
Land occupied by a farming operation including pastureland or land consisting of important farmland soils as defined in a report entitled “Important Farmlands-Hartford County Connecticut, United States Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service.” 

b. 	
Sloping land in excess of 15 percent grade, as calculated by two-foot contour intervals. 

c. 	
Inland wetlands or watercourses as defined in Section 2. of the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations for the Town of Farmington. 

d. 	
Structures or landscapes having historic or cultural value including archaeological sites. 

e. 	
Land along ridgelines, defined as areas lying in the upper half of the area above the mean elevation of the subregional watershed that the subject property is located in. The subregional watersheds are defined on maps prepared by the Natural Resources Division of the Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection. 

f. 	
Existing or proposed public well sites and their respective area of contribution as defined in State Public Act 89-305. 

g. 	
Established marked trails. 

h. 	
Land containing existing permanently preserved open space or recreational areas or land containing areas proposed as open space or recreational areas as shown in the Plan of Development. 

i. 	
Land containing areas of special concern as identified by the Connecticut Natural Diversity Data Base as prepared by the Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection. Habitats of species that are endangered, threatened, or considered by State or Federal agencies to be significant at the state level; and other ecologically unique or special areas. 

j. 	
Land containing one or more specimen trees, defined as trees having a diameter at breast height of 36 inches or more. 

k. 	
Land located within any of the A zones as found on the Flood Insurance Rate Maps for the Town of Farmington as prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency dated July 17, 1986 and any revision thereto. 


The Commission shall conduct a public hearing prior to approving any cluster or open space subdivision under this procedure. Such hearing may be conducted as part of the hearing for subdivision approval. In the case where no subdivision application has been submitted the hearing shall be conducted in accordance with Article IV. Section 12.C. 
C. SUBMISSION OF PLAN. At a minimum, for Cluster Subdivisions and Open Space 
Subdivisions, an informal subdivision plan, as described in Section 2.01.01 of the Farmington Subdivision Regulations, shall be submitted along with an application for special permit approval. In the case where attached housing is proposed by the applicant or required by the Commission a preliminary site plan containing the property boundary, location of all proposed buildings, driveways and parking areas, conceptual utility plan and building elevations shall be submitted. Subsequent to the approval of the preliminary site plan the applicant shall submit to the Commission for approval a final site plan which meets the specifications found in Appendix B of these regulations. 
All areas of inland wetlands and watercourses and slopes in excess of 33 percent (as calculated by two-foot contour intervals) shall be clearly indicated on all plans. 
The Commission may require additional information in order to adequately review the proposal against the standards specified in this section. 
D. STANDARDS FOR LOT (UNIT) COMPUTATION. The maximum number of lots (housing units) shall be computed as follows: 
1. 	The following developable land formula shall be applied to the total tract size and its natural composition: 
A -(.75B + .75C) = D 
Where A = Total Site Area. 
B = Area of Inland Wetland Soils and Watercourses Present on the Site. 
C = Area of Land Containing Slopes Equal to or in Excess of 33 Percent (as calculated using two-foot contour intervals). 
D = Land Area for Computing the Maximum Number of Lots (Housing Units) that may be Developed. 
2. 	The result of this equation shall be reduced by 10 percent for street rights-of-way and by 15 percent for open space dedication for property located in R80, R40 and R30 zones; and 20 percent for the R20 zone. The reduction for street rights-of-way may be deleted where all proposed lots will have access from an existing street. The reduction for open space dedication may be deleted where a cash payment is made to the Town in accordance with Section 4.01.03.1. or in cases where the development meets the standards of Section 
4.01.03.2. of the Farmington Subdivision Regulations. 
3. 	The remaining area shall be divided by the minimum lot size requirement for the zoning district in which the development is to be located. 
E. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 
1. 	Minimum area, frontage and yard requirements for R80, R40, R30 and R20 Cluster 
Subdivisions. 

Minimum Area    Frontage Minimum Yard Depths (Ft.) 
Zone 	(Sq. Ft.)__ (Ft.)     Front  Side           Rear           
R80          	30,000 100 40 (see b.)          25 
R40, R30, R20 15,000 85 30 (see b.)          25 
a. 	
In the R40, R30 and R20 Zones, 25 percent of the total number of lots may be reduced to 12,000 square feet. 

b. 	
Minimum Side Yard Depths shall be provided in accordance with the following table: 


Lot Frontage (feet) Min. Side yard Each (feet) 
50 to 84              	10 percent of frontage 
84.01 to 99           10 
Greater than 99.01   10 for one, 30 for both 

c. 	
Minimum floor area requirements shall be those of the underlying zone. 

d. 	
In the R40, R30 and R20 Zones by a five-sixths vote of the full Commission the minimum area of lots may be reduced to 10,000 square feet along with the following reductions in the minimum frontage, front and rear yard setbacks: 


Minimum Frontage -50 feet 
Minimum Front Yard -25 feet 
Minimum Rear Yard -20 feet 

In order to be eligible for the reductions specified in this paragraph the development plan shall provide (i) a perimeter buffer area of at least 30 feet in width; (ii) that all lots abut common open space with a minimum width of 30 feet for a minimum length of 50 feet. 
e. 	On corner lots 15,000 square feet or greater in area, the width of a side yard along a street shall be 20 feet. On corner lots less than 15,000 square feet in area, the width of a side yard along a street shall be 15 feet. A corner lot shall contain a front yard along one street. Determination of the front and side lot lines shall be done in accordance with Article III. Section 3.C. of these regulations. 
2. 	
Minimum Area, Frontage and Yard Requirements for R80, R40, R30 and R20 Open Space Subdivisions. 

Lots within the R80 and R40 Zones shall comply with the minimum requirements of the R40 and R30 Zones respectively while lots in the R30 Zone shall meet the minimum standards of the R20 Zone and lots in the R20 Zone shall meet the minimum requirements of the R12 Zone. 

3. 	
Minimum Standards for Single Family Attached Cluster Housing. 


a. 	
Single-family attached cluster housing shall be a single-family dwelling attached to or having a common wall with an adjacent single-family dwelling and having its own 

F. 	
OTHER REQUIREMENTS 


ground floor and at grade entrance.  
b.  Minimum Yard Requirements:  
Front Yard -65 feet Rear Yard -50 feet Side Yard -50 feet each  
c.  No building shall contain more than four units. Rooflines shall contain sufficient vertical breaks and horizontal breaks (at least between each unit) in order to avoid a rowhouse effect.  
d.  Grouping: The shortest distance between any two structures shall be not less than the height of the taller structure, as measured to the highest point of the roof from the ground elevation of the closest wall to the adjacent structure, with a minimum of 24 feet. The Commission may waive the separation requirement if the design of the proposed development is benefited by closer spacing.  
e.  Two and three-tenths parking spaces shall be provided for each dwelling unit. Such spaces shall be located within 200 feet of the dwelling unit they are intended to serve. No parking space, including stall and aisle way, shall be permitted within any minimum front, rear or side yard.  
f.  The Commission, in addition to the setback requirements specified in paragraph b. above, may require the provision of a buffer with a maximum width of 50 feet.  
g.  The Commission may approve the development and location of any recreation or accessory use or structure within an attached cluster housing development provided no structure or use is located within any minimum yard or buffer area.  
h.  The maximum height of any attached cluster housing shall be 35 feet. Accessory buildings shall not exceed 15 feet in height.  
i.  Construction of attached cluster housing shall include (i) control of airborne sound transmission, and (ii) impact noise reduction assemblies equal to F.H.A. minimum property standards for multifamily housing, current edition.  
j.  The Commission may require that all setback yards and buffers be planted in accordance with the specifications of an A Bufferyard (40-foot width) as described in Article IV. Section 13.B.4. or the Commission may require additional landscaping when unusual conditions require more extensive screening.  
k.  Dwelling Size: Each dwelling unit shall consist of at least two rooms, exclusive of hall or bathroom, and there shall be at least 600 square feet of living area for a two-room unit. Each additional room shall have at least 100 square feet.  
l.  All utility wires shall be installed underground.  

1. 	
The applicant shall either deed to the Town, an acceptable nonprofit land trust or reserve by a method otherwise approved by the Commission at least five acres of open space land. The minimum acreage requirement specified here may be modified by a five-sixths vote of the full Commission in instances where the Commission seeks to protect or conserve one or more of the natural or man-made resources listed in Section 19.B.2. The Commission may require that all open space be reserved for public use. 

2. 	
The use of the land set aside as open space shall be approved by the Commission and said use shall be stated upon the record subdivision map or final site plan. The developer shall submit a suitable legal instrument for approval which will ensure that lands not deeded to the Town will continue to be used for conservation, park or recreational purposes. Such legal instrument shall also provide that the Town of Farmington, its agents or employees may without liability enter upon such land for the purpose of eliminating or discontinuing any thing, object or condition which may be deemed to be in violation of this regulation or the approval. 

No privately-owned open space shall be disposed of by sale or otherwise, except to an organization established for the purpose of owning, maintaining and preserving open space, without first offering to convey such open space to the Town. The Commission must approve the placement of any structures on lands reserved for park, recreation or conservation use. 

3. 	
The Commission may require the submission of a landscape plan in the case where designated open spaces are disturbed or where it is desirable to screen a cluster subdivision or open space subdivision from adjacent properties. 

4. 	
To ensure the protection of existing residences, the Commission may require that proposed lots abutting lots with existing single-family residences conform to the area and setback requirements of the adjacent zone. 

5. 	
To ensure the protection of wetlands, watercourse and vernal pools on or adjacent to the property, the Commission may require the following minimum buffers to be designated as open space or conservation easement: 50 – 100 feet from designated wetlands and watercourses, and 100 – 200 feet from vernal pools. 

6. 	
When the property contains or is adjacent to an active farming operation, the Commission may require a minimum 75 – 100-foot vegetated buffer between the residential use and agricultural use. This buffer shall, at the discretion of the Commission, be designated as open space or conservation easement. 


Section 20. R9 MULTIFAMILY CLUSTER 
A. PURPOSE. To provide a method of development that will promote affordable and multifamily housing compatible with existing and projected land uses. 
B. USE ALLOWED BY SPECIAL PERMIT. The following use may be allowed in the R9 Zone after obtaining a special permit. In addition to specific requirements listed here, the standards provided in Article IV. Section 12. shall also apply to applications submitted under this section. Article IV. Section 12. shall also apply to application procedures, hearing and notice requirements and site plan information. 
1. 	Multifamily dwelling with up to 8 dwelling units in a building provided the following 
standards are met:  
a.  Minimum Land     Area per Unit   8,712 sq. ft.          Maximum Units  per Lot 24  Minimum Frontage on Public Street 200 feet  
Minimum Yards Front yard:  Rear yard: Side yards:  Maximum Height 30 feet 25 feet 20 feet  of Buildings 35 feet  

b. 	
No parking area (including parking stalls and back up area) shall be permitted within required yards or buffers; 

c. 	
Between a building and access drives or parking area there shall be a minimum of 4 feet of landscaping space which is not encroached upon by vehicle overhang; 

d. 	
Refuse containers shall be provided in an appropriate number for waste and recycling unless curbside service is provided. 

e. 	
In the event that adjacent properties are zoned in any of the zoning classifications shown below, a buffer area shall be provided as shown in the column captioned “Buffer Width.” For each side and rear yard abutting such zones buffer areas shall be planted or preserved in a natural state in a mixture of evergreen and deciduous trees and shrubs and shall be maintained in proper order so as to protect adjacent properties and present a reasonably opaque, natural barrier to a height of ten feet; 


Zone Buffer Width R80, R40     40 feet R30, R20     25 feet R12, R9       20 feet 
f. 	
All units shall be served by public water and sewers. For the purpose of this section, public water shall not include a private or community well. 

g. 	
The shortest distance between any two structures shall be not less than the height of the taller structure, as measured to the highest point of the roof from the ground elevation of the closest wall to the adjacent structure, but not less than a minimum of twenty-four (24) feet. 

h. 	
No portion of a lot proposed to be developed in accordance with this section shall be within a 500-foot radius of any other lot developed or intended to be developed in accordance with this section. 

i. 	
Dwelling Size: Each dwelling unit shall consist of at least two rooms, exclusive of hall or bathroom, and there shall be at least 500 square feet of living area for a two-room unit and at least 600 square feet for a three-room unit. Each additional room shall contain at least 100 square feet. 

j. 	
Each grouping of four dwelling units (combined in one structure) shall be separated by a two-hour firewall. Construction of dwelling units shall include (a) control of airborne sound transmission and (b) impact noise reduction assemblies equal to F.H.A. minimum property standards for multifamily housing, current edition. 

k. 	
All utility wires shall be installed underground. 

C. 
The approval of a special permit application for cluster housing within the R9 Zone shall be void and of no effect unless construction of the project commences within one year from the date the approval is granted by the Commission. For purposes of this regulation the term construction shall be defined as the installation of a permanent building foundation. The Commission may grant up to two six-month extensions of this period upon written request of the applicant. The Commission shall withhold approval of any or all extensions unless the development plan is brought into conformance with any relevant zoning regulations which have been amended subsequent to the original approval and if the applicant fails to provide adequate evidence that construction is able to begin within the extended time period sought. This evidence shall include, but not be limited to, the acquisition of any or all required government approvals and project financing. Any appeals of such special permit, site plan, inland wetlands or subdivision approval shall extend the aforementioned one-year period the length of such appeal. 


Section 21. UNIONVILLE CENTER ZONE (UC) 
A. PURPOSE. 	The purpose of the Unionville Center Zone is to facilitate the development of a compact village center which promotes through design regulations, mixed uses (housing, shopping, employment opportunities, social and civic use), access to the Farmington River, business growth and vitality, a proper balance between accommodating pedestrian use and the automobile, a pattern of development which respects and fosters Unionville’s historic past, the preservation of historic resources, views and vistas, buildings which are in proper size and scale with respect to the streetscape and one another in concert with the objectives of the Farmington Plan of Conservation and Development and the study entitled “Unionville Study:2002 Past, Present and Future” prepared by the University of Connecticut and Yale University.  The pedestrian environment encouraged by this regulation is essential for developing the sense of community desired by the Town and will permit the business community to prosper. 
B. PERMITTED USES. The following uses requiring only a Zoning Permit as specified in Article 
V. 
1. 	
Signs. Signs shall be permitted as specified in Article IV Section 7. 

2. 	
Accessory Uses in conjunction with an approved special permitted use in Section C. 

3. 	
Home Office as described and regulated by Article I. Section 9. and Article II. Section 1. of these regulations. 


C. USES ALLOWED ONLY BY SPECIAL PERMIT. 	In addition to specific requirements listed here, the standards provided in Article IV Section 12 and Article II Section 21A shall also apply to applications submitted under this section.  Article IV Section 12 shall also apply to application procedures, hearing and notice requirements and site plan information. 
1. 	
School. 

2. 	
Public Utility Building and Structure. 

3. 	
Municipally owned or leased building and structure. 

4. 	
Community Building for use by residents of the community or neighborhood and maintained and operated for community purposes. 

5. 	
Retail Store and Personal Service Shop. 

6. 	
Fast Food Restaurant, Dairy Bar, Grill, Coffee Shop except mobile type of eating and drinking place, place offering curb service and drive through windows.  Where alcoholic beverages are sold, the limitations of Article IV Section 5. shall apply. 

7. 	
Shop for making articles to be sold primarily at retail on the premises, provided that those engaged in making the articles shall not exceed five in number. 

8. 	
Gallery. 

9. 	
Hotel, Motel, Inn. 

10. 
Business Offices. 

11. 
Bank without drive through teller. 

12. 
Medical Offices. 

13. 
Health Club and Sports Facility. 

14. 
Club and Fraternal Organization. 

15. 
Private or Public Parking Facility. 

16. 
Billiard Parlor. 

17. 
Apartments with single family units combined in a single use or mixed-use structure under single common ownership. 

18. 
Condominiums consisting of single-family units combined in a single use or mixed use structure as permitted under the Common Interest Ownership Act of the Connecticut General Statutes. 

19. 
Restaurant (low turnover).  	Where alcoholic beverages are sold, the limitations of Article IV. Section 5 shall apply. 

20. 
Animal Day Care Center 

21. 
Within design sub district 2, the uses allowed by the granting of a special permit by the Commission shall be limited to public or private school, public utility buildings and structures, municipally owned or leased buildings or structures, community buildings, apartments with single family units, condominiums consisting of single-family units combined in a single use as permitted under the Common Interest Ownership Act of the Connecticut General Statutes. 


D. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR ALL DEVELOPMENT WITHIN THE UNIONVILLE CENTER ZONE. 
1. 	
Construction, rehabilitation and reconstruction of properties within this zone and in view from a public roadway must conform to the standards and requirements found here as well as the standards and requirements found in Article II Section 21A (Unionville Village District Zone). 

2. 	
A tract of land within the Unionville Center Zone may be developed in stages.  However, the Commission may require that certain data be submitted for the entire tract.  This may include site topography, natural resources data, traffic, parking and circulation, schematic architectural drawings, grading, erosion and sedimentation control and storm drainage. 

3. 	
Height and Area Requirements. 


a. 	
Maximum height of buildings: Forty (40) feet.  With a favorable recommendation from the Architectural Design Review Committee the height may be increased to fifty two (52) feet. 

b. 	
Minimum height of buildings:  Two floors of finished space with a minimum ceiling height of eight (8) feet, except for buildings located within design sub district 1.  Each floor shall be completely set above grade as measured from all sides of the building.  This provision may be waived by vote of 5/6 of the full Commission provided a favorable recommendation is received from the Architectural Design Review Committee. 

c. 	
Yards: Front Yard:  10 feet* 
Rear Yard:  10 feet* 
25 feet (when abutting a residential zone) 
Side Yard:  0 



25 feet (when abutting a residential zone) 
Side Yard Along a Street:  10 feet* 

*
 The Commission may approve a reduction of the minimum front or rear yard requirement by vote of 5/6 of the full Commission provided a favorable recommendation is received from the Architectural Design Review Committee. 

d. 	
Minimum lot size:  None, except in design sub district 2 where the minimum lot size shall be two (2) acres. 

e. 	
Minimum frontage: None, except in design sub district 2 where the minimum frontage shall be 200 feet. 

f. 	
Minimum building length: The minimum length of a building shall be 25 feet. This standard shall be measured along that portion of the building situated closest to a street. 

g. 	
Maximum floor area:  With the exception of buildings constructed in design sub district 1, no building constructed after the effective date of this regulation (August 14, 2004) shall contain a retail business or office having a gross floor area greater than 5,000 square feet. The Commission may approve an increase in the allowable gross square footage of a building for a retail business or office use to a maximum of 15,000 gross square footage upon favorable recommendation from the Architectural Design Review Committee and upon a Commission’s finding that the proposed plan: 


1. 	
Is in harmony with the overall objectives of the Unionville Study – 2000; 

2. 	
The design of the building shall resemble and be in harmony with individual store fronts permitted and/or existing in the Unionville Center Zone through the use of architectural features such as: 


a. 	
staggering the depth from the street to the face of the building; 

b. 	
changing roof heights; 

c. 	
use of different but complimentary building materials; 

d. 	
changes in fenestration; 

e. 	
use of awnings/canopies; and 

f. 	
exterior lighting. 


3. 	Does not result in the demolition of any existing buildings. 
No retail business located in design sub district 1 shall have a gross floor area in excess of 44,000 square feet.  For purposes of this subsection gross floor area means the horizontal area of all floors of a building measured from the exterior of outside walls, excluding the following non-customer areas contained within the building footprint: (1) an enclosed mezzanine used for purposes such as offices and storage; and (2) a basement used for storage and food preparation. 
4. 	Off Street Parking. This provision shall supercede the similar standards found in Article IV. Section 8.  
a. 	
All Office Uses: one (1) space for each 285 square feet of gross usable floor area.  Gross usable floor area should be assumed as eighty percent (80%) of total floor area where no floor plan exists at the time of application. 

b. 	
Retail and Personal Service Shop and Bank: one (1) space for each 285 square feet of sales and customer area plus one (1) space for each 285 square feet of gross usable floor area of office space. 

c. 	
Dwelling Units:  one and one-half (1.5) spaces for a one-bedroom unit.  Two (2) spaces for units having two bedrooms and one space for studio units.  In determining the number of spaces, enclosed garage spaces and garage apron spaces meeting the dimensional criteria of a parking space set forth in these Regulations shall be considered to be acceptable provided, however, that such apron spaces are under the same ownership or control as the garage space. 

d. 	
Hotel, Motel:  one (1) space for each room plus one (1) space for each employee at the largest shift. 

e. 	
Restaurant, Fast Food or Low Turnover:  one (1) space for every three (3) seats plus one 


(1) 
space for each 285 square feet of customer area (without seats) plus one (1) space per employee at the largest shift. 

f. 	
Billiard Parlor:  one (1) space for each 285 square feet of customer area plus one (1) space per employee at the largest shift. 


Provisions for parking within the Unionville Center zone are based upon the concept of shared parking.  The Commission may require that as part of an approval for a development in this zone legal rights of access and use of such parking areas be provided for others.  No owner or tenant shall designate a parking space for their or others exclusive use without the approval of the Commission. 
In calculating the required number of parking spaces for a use or uses on a particular site or offsite (see next paragraph), the Commission may consider over lapping use of parking spaces based upon the various hours of operation and peak usage for each use. 
Required parking spaces for uses located in the Unionville Center zone shall be provided onsite.  However, by vote of 5/6 of the full Commission such spaces may be provided off site provided they are located within 500 feet of the entrance to the building housing such use and an agreement of a term found acceptable to the Commission is executed for use of such spaces. 
The setback requirements for parking areas found in Article IV Section 8.A of these regulations shall not be applicable to the Unionville Center Zone. 
E. LIGHTING. Exterior lighting shall be of such intensity or located or directed in such a way so as not to produce glare on public streets or neighboring property.  The Commission may require a reduction in lighting after 10:00 p.m. or when otherwise found to be warranted in order to protect nearby residential properties. 
F. 	HOURS OF OPERATION FOR SPECIAL PERMIT USES. At the time of the public hearing the Commission shall require the submission of projected hours of operation.  The Commission shall review the impact of such hours on the immediate neighborhood as well as current and projected traffic circulation patterns.  As part of the special permit, reasonable limitations on hours of operation may be imposed. 
G. LOT COVERAGE. 	No more than 85 percent of the lot may be covered with impervious surfaces except in design sub district 2 where no more than 60 percent may be covered with impervious surfaces. 
H. RESIDENTIAL USE 
1. 	
Excluding the area contained in design sub districts 1 and 2, new construction of a building shall not be permitted where such building is designed to have more than two thirds of its gross floor area dedicated to residential use.  No building constructed after the effective date of this regulation, or amendment thereto, and located outside design sub district 1 or 2 shall contain residential units on the first floor above grade. 

2. 	
No residential dwelling unit located within the Unionville Center zone shall contain more than two bedrooms. Each dwelling unit shall consist of at least two rooms, exclusive of hall and bathroom, and there shall be at least 500 square feet of living area for a two-bedroom unit.  Each additional room shall have at least 100 square feet. 

3. 	
Except in design sub district 2, the floor area ratio for residential development shall not exceed 0.20.  In design sub district 2, the maximum density shall be the lesser of four units per gross acre or eight units per net acre (net acre as defined in these regulations).  For larger projects where a minimum of 15% of the lot area and a total of 3 or more acres of the overall property is being provided as deeded open space or set aside as conservation restricted (excluded from further development) area.  The maximum density shall be no more than 15 units per gross acre. 

4. 	
There shall be no outside display or storage associated with any residential use. Outdoor clotheslines are prohibited. 


I. 	LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS. The specific requirements found in Article IV Section 13 of these regulations shall not be applicable to the Unionville Center Zone.  However, parking areas containing more than ten cars shall contain landscaped areas within such parking area equal to at least 10 percent of the gross parking area.  Gross parking area shall include the area of parking stalls, aisleways and associated landscaping.  Landscape bufferyards as specified in Article IV Section 13 shall be provided as deemed necessary by the Commission to provide protection to adjacent residential properties. 
J.  	VARIANCE. The Zoning Board of Appeals when processing and deciding an application for variance for any property located within the UC zone shall give due consideration to and consult with the plan entitled “Unionville Study: 2002 Past, Present and Future” prepared by the University of Connecticut and Yale University in making a finding that such application is in harmony with the general intent and purpose of these regulations. 
K. EXPIRATION OF PERMIT. 	The approval of an application for special permit shall be void and of no effect unless construction of the project commences within one year from the date the approval is granted by the Commission.  For purposes of this regulation the term construction shall be defined as the installation of a permanent building foundation.  The Commission may grant up to two six-month extensions of this period upon written request by the applicant.  The Commission shall withhold approval of any or all extensions unless the development plan is brought into conformance with any relevant zoning regulations, which have been amended subsequent to the original approval and if the applicant fails to provide adequate evidence that construction is able to begin within the extended time period sought.  This evidence shall include, but not be limited to, the acquisition of any or all required government approvals and project financing.  Any appeals of such special permit, site plan, inland wetlands or subdivision approval shall extend the aforementioned one-year period the length of such appeal. 
L. Nothing herein shall prevent the construction of a development within the Unionville Center Zone which was submitted for approval to the Commission prior to the effective date of this regulation (insert date) and which was subsequently approved and provided that construction commences in conformance with the timeframe set forth in section K. 
M. The Commission, in 	conjunction with the approval of a development proposal under this regulation, may establish a reasonable timeframe for the commencement and completion of various improvements.  In order to ensure compliance with such a timetable the Commission may require the posting of a performance bond in a type and amount, which is found to be satisfactory. 
N. The Commission, in 	conjunction with the approval of a development proposal under this regulation, may require the posting of a performance bond to ensure the maintenance of various improvements.  The Commission shall determine the type and sum of such bond. 
Section 21A. UNIONVILLE VILLAGE DISTRICT ZONE (UV) 
A. PURPOSE. 	The purpose of this section is to promote, protect and enhance the unique and distinctive character, historic settlement pattern and architecture, and landscape of Unionville Center and to function in support of the Unionville Center Zone and its purposes pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes 8-2j. 
B. DEFINITIONS. For the purpose of applying the provisions of this section the terms below shall be defined as follows: 
A.D.R.C. – Architectural Design Review Committee. 
MAJOR STREET – Farmington Avenue (Route 4), South Main Street/Lovely Street (Route 177), Mill Street and any other streets so designated by the Commission. 
APPROVING AUTHORITY – The Farmington Town Plan and Zoning Commission. 
DISTRICT or UNIONVILLE VILLAGE DISTRICT – The Unionville Village District as delineated on the Zoning Map for the Town of Farmington.  The District shall be an overlay zone and its boundaries are coincidental with the zoning district boundaries of the Unionville Center Zone and its requirements and standards shall be in addition to and not in lieu of the regulations pertaining to the Unionville Center Zone. 
VILLAGE DISTRICT PLAN – The study entitled “Unionville Study: 2002 Past, Present and Future” by the University of Connecticut and Yale University. 
C. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS. 
1. 	This regulation shall apply to new construction, substantial reconstruction and rehabilitation of properties within the District and in view from public roadways including but not limited to: 
a. 	
The design and placement of new, expanded or altered buildings including materials and colors. 

b. 	
The maintenance of public views. 

c. 	
The design, paving materials and placement of public and private roadways. 

d. 	
The design and placement of new and modified landscape areas, lighting, fencing and walls. 

e. 	
The replacement or elimination of exterior structural surfaces and features, including roofing materials, and siding. 

f. 	
Any change to the exterior color of a structure. 

g. 	
The demolition of any structure or part thereof or the elimination of any landscape area. 

h. 	
The design (including color), installation and modification of any sign. 


This provision shall not apply to repairs to buildings where such repairs involve the replacement of building elements with like materials, colors etc. and such repairs do not expand or decrease the area, vertical or horizontal footprint of the building, change roof line or roof type or add or remove building elements. 
D. PROCEDURE. 	Activities that are governed by this regulation shall be presented to the Town in accordance with the requirements and procedures found under the Unionville Center Zone and under Article IV Section 12 as applicable.  All proposals concerning the activities listed in Section C above shall be referred to the A.D.R.C. for a report and recommendation.  The 
A.D.R.C. shall provide such report to the Town Plan and Zoning Commission within 45 days after the date the complete application is received by the Planning Office.  In addition to the information, exhibits, drawings and plans required by these regulations the A.D.R.C. may also require one or more of the following items where it is reasonably required to adequately evaluate a proposal: 
1. 	
Cross-section drawings. 

2. 	
Perspective drawings. 

3. 	
The superimposition of the proposal on a computer created image of the existing area. 

4. 	
A streetscape illustrating the new proposal to scale and indicating the dimensional 

relationship between the project and structures on adjacent parcels. 

5. 	
Samples of colors and materials. 

6. 	
A three-dimensional model of the proposal. 

7. 	
Half size sections through all trim details. 

8. 	
Historical pictures of the subject site and surrounding area as available. 


E. ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN REVIEW COMMITTEE. 	The Architectural Design Review Committee is a body composed of nine (9) members and created pursuant to CGS 8-2j.  The Town Planner shall serve as the professional staff to the A.D.R.C. but not be a voting member. The Committee at a minimum shall contain one architect or landscape architect.  All appointments shall be made by the Town Plan and Zoning Commission.  When appointing members the Planning and Zoning Commission may conduct public interviews and give preference to individuals who possess experience in disciplines such as: architecture, landscape architecture, planner with experience in design, artist, developer, historic preservationist and / or members of the Unionville or Farmington Historic District Commission. 
Members shall serve on the committee for a term of three years.  Initial membership shall be comprised of the members of the Unionville Architectural Design Review Committee as existing on March 30th 2018 and shall serve their current terms until replaced.  Persons filling a vacancy shall be appointed for a period coincident with the completion of such term.  Members shall continue to serve after the completion of their term until such time they have officially been reappointed or replaced. 
For complex projects, the Commission may also select and contract with a Village District consultant to serve in this capacity for any project in accordance with CGS 8-2j and §98-4 Costs of special studies or consultations of the Farmington Code of Ordinances.  Such Village District consultant shall be a registered architect or an architectural firm. 
The A.D.R.C. may meet informally with property owners or prospective developers prior to the formal submission of an application to the Town Plan and Zoning Commission.  The A.D.R.C. shall provide design support to the Commission consistent with the design and landscape standards/guidelines found in regulations, the principles expressed in the Village District Plan, the architectural heritage of the area and the distinctive characteristics of each District. 
All proposals concerning the activities listed in Section C above shall include a project narrative prepared by the project architect detailing the proposed materials and colors and other details and plans and shall be referred to the ADRC for a written report and recommendation.  The A.D.R.C. shall provide a written report to the Town Plan and Zoning Commission within 45 days after the date the complete application is received by the Planning Office.  The written report shall be entered into the public record and considered in the decision. 
F. 	DESIGN OBJECTIVES AND STANDARDS. 
1. 	
The building and layout of buildings and associated site improvements shall reinforce 

existing or historical building and streetscape patterns as determined by the Approving Authority.  The applicable existing or historical building and streetscape patterns are found in publications entitled “Farmington-New England Town Through Time” and “Farmington Connecticut-350 Years In Pictures.  The placement of buildings and associated site improvements shall assure there is no adverse impact on the District. 

2. 	
Proposed streets shall be laid out consistent with the design found in the Village District Plan. 

3. 	
Open spaces shall be provided and designed to facilitate safe pedestrian access to adjoining parking areas and developed properties and shall facilitate access to and enjoyment of the Farmington River. 

4. 	
Locally significant features of the site such as distinctive buildings or sight lines of vistas from within the District shall be integrated into the site design. These significant features are illustrated in the publications entitled “Farmington-New England Town Through Time” and “Farmington Connecticut-350 Years In Pictures”. 

5. 	
The landscape design shall complement or enhance the district’s landscape patterns; provide for an appealing streetscape and mitigate the visual impact of streets, parking areas and manmade objects and features through the use of plants and trees, fencing and masonry walls. 

6. 	
The exterior signs, site lighting and accessory structures shall complement and not undermine the architectural theme for the district and be compatible with their surroundings. There shall not be any internally illuminated signs including neon visible from a street or driveway. 

7. 	
The scale, proportions, massing and detailing of any proposed building shall be in proportion to the scale, proportion, massing and detailing in the district or consistent with those recommended in the Village District Plan as determined by the Approving Authority. 

8. 	
Reasonable efforts shall be made to preserve, reuse and enhance historic structures. 

9. 	
Buildings to the greatest extent possible shall be placed and oriented to the front of a lot and close to a street and should maintain a pleasing spatial relationship with the roadway and other nearby buildings in relation to their height and mass and that of others. 

10. 
Buildings shall have their principal access directly off a public street and sidewalk unless otherwise approved by the Approving Authority. 

11. 
Off street parking areas shall be located to the rear of a building where practicable. No parking should ever be provided between a major street and the closest wall of a building to such street or a line extending out in a direction parallel to such major street in conjunction with applications for new building construction proposed after the adoption of this regulation. 

12. 
Vehicular access to buildings and parking areas shall be via driveways from streets other than 

major streets where practicable and consistent with the circulation design found in the Village District Plan. 

13. 
Front facing walls of retail establishments shall contain display windows appropriate in size and number to their internal functions. 

14. 
Where practicable developments shall provide pedestrian circulation access to off-site walks, trails, parks and other public gathering places in addition to providing a front sidewalk. 

15. 
Where practicable developments shall provide for public and pedestrian amenities such as plazas, greens, walkways, benches, fountains, sculpture etc. 

16. 
The predominate building materials used in the district shall be brick, wood, stone or other natural materials. Manmade materials may be used where approved by the Approving Authority. 

17. 
Adequate provisions shall be made for deliveries and loading and to not interfere with pedestrian movement.  Dumpsters shall be properly screened and odors from trash properly confined. 

18. 
Sidewalks shall not be less than 6 feet wide and should be designed to accommodate their intended function including but not limited to outdoor seating areas for dining.  Sidewalks shall be concrete, brick or cobblestone unless otherwise approved by the Approving Authority. 

19. 
The construction of accessory buildings shall be prohibited unless otherwise approved by the Approving Authority. 

20. 
Vehicular circulation and the design and placement of parking shall be developed to prevent or reduce vehicular/pedestrian circulation conflicts. 

21. 
The ground level of a building should generally be visually distinct from upper stories. 

22. 
The design of buildings shall avoid long walls that are absent of windows or architectural detail or are presented on one plane without relief and shadow lines. 

23. 
Rooflines and roof types shall not include mansard roofs. 


G. USE. Uses at	 any location within the District shall be permitted and regulated only in conformance with the underlying Unionville Center Zone. 
H. LOT SIZE,	 SETBACK, LOT COVERAGE AND HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS.  Lot size, setback, coverage and height requirements for any lot located within the District shall be as specified for the underlying Unionville Center Zone. 
Section 22. EARTH EXCAVATION ZONE (EE) 
A. USES ALLOWED BY SPECIAL PERMIT. The following uses may be allowed in the EE Zone after obtaining a special permit. In addition to specific requirements listed here, the standards provided in Article IV. Section 12. shall also apply to applications submitted under this section. Article IV. Section 12. shall also apply to application procedures, hearing and notice requirements and site plan information. 
1. 	The removal of sand, stone, gravel, loam, peat and peat moss and the processing of materials extracted from the premises provided the following conditions can be met: 
a. 	
Erosion Control. A detailed erosion control plan shall be submitted in accordance with Article IV. Section 11. of these regulations; 

b. 	
Wind Erosion and Dust Controls. Proper measures shall be taken to minimize nuisance from dust and wind erosion at all storage areas, yards, access roads, service roads or other untreated open areas within the lot; 

c. 	
Working Slopes. Upon completion of the workday, proper measures shall be taken to restore a slope not exceeding 1 vertical to 1-1/2 horizontal to the area of excavated or otherwise disturbed ground. Alternatively, the Commission may approve, as part of the application, satisfactory terracing arrangements to assure the safety and stability of the working slopes. Finished slopes shall not exceed a 1 vertical to 3 horizontal slope unless otherwise approved by the Town Engineer or in the case of a rock cut. Fences or embankments shall be provided where necessary for the protection and safety of vehicular and pedestrian traffic; 

d. 	
Minimum Setbacks. All excavation, removal, filling or grading shall be located at least fifty (50) feet from any property line unless a plan for removal is coordinated with the owner of an adjacent tract and approved by the Commission. The Commission may permit grading up to a public street, road or highway right-of-way. There shall be no stockpiling of materials within 50 feet of any property line, public street, road, highway or right-of-way; 

e. 	
Topsoil Preservation and Restoration. Topsoil stripped from the property shall be set aside on the premises. Such topsoil stockpiles shall not be sold or removed from the premises. A minimum of four (4) inches of topsoil shall be placed over all areas proposed to be restored as shown on the approved grading plan; 

f. 	
Screening. When deemed applicable by the Commission, the applicant shall provide landscaping and/or a fence and/or embankment for the purposes of minimizing objectionable noise and screening operations from the view of highway traffic and neighboring property owners; 

g. 	
Landscaping. A final landscaping plan shall be prepared by the applicant and approved by the Commission. All material and labor costs to implement such plan shall be included in paragraph h. below; 

h. 	
Bonding. Before a permit is granted under this section, the applicant shall file a bond in a form acceptable to the Town Engineer, and in such amount as the Town Engineer deems sufficient to ensure the faithful performance and completion of the work in accordance 


with the provisions of this section; 
If the applicant fails to comply with any requirements of the original special permit approval, the Town Engineer may declare the special permit to be null and void and may declare the project to be in default and call the bond or other security. The Town Engineer may take whatever steps are necessary to complete the improvements necessary to bring the site into compliance with this section and to pay for such improvements from the bond or other security; 
A bond will not be released by the Town Engineer until the applicant’s engineer has certified to the Town Engineer, through submission of detailed “as built” plans, that all improvements are in accordance with approved plans. “As built” plans shall include grading plans, as well as erosion and sedimentation control details; 
i. 	
Hours of Operation and Noise. Earth excavation operations may be performed only during the hours between 7:00 A.M. and 6:00 P.M. on Mondays through Saturdays. When deemed proper by the Commission to protect the public health and safety or mitigate any nuisance to nearby residences the Commission may specify the length of duration of such operation. All requirements of the Town’s Noise Ordinance shall be complied with; and 

j. 	
Control Points. In order to ensure that the site is graded in accordance with the approved plans, vertical and horizontal control points shall be set around the entire perimeter of the parcel. Such control points shall be: (i) noted on the approved plans; (ii) located in number as approved by the Town Engineer but spaced no further than 200 feet apart; and 


(iii) set in or on the ground using materials approved by the Town Engineer. 
2. 	
Municipally owned or leased Building and Structure used in connection with the governmental or proprietary functions of the Town of Farmington or any other government. 

3. 	
The processing or recycling of earth materials or concrete products imported from off the premises. 

4. 	
The recycling, composting, processing and sales of organic material from onsite or imported from offsite.  This activity shall be subject to all permits required by the State of Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection. 


B. SITE PLAN REQUIREMENTS. 	In addition to site plan requirements for special permits as listed in Article IV. Section 12. of these regulations, five copies of a grading plan certified by a Registered Land Surveyor and Professional Engineer licensed in the State of Connecticut shall be submitted which contain the following: 
1. 	
The quantity of material to be removed and the limits of the proposed excavation, removal, filling or grading, areas to be restored and the location of processing equipment; 

2. 	
Storm drainage data showing drainage areas and estimated runoff of the area to be served by existing drainage facilities together with detailed plans and specifications of all proposed drainage facilities and other protective devices to be constructed in connection with proper 

drainage of the premises both during and after completion of the proposed operation; and 

3. 	
All other data necessary to ensure compliance with A.1.a. through j. of this section. 


Section 23. EARTH REMOVAL FOR PURPOSES OF SITE IMPROVEMENT 
The removal of more than 100 cubic yards of earth, sand, stone, gravel, soil or other earth products from a parcel of land located outside of the EE Zone shall require a special permit unless the removal of such material is undertaken in conjunction with a site plan, development plan or subdivision plan approved by the Commission. No processing of such material shall occur on site without the approval of the Commission. In reviewing any proposal to remove over 100 cubic yards of material, whether requiring a special permit or not, the Commission may require the submission of part or all information or employ some or all of the provisions found in Article II. Section 
22.A.1.a. through j. and B.1. through 3. If a special permit is required, see Article IV. Section 12. for application procedures, hearing and notice requirements. 
Section 24. PLACEMENT OF FILL ON SITE 
The placement of more than 100 cubic yards of fill material upon a parcel of land shall require approval from the Commission except where such activity is undertaken in conjunction with a site plan, development plan or subdivision plan approved by the Commission. In the review of such activity the Commission may require the submission of part or all information or employ some or all provisions found in Article II. Section 22.A.1.a. through j. and B.1. through 3. 
Section 25. AFFORDABLE HOUSING ZONE (AH) 
A. PURPOSE. 	The purpose of this section is to promote the development of affordable single family and multiple-family housing by means of providing for an increase in allowable density. 
B. PERMITTED USES. The following uses requiring only a Zoning Permit as specified in Article 
V. 
1. 	
Single Family Dwelling, one per lot. 

2. 	
Two Family Dwelling, one per lot. 

3. 	
Multiple Family Dwellings, as described in Article II. Section 8.B.1. and 8.B.2 and 8.B.3. of these regulations. 

4. 	
Accessory Uses and Structures, to single family and two-family homes as described and regulated in Article II. Section 1.A.3. and Article IV. Section 2. of these regulations. 

5. 	
Parking, Recreation and Accessory Structures limited to the use of the residents. 

6. 	
Family Day Care Home. 

7. 	
Home Office as described and regulated by Article I. Section 9. and Article II. Section 1. of these regulations. 


C. 	USES ALLOWED ONLY BY SPECIAL PERMIT. In addition to specific requirements listed here, the standards provided in Article IV. Section 12. shall also apply to applications submitted under this section. Article IV. Section 12. shall also apply to application procedures, hearing and notice requirements and site plan information. 
1. 	
All uses allowed by special permit in the R80, R40 and R30 Zones, except Guest House and except Group Day Care Home unless in compliance with 2. below. 

2. 	
Group Day Care Home provided: 


a. 	
The lot contains a minimum of 10,000 square feet; and 

b. 	
All play areas shall meet all front, side and rear yard setback requirements for single family or two-family homes in this zone. 


3. 	Day Care Center. 
D. PROCEDURE. An application for an Affordable Housing Zone designation may be submitted to the Commission by a public, nonprofit or for-profit housing developer for a parcel of land or part thereof located in any business, industrial or residential zone with the exception of the R80 Zone and which contains the minimum area set forth in this regulation. Such application where proposing single family or two-family housing, on individual lots, shall be accompanied by an informal subdivision plan as specified in the Farmington Subdivision Regulations. In the case where multiple family housing is proposed such application shall be accompanied by a site plan as described in Article IV. Section 12.C.3. of these regulations. All development within the Affordable Housing Zone shall be constructed strictly in accordance with the maps and drawings described above and approved by the Commission with the exception of additions to one or two family homes provided no additional dwelling units are added. Any additions or modifications to such approved plans shall be approved by the Commission, however minor additions or modifications shall not require a public hearing. The Commission shall make the determination as to whether an addition or modification shall be considered as minor. 
No application for an Affordable Housing Zone shall be approved by the Commission unless it finds that in addition to the standards contained in Article IV. Section 12.B. the application and plans conform to the standards contained in this section. The Commission may attach conditions to an approval of an Affordable Housing Zone in order to assure compliance with the abovementioned standards. 
The Affordable Housing Zone shall not legally take effect until the housing developer has entered into a contract with the Town of Farmington. The contract shall contain a) the specific initial rental charge or sales price for each affordable housing unit, as approved by the Commission; b) the selection criteria and procedure for determining eligible persons or families purchasing an affordable housing unit; c) a plan for the long term ownership and management of affordable rental units; d) a plan for the disposition and ownership of lots upon which affordable housing units are erected for sale; e) a plan for the sequence of construction of market rate and affordable housing units including provisions for financing construction and ownership of affordable units; f) provisions for the resale or conveyance of affordable units; g) provisions governing the occupancy of affordable units; h) provisions governing the relationship of any affordable units within a common interest ownership community; i) provisions prescribing the manner in which resale restrictions will be established and enforced; j) provisions for indemnifying the town from any liabilities, damages or claims rising out of or in connection with the terms of the agreement; and k) provisions governing the enforcement and continued effectiveness of the agreement. A copy of this agreement shall be filed on the Farmington Land Records. 
E. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS. 
1. 	
A parcel of land may be designated within the Affordable Housing Zone if its size is equal to or greater than four (4) continuous acres. 

2. 	
Density -The maximum number of dwelling units shall be calculated as follows: 


Housing Type – One and Two Family Dwellings on Individual Lots – Minimum Land area per Dwelling Unit is 10,890 sq ft. 
Housing Type – Multiple Family Dwellings – Minimum Land Area per Dwelling unit is 6,222 sq ft.* 
* By a five-sixths vote of the full Commission the minimum land area per unit for multiple family rental housing may be reduced to 5,445 sq. ft. 
In all cases a minimum of forty percent of the total number of units shall be designated as affordable. 
The above stated minimum land area per dwelling unit shall be applied to the net acreage of the property which is expressed as the total acreage minus 75% of all areas of inland wetlands and watercourses and slopes in excess of 33% percent (as calculated by two foot contour intervals.) 
3. 	A bufferyard having a minimum width of 50 feet shall be provided along the side and rear lot lines of the Affordable Housing Zone. The bufferyard shall be owned and maintained by the applicant or a homeowners’ association. 
This bufferyard may be reduced to as little as 15 feet by a five-sixths vote of the full Commission when the proposed AH Zone is adjacent to a commercial, industrial or RDM Zone. Furthermore, the Commission may permit the location of individual lots for one or two family homes in place of the bufferyard by a five-sixths vote of the full Commission. 
A bufferyard having a minimum width of 40 feet shall be provided along the front property line. Upon a five-sixths vote of the full Commission individual lots for one and two family homes may be approved in place of the bufferyard. 
The approval of individual lots in place of any front, side or rear bufferyard shall not increase the maximum number of dwelling units permitted under E.2. of this regulation. 
The Commission may require that all bufferyards be planted in accordance with the specifications of an A Bufferyard (40-feet width) as described in Article IV. Section 13.B.4. or the Commission may require additional landscaping when unusual conditions require more extensive screening. One or more driveways may run perpendicular (approximations expected) to the required bufferyard. 
4. 	
No more than 40 percent of the land area within the Affordable Housing Zone may be covered with impervious surfaces. 

5. 	
The maximum height of principal buildings exclusive of detached single family and two family dwellings shall be 36 feet. Accessory buildings such as community centers and community garages which are planned and designed to be accessible or used by more than one family shall not exceed 28 feet height. Other accessory buildings and structures shall be governed as to their location and height by Article IV. Section 2. of these regulations. 

6. 	
The shortest distance between any two principal structures excluding all detached single family dwellings and two family homes situated on individual lots shall be not less than the height of the taller structure, as measured to the highest point of the roof from the ground elevation of the closest wall to the adjacent structure, with a minimum of twenty-four (24) feet. The Commission may waive the separation requirement if the design of the proposed development is benefited by closer spacing. 

7. 	
No building may exceed 160 feet in length. The length of a building shall be defined as the longest horizontal dimension of a building following a wall which is unbroken by an intersecting wall at least fifty (50) feet in length and having an angle of 135 degrees or less. 

8. 	
Two and three-tenths parking spaces shall be provided for each multiple family dwelling unit containing two or more bedrooms. Each multiple family dwelling unit containing one bedroom shall require one and one-half spaces. The Commission may waive the immediate installation of up to twenty-five percent of this parking requirement. 

9. 	
The area of dwelling units within the Affordable Housing Zone shall conform with the following table: 


Number of Minimum Finished* 
Housing Type Bedrooms Area    Per     Unit  

Detached Single Family N/A 1,100 sq. ft. 
Detached Two Family N/A 1,100 sq. ft. 
Multiple Family (Rental) 1 600 sq. ft. 
Multiple Family (Rental) 2 725 sq. ft. 
Multiple Family (Rental) 3 850 sq. ft. 
Multiple Family (Sale) 1 750 sq. ft. 
Multiple Family (Sale) 2 875 sq. ft. 
Multiple Family (Sale) 3 1,000 sq. ft. 

10. The minimum area per unit may be decreased with the approval of the Commission where the sales price or rental charge of a unit is reduced to a figure below the maximum established by Paragraph F.1. of this section. 
Single family and two family dwellings located on individual lots shall be developed in accordance with the following table: 
Minimum 
Lot Size Minimum    	Minimum Yards   
(Sq.  Ft.) Frontage Front Side Each* Rear 1 Family   6,000 60’ 20’ 8’ 25’ 2 Family   7,000 70’ 20’ 8’ 25’ 
On corner lots 15,000 square feet or greater in area, the width of a side yard along a street shall be 20 feet. On corner lots less than 15,000 square feet in area, the width of a side yard along a street shall be 15 feet. A corner lot shall contain a front yard along one street. Determination of the front and side lot lines shall be done in accordance with Article III. Section 3.C. of these regulations. 
Maximum height shall be 35 feet. 
No more than 40 percent of the lot area may be covered with impervious surfaces. 
* The Commission may permit one side yard to be reduced providing the total of both side yards is at least equivalent to 16 feet and the minimum distance between principal buildings is 16 feet. 
11. 
Access Streets and Sidewalks. The placement, size, arrangement and use of access routes to public or private streets shall be adequate to serve residents and provide no hindrance to the safety of existing or proposed streets. Pedestrian walkways with all-weather surfacing may be required where the density of population or school bus routes make such advisable for convenience and safety. Street and parking lot grading, drainage and surfacing shall comply with the specifications of the Town. Unless otherwise approved by the Commission no detached one family or two-family affordable housing unit for sale shall have access to a private street. 

12. 
Firewalls	 and Sound Control. Each grouping of four dwelling units (combined in one structure) shall be separated by a two-hour firewall. Construction of dwelling units shall include a) control of airborne sound transmission; and b) impact noise reduction assemblies equal to F.H.A. minimum property standards for multifamily housing, current edition. 

13. 
All utility wires shall be installed underground. 


F. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 
1. 	
An affordable housing unit is defined as a dwelling unit for which a household pays not more than 30% of its gross annual income for mortgage payment, property taxes and insurance where such income is equal to or less than 80% of the regional median income for a family of four as established by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development for the Hartford Primary Metropolitan Statistical Area. In the case of rental housing, the rental charge plus cost of utilities for a dwelling unit shall not exceed 30% of a household’s gross 

annual income where such income is equal to or less than 70% of the regional median income for a family of four as established by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development for the Hartford Primary Metropolitan Statistical Area. 

2. 	
The sale of an affordable dwelling unit shall be subject to the following conditions and restrictions: 


a. 	
A resale restriction as approved by the Commission which would attempt to preserve the unit as perpetually affordable. 

b. 	
In the case of detached one and two family dwellings, the lot shall be conveyed at no cost to the Town of Farmington or a nonprofit housing corporation unless otherwise approved by the Commission. 

c. 	
Affordable dwelling units may only be sold to buyers as qualified by the Town of Farmington or a nonprofit housing corporation.  All selection criteria shall be approved by the Commission. 


3. 	Affordable dwelling units proposed as rental housing shall be subject to the following conditions and restrictions: 
a. 	
Restrictions imposed by this regulation concerning permitted rental charges shall apply to such rental units for a period of thirty (30) years from the date a Certificate of Occupancy is issued. 

b. 	
Increases in rent charged shall be tied to the following formula: 


(Maximum Rental Initial Maximum)   Maximum 
Initial   (Charge for Future Rental Charge )     New 
Rent + ( Year as Set by -as Set by ) = Rental 
(  Section F.1        Section F.1  ) Charge 

Any increase beyond this figure must receive approval of the Commission. 
c. 	No rental unit may be offered for sale unless approved by the Commission. 
4. 	
No affordable dwelling unit offered for sale shall be subject to any private restriction or covenant except as approved by the Commission. The Commission shall not approve any private restriction or covenant that will adversely affect the affordability of such dwelling unit. 

5. 	
No Affordable Housing Zone shall be approved unless the Commission finds that the topography and other natural features of the property are capable of accommodating increased building density without detrimental impact. 

6. 	
The Commission may withhold approval of an Affordable Housing Zone if it determines that the infrastructure proposed to serve the development (including but not limited to utilities and roadways) cannot adequately support the number of housing units proposed. 

7. 	
This section shall not be applicable to applications filed after ten percent of all dwelling units in the Town are (a) assisted housing or (2) currently financed by Connecticut Housing Finance Authority mortgages or (3) subject to deeds containing covenants or restrictions which require that such dwelling units be sold or rented at, or below, prices which will preserve the units as affordable housing as defined in Connecticut General Statutes Section 8-39a, for persons and families whose income is less than or equal to eighty percent of the area median income. Assisted housing shall be defined as housing which is receiving, or will receive, financial assistance under any governmental program for the construction or substantial rehabilitation of low and moderate income housing, and any housing occupied by persons receiving rental assistance under Chapter 138a of the Connecticut General Statutes or Section 1437f of Title 42 of the United States Code. 

8. 	
For each dwelling unit being constructed which has not been designated as affordable the developer shall construct simultaneously an affordable housing unit to a point of completion where such unit is entitled to a Certificate of Occupancy. However in cases where the number of affordable housing units approved in a particular application exceeds the minimum number determined by Section 25.E.2. the applicant with the approval of the Commission may initially construct a number of units not designated as affordable equal to that surplus figure prior to the construction of an affordable housing unit. 

9. 	
A Certificate of Occupancy shall not be issued by the Building Inspector for more than 85 percent of the dwelling units of the approved development plan until all details of the approved development plan shall have been fully completed or bonded. 

The approval of an application for an Affordable Housing Zone shall be void and of no effect unless construction of the project commences within one year from the date the zone change is granted by the Commission. For purposes of this regulation the term construction shall be defined as the installation of a permanent building foundation. The Commission may grant one or more six-month extensions of this period upon written request made by the applicant. The Commission may withhold approval of any or all extensions if the applicant fails to provide adequate evidence that construction is able to begin within the extended time period sought. This evidence shall include but not be limited to the acquisition of any or all required government approvals and project financing. Any appeals of such zone change or any site plan or subdivision approval related to such zone change shall extend the aforementioned one-year period the length of such appeal. 

10. 
Nothing herein shall prevent the construction of a development within an AH Zone approved prior to March 24, 1995 providing such development is in conformance with Section 10. above. Nothing herein shall require a development within an AH Zone approved prior to March 24, 1995 to comply with the standards of the AH Zone adopted on or after such date. Development of AH Zones approved prior to March 24, 1995 shall conform to the standards of the AH Zone in effect at the time of such approval. 

11. 
Areas of the development that are not proposed to be disturbed shall be encumbered by a conservation easement at the request of the Commission. Such areas or portions thereof may be conveyed with the express approval of the Commission to the Town of Farmington, non­profit land trust or other organization dedicated to the preservation of land subject to the 


following: 
a. 	Land to be conveyed shall generally not include required yards or buffer areas except in cases where such yard or buffer area is situated contiguous to an existing or proposed area of open space offsite or contains one or more natural or manmade resources as defined in Article II Section 19.B.2 of these regulations. 
Land to be conveyed shall be preserved in an undisturbed state, used for passive recreation, used for active recreation or other community facilities as established by the Commission. Such use or uses of this land shall be determined at the time the AH zone becomes effective. In cases where an AH zone contains land which is to be conveyed for the above-mentioned purpose(s), the approval of such zone and development plan shall not become effective until a map of the final development plan indicating the location and use of such land to be conveyed is filed in the Farmington Land Records. Unless otherwise approved by the Commission, no building permit shall be issued for an AH zone until the designated land conveyance has been executed. 
The conveyance of land under this section shall not constitute a violation of the area, setback, density or bulk requirements of the AH zone. Required yards or buffer areas which may have been conveyed shall continue to be recognized and function under this regulation as such. 
Section 25A: HOUSING OPPORTUNITY DISTRICT (HOD) 
A. PURPOSE: 	The purpose of this section is to promote the development of housing that will include both market-rate homes and homes within the economic means of moderate and low income households; and to allow as adjacent but otherwise separately operated uses, age-restricted rental housing and multi-family units for sale.  
B. PERMITTED USES:	  The following uses may be approved on land zoned HOD on a site plan in accordance with Article IV, Sections 12 and 13 and Appendix § A.02. 
1. Multiple family dwellings in combination with senior housing, as defined in Article II Section 
25.B.3. 
2. 	
Senior housing in combination with multiple family dwellings as defined in this Section 25A. 

3. 	
Parking, recreation and accessory structures limited to the use of the residents. 

4. 	
Home offices as described and regulated by Article I, Section 9 and Article II, Section 1 of these regulations. 


C. AFFORDABILITY PLAN:	  An application for site plan approval of a Housing Opportunity District development shall be accompanied by an affordability plan prepared in compliance with Connecticut General Statutes § 8-30g(b)(1) and corresponding regulations, which plan shall include a specification of the percentage of units that will be subject to the plan and formulas for maximum rental and sale or resale price. 
D. ELIGIBLE PARCELS: A Housing Opportunity District development may be located on any parcel of land containing not less than 45 and not more than 50 acres; and having no less than 500 feet of frontage on Middle Road. 
E. 	OVERALL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS: It is the intent of this Section 25A to allow, as adjacent uses, housing units rented to seniors as herein defined; and multi-family condominium units, not age-restricted, for sale.  For the purpose of compliance with the federal and state Fair Housing Acts, such senior housing and non-age-restricted uses shall be developed, operated and managed as separate units of a common interest ownership community, subject to a master, common interest declaration only as necessary for maintenance of shared infrastructure such as access roads and utility easements, and for administration of affordability restrictions.  Each such development shall be subject to the following development standards: 
1. 	Overall Standards 
Minimum Front Yard 50 Feet 
Minimum Side Yard 50 Feet 
Minimum Rear Yard 50 Feet 
Maximum Building Height 38 Feet 
Required Parking Spaces (overall) 2.3 Per Unit 
Required Parking Space (Village @ Yorkshire) 1.25 Per Unit 
Maximum Impervious Coverage 40 Percent 
Maximum Density 6 Units Per Net Acre 
Net Acre or Acreage Total acreage minus 75% of 

all areas of inland wetlands and watercourses and slopes in excess of 33% (as calculated by two foot contour intervals) 
2. 	
All HOD developments shall be served by public sewer and water.  For the purpose of this section, public water shall not include a community well. 

3. 	
All utility wires shall be placed underground. 

4. 	
A Certificate of Occupancy shall not be issued by the Building Inspector for more than 85 percent of the dwelling units of the approved development plan or of the approved stage of the development until all details of the approved development plan or of the approved stage of the development plan shall have been fully completed or bonded. 

5. 	
The approval of an application for an HOD development shall be void and of no effect unless construction of the project commences within two years from the date the approval is granted by the Commission. For purposes of this regulation the term construction shall be defined as the installation of a permanent building foundation for any one of the building structures.  The Commission may grant up to two six-month extensions of this period upon written request by the applicant.  The Commission shall withhold approval of any or all extensions unless the development plan is brought into conformance with any relevant zoning regulations, which have been amended subsequent to the original approval and if the applicant fails to provide adequate evidence that construction is able to begin within the extended time period sought.  This evidence shall include, but not be limited to, the acquisition of any or all required government approvals and project financing.  Any appeals of such special permit, site plan, inland wetlands or 

subdivision approval shall extend the aforementioned one-year period the length of such appeal.  

6. 	
Areas of any development within an HOD development that are not proposed to be disturbed shall at the request of the Commission be encumbered by a conservation easement.  Such areas or portions thereof may be conveyed with the express approval of the Commission to the Town of Farmington, a nonprofit land trust or other organization dedicated to the preservation of land subject to the following: 


a. 	
Land to be conveyed shall be in excess of the required area reserved and designated as open space. 

b. 	
Generally front yards, side and rear yard buffer areas as required or established shall not be conveyed except in cases where such yard or buffer area is situated contiguous to an existing or proposed area of open space offsite or contains one or more natural or man-made resources as defined in Article II, Section 19.13.2 of these regulations. 


7. 	Land to be conveyed shall be preserved in an undisturbed state, used for passive recreation, or used for active recreation or other community facilities, as established by the Commission.  In cases where an HOD development contains land which is to be conveyed for the above-mentioned purpose(s), the approval of such zone and development plan shall not become effective until a map of the final development plan indicating the location and use of such land to be conveyed is filed in the Farmington Land Records.  Unless otherwise approved by the Commission, no building permit shall be issued for an HOD development until the designated land conveyance has been executed.  
F. 	DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR SENIOR HOUSING, THE “VILLAGE AT YORKSHIRE”: 
2. 	
The maximum number of units per net acre shall be 10.  

3. 	
The shortest distance between any two structures shall be not less than twenty-four (24) feet. Courts shall be completely open on one side.  Maximum height of any building shall be thirty-six 


(36) feet.  Accessory buildings shall be limited to twenty-five (25) feet in height.  The maximum height and minimum distance between buildings may be waived upon a five-sixths vote of the full Commission if the design of the development is benefited by greater height or closer spacing.  
4. 	
There shall be provided along the perimeter of a development a front yard with a minimum width of 50 feet and side or rear buffer yard of at least 50 feet in width.  Front yards shall be designated along all perimeter property lines contiguous to a street.  The Commission may require that front yards be planted in accordance with the specifications of an “A” or “B” Buffer yard and side or rear buffer yards be planted in accordance with a “B” Buffer yard.  No buildings, structures (other than utility structures) or parking areas are permitted within any front, side or rear yard, except that a roadway may encroach up to 25 feet into a front yard provided that the requirements of the “B” Buffer yard are met within the area of encroachment.  One or more driveways may run perpendicular through the required front yard.  The required front yard and buffer areas may be reduced to as little as 25 feet by a five-sixths vote of the full Commission.  

5. 	
Each senior housing unit shall be occupied by: 


a. 	
Persons who are 62 years of age or older. 

b. 	
A spouse of an occupant pursuant to a. above. 

c. 	
Occupant pursuant to b. above whom survives his or her spouse. 

d. 	
Occupant pursuant to b. above whose spouse has entered into a long-term continuing care facility. 


In c. and d. above, remaining spouses who remarry or cohabitate must meet all occupancy requirements. 
e. 	A personal care attendant who is in service to a resident 62 years of age or older, to attend to that resident(s) medical and/or health needs, provided that (i) the personal care attendant is 21 years of age or older, registered with the Town Planner’s office, and not paying the resident any form of rent; (ii) the resident(s) in question has a note from his/her doctor stating that the condition of the resident is such that a personal care attendant is warranted; and (iii) if the resident in need of a personal care attendant is not in occupancy of his/her home for a period in excess of one month, unless extended by the Commission, the personal care attendant shall not live in the home. 
6. 	
In no event shall a senior housing unit be occupied by more than two residents. 

7. 	
The Commission may require the provision of a walking trail system within the proposed development.  Unpaved walking trails may be counted as open space. 

8. 	
The entire development shall be governed by a master declaration prepared in accordance with the Common Interest Ownership Act. 

9. 	
1.25 parking spaces shall be provided for each dwelling unit.  Such spaces shall be within 200 feet of the intended users. No parking shall be permitted within the buffer area or required front yard.  


G.  	DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR MULTI-FAMILY DEVELOPMENT, “YORKSHIRE”: 
1. 	Grouping: The shortest distance between any two structures shall be not less than twenty-four 
(24) feet.  Each structure shall consist of no more than 12 units.  No building may exceed 200 feet in length. The length of a building shall be defined as the longest horizontal dimension of a building following a wall which is unbroken by an intersecting wall at least fifty (50) feet in length and having an angle of 135 degrees or less.  Maximum height of residences shall be 36 feet.  All other buildings and structures shall not exceed 15 feet in height.  The Commission may waive the separation requirement if the design of the proposed development is benefited by closer spacing, provided there is a five-sixths vote of the full Commission. 
2. 	
Open Area:  There shall be set aside, not to be built upon, unpaved and landscaped with an acceptable balance of viable trees, shrubs and grass, site area equal to 3,500 square feet per unit. The area contained within the front yard and side and rear yard buffers, may be used to satisfy this requirement. 

3. 	
Front Yard and Buffer Area: There shall be provided along the perimeter of a development a front yard with a minimum width of 50 feet and side or rear yard buffer areas of at least 50 feet in width.  Front yards shall be designated along all perimeter property lines contiguous to a street. 

The Commission may require that front yards be planted in accordance with the specifications of an “A” or “B” Buffer yard as set forth in the Buffer yard schedule in Section 13 of the Zoning Regulations.  No buildings, structures or parking areas are permitted within the front yard.  One or more driveways may run through the required front yard.  The Commission may require that side or rear buffer yard areas be planted in accordance with the specifications of a “B” Buffer yard.  

4. 	
Parking:  2.3 parking spaces shall be provided for each dwelling unit.  Such spaces shall be within 200 feet of the intended users.  No parking shall be permitted within the buffer area or required front yard. 

5. 	
Access Streets and Sidewalks:  The placement, size, arrangement and use of access routes to public or private streets shall be adequate to service residents and provide no hindrance to the safety of existing or proposed streets.  Pedestrian sidewalks with all weather surfacing may be required where the density of population or school bus routes make such advisable for convenience and safety.  Street and parking lot grading, drainage and surfacing shall comply with the specifications of the Town. 

6. 	
Firewalls and Sound Control:  Each grouping of four dwelling units (combined in one structure) shall be separated by a two-hour firewall.  Construction of dwelling units shall include (i) control of airborne sound transmission; and (ii) impact noise reduction assemblies equal to FHA minimum property standards for multifamily housing, current edition. 


Section 26: RIDGELINE PROTECTION ZONE 
A. PURPOSE: The purpose of this section is to protect Traprock Ridges so as to preserve their unique environmental attributes, their groundwater recharge function and the visual and historic assets of these distinctive ridgeline areas. 
B. DEFINITIONS: For the purpose of applying the provisions of Section 26 the terms below shall be defined as follows: 
ALTERATION means a change or rearrangement in the structural parts of a building, the movement of all or any part thereof, or the substantial reconstruction thereof, so as to produce a substantial change in appearance, character, or construction; also, means an enlargement, whether by increase in height, coverage, volume or floor area. 
BUILDING means any structure other than (A) a “facility” as defined in section 16-50i of the general statutes or (B) structures of a relatively slender nature compared to the buildings to which they are associated, including but not limited to chimneys, flagpoles, antennas, utility poles and steeples, provided such structures are accessory to a building or use permitted by these regulations, and not the principal use or structure on the lot. 
CLEAR CUTTING means the harvest of timber in a fashion which removes all or substantially all, trees over two inches in diameter at breast height (4.5 feet above grade) from any ten square foot area. 
DEVELOPMENT is defined as the construction, reconstruction, alteration, or expansion of a building. 
LOT OF RECORD means a lot which either has been approved by the Farmington Town Plan and Zoning Commission for building purposes prior to the effective date of this regulation or a lot which was legally established and recorded in the Farmington land records prior to the effective date of this regulation. 
PASSIVE RECREATION means non-motorized recreation not requiring "development," as defined herein, nor requiring any alteration of the existing topography, nor any activity regulated pursuant to this section. Such passive recreation shall include, but not be limited to, hiking, bicycling, picnicking and bird watching. 
EARTH CHANGE means the removal, excavation, deposition, processing, or grading of stone, fill or other earth material, regardless of the methods utilized (e.g., blasting, crushing, excavation equipment). 
RIDGELINE SETBACK AREA means the area bounded by: A) a line that parallels and is placed a horizontal distance of one hundred and fifty (150') feet off the lesser sloped side (typically the more wooded side) of all traprock (basalt) ridgelines as defined herein; and B) that lowest contour line created where less than a fifty (50%) percent slope (two horizontal for each vertical unit of distance) exists for a distance of fifty (50') horizontal feet on the more steeply sloped side (typically the more rocky side) of all traprock (basalt) ridgelines as defined herein. 
SELECTIVE TIMBERING means the harvesting of not more than ten percent (10%) of the trees, not less than 6 inches (6”) in diameter at breast height (4.5 feet above grade), within the ridgeline setback area on a lot for the commercial sale of lumber. The ten percent limitation shall be cumulative from the effective date of this regulation. 
SELECTIVE CLEAR CUTTING means the removal or alteration of trees within the ridgeline setback area exclusively for the purpose of establishing, maintaining or enhancing a view from an existing or proposed residence. 
TRAPROCK RIDGELINE means the line on Pinnacle Rock, Rattlesnake Mountain, Farmington Mountain and Talcott Mountain created by all points at the top of a fifty percent (50%) or greater slope (2 horizontal for each vertical unit of distance), which slope is maintained for a distance of at least fifty (50) horizontal feet measured perpendicular to the contours of the slope, and which consists of surficial basalt geology, identified on the map entitled "Surficial Materials Map of Farmington," a copy of which is on file in the Planning and Zoning office of the Town of Farmington (hereinafter, "Surficial Materials Map"). The Surficial Materials Map shall be deemed and construed to be illustrative only, and in individual instances, the actual surficial basalt geology may be as determined by field observations, and other topographic maps, bedrock geologic maps, surveys, and other available information. Where no surficial basalt geology (unconsolidated, loose rock) exists, bedrock basalt geology shall be used to define the traprock ridgeline. All slopes shall be measured as preexisting prior to any disturbance by human intervention, existing or proposed, as best such preexisting conditions can be determined by available topographic maps or other records. 
C. DELINEATION OF REGULATED AREAS The Town of Farmington shall prepare within three (3) months after the enactment of this regulation a map or series of maps which generally delineate the Ridgeline and Ridgeline Setback Area as defined herein (hereafter referred to as “the Ridgeline Map”).  The definitions of Traprock Ridgelines and Ridgeline Setback Areas in these regulations shall govern for purposes of determining whether any area within the Town is in fact a regulated area.  The actual presence and location of Ridgeline Setback Areas as determined by qualified professionals shall govern the applicability of this regulation to a proposed development.  “Qualified professionals” shall include, as relevant, licensed land surveyors, geologists, and/or geographers. In cases where an applicant disputes the designation of any part of his land as a regulated area, he shall have the burden of proving that designation inapplicable. 
D. PERMITTED USES: 	Anything in this section to the contrary notwithstanding, the following operations and uses shall be permitted in Ridgeline Setback Areas, as of right, as set forth in Connecticut General Statutes Section 8-2(c), as amended: 
1. 	
Emergency work necessary to protect life or property. Emergency work shall include but not be limited to the removal or trimming of dead or dangerous trees. Prior to the commencement of such activity, a plan for conducting all emergency work shall be submitted to and approved by the Planning Department.  

2. 	
Establishment or construction of any commercial use or structure approved by special permit or by site plan approval prior to the effective date of this regulation, which approvals remain in effect. In the case of a site plan which was approved without a special permit such approval shall be deemed to remain in effect for a period not to exceed five years from the date of the adoption of this regulation, unless such time period is extended per Section 8-3(i) of the Connecticut General Statutes. 

3. 	
Maintenance of any use or structure existing on the effective date of this regulation. Maintenance shall not include any expansion or relocation of such use or alteration of structures as defined by this regulation. 

4. 	
Selective timbering subject to the following conditions: 


a. 	
The work shall be done or monitored by a registered forester as certified by the Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection. 

b. 	
Prior to commencing such activity a plan prepared by a registered forester for the work shall be filed with the Farmington Planning Department. 


5. 	
Grazing of domesticated animals in pasture areas existing only on the effective date of this regulation. 

6. 	
Passive recreation. 

7. 	
Earth changes conducted within an EE zone existing on the effective date of this regulation. Such earth changes are to be undertaken in accordance with any approved plan which is on file with the Town of Farmington prior to the effective date of this regulation. 

8. 	
Alteration of a building which existed prior to the effective date of this regulation or which was approved and constructed in accordance with this regulation subject to the following conditions: 


a. 	
Any expansion (by height, volume, coverage or floor area) shall not involve earth changes in an area occupied by tree cover and shall not cause clear cutting activity. 

b. 	
Such alteration shall not produce a substantial change in appearance or character of the building as viewed from below the ridgeline setback area. This determination shall be made by the Planning Department in consultation with the Commission. 

c. 	
A plan for such alteration shall be submitted to and approved by the Farmington Planning Department. 

d. 	
Such alteration shall not involve a cumulative floor area expansion greater than ten percent (10%) of the floor area of the building existing prior to the effective date of this regulation or the floor area approved by the Commission by special permit. 


9. 	Selective Clear Cutting Subject to the following conditions: 
a. 	
Such clear cutting shall be limited to the cumulative removal or alteration of no more than ten trees less than ten (10”) inches in diameter (4.5 feet above grade) from the effective date of adoption of this regulation or shall be done in accordance with a plan prepared by an arborist and approved by the Farmington Planning Department.  

b. 	
Such clear cutting shall not result in the removal of all trees within a 100 square foot area. 

c. 	
Such clear cutting shall not result in the creation of large treeless gaps along the top of the ridgeline. 

d. 	
Such clear cutting shall not result in the exposure of large areas of the building as viewed from below the ridgeline setback area. 


In deciding to approve such plan, the Department shall give due consideration to the environmental impacts from such selective clear cutting as well as the implementation of lesser means in the establishment, maintenance or enhancement of a view such as the topping of trees or the removal of fewer or smaller trees. 
10. Construction, relocation, alteration	 of an accessory building or use provided that such building or use is not visible as viewed from below the ridgeline setback area, such activity will not result in the removal or alteration of trees over 3 inches in diameter at breast height 
(4.5 
feet above grade) and no trees will be removed or altered which are located between the principal building and the Traprock Ridgeline. 

E. 
USES ALLOWED ONLY BY SITE PLAN APPROVAL. The following operations and uses shall be permitted in Ridgeline Setback Areas after receiving site plan approval from the Town Plan and Zoning Commission. An application shall be accompanied by the site plan information in section K. The Commission may waive the requirement for all or a portion of this information upon a finding that it is not essential to determining compliance with the conditions set forth in this section. 


1. 	Alterations of buildings not permitted under Section D of this regulation subject to the following conditions: 
a. 	
Such alterations shall not involve a cumulative floor area expansion greater than twenty-five percent (25%) of the floor area of a building existing prior to the effective date of this regulation or the floor area approved by the Commission by special permit. 

b. 	
Such alteration shall not produce a substantial change in appearance or character of the building as viewed from below the ridgeline setback area. 

c. 	
Such alteration shall not result in the removal of trees greater than ten (10”) inches in diameter (4.5 feet above grade) located within 75 feet of the Traprock Ridgeline as defined in this regulation.  


2. 	Construction, relocation alteration of any accessory building or use provided that such building or use is less than 300 square feet in area. 
F. 	USES ALLOWED ONLY BY SPECIAL PERMIT. The following operations and uses shall be permitted in Ridgeline Setback Areas after receiving a special permit from the Town Plan and Zoning Commission. An application shall be accompanied by the site plan information in Section K. The Commission may waive the requirements for all or a portion of this information upon a finding that it is not essential to determining compliance with the conditions set forth in this section. In addition to the specific requirements and standards listed below and in Section O. Article IV, Section 12 shall apply to application procedures, hearing and notice requirements. 
1. 	Development except for alterations permitted by right or after site plan approval as set forth provided the following conditions are met: 
a. 	No more than 40 percent of the portion of the lot within the Ridgeline Setback Area as defined in this section may be covered with impervious surfaces. 
2. 	
Earth Changes 

3. 	
Clear Cutting 

4. 	
Above Ground Utilities. However, this provision shall not apply to utilities, which are accessory to the construction of a building permitted by this regulation. 


G. STANDARDS FOR GRANTING OF A SPECIAL PERMIT WITHIN RIDGELINE SETBACK AREAS 
In addition to the requirements of Article IV. Section 12., the Commission shall require compliance with the following: 
1. 	
That adequate safeguards have been taken to minimize the visual impact of proposed activities as viewed from public highways, public parks, or other areas accessible to the general public. Visual impacts may include, but not be limited to: unnatural gaps, cuts, projections, or other obviously artificial alterations of existing natural tree lines, ridgelines, prominent topographic features, or rock formations; the use of materials which, by their color, reflectiveness, finish, size, or orientation disrupt the natural or historic character of the ridgeline; the size, height, shape, and location of buildings; the height, intensity, coverage and glare from proposed lights. Such safeguards may include, but not be limited to 

restrictions on the removal of trees and other vegetation, requiring supplemental landscaping, restrictions on structure colors and reflectivity of windows and roofs, requiring buffers and setbacks from ridgeline, restrictions on exterior lighting and height limitations. The Commission may require that clear cutting occur in a staggered or other pattern, which reduces the visual impact of such cutting, and may further require that clear cutting be staged over a period of time to allow for regrowth of remaining vegetation. Additionally, the Commission may require that buildings be clustered to reduce visual impact. The Commission may require the installation of flags, balloons, or other on-site markers to allow evaluation of visual impacts as seen from various vantage points. 

2. 	
That the viability of the area as a wildlife resource (habitat, breeding ground, foraging area, migratory pathway, etc.) is protected.  Steps to protect these areas may include, but not be limited to, restricting the size of lawn areas or other clearings; restricting clear cutting to certain seasons of the year or to certain areas, patterns, methods of removal, or other restrictions which may be necessary to minimize the impact on wildlife and wildlife habitats. The Commission may require an analysis of the potential impacts of the proposed activity on wildlife to be prepared by an Environmental Specialist or Biologist. 

3. 	
That the groundwater quality and recharge potential of the area is preserved.  The Commission may require an analysis of the possible impacts of the proposed activity on groundwater quality and recharge.  In order to minimize such impacts, the Commission may require, but not be limited to, restrictions on the size or location of septic systems; the use of biofilters, detention ponds, retention ponds, and other methods of storm water management which protect surface and subsurface waters; and the regulation of the storage, handling or usage of hazardous materials or waste, including, but not limited to, fertilizers, pesticides and herbicides. 

4. 	
That areas of archaeological and historic importance have been identified, and adequate steps have been taken to preserve and/or record these areas.  

5. 	
That the stability of the ridgeline is protected and that erosion potential is kept to a minimum by minimizing changes to the existing topography, preserving existing vegetation, requiring the revegetation of disturbed areas, and requiring the installation and maintenance of sedimentation and erosion control structures as needed. Steps to protect the ridges stability may include, but not be limited to, requiring retaining walls or other methods to minimize the cutting and filling of slopes; requiring reforestation or landscaping of quarries upon reaching finished grade, or of other areas disturbed by development or clear cutting; and requiring that driveways, roads, and other improvements requiring grading shall be approximately parallel to existing contours. 

6. 	
In reviewing any application for development or earth changes involving a lot of record and within 75 feet of the Traprock Ridgeline the Commission may allow less than full compliance with the restrictions set forth in this regulation on activities set within said 75 foot area where full application of such restrictions would have the effect of precluding development of a principal building on such lot consistent with the size of typical homes in the neighborhood. In addition, in reviewing an application for an accessory structure or use on a lot of record and within said 75-foot setback area, the Commission may approve such structure or use provided the Commission determines that such application complies with 


Section G 1-5. 
As a result of applying these criteria, the Commission may alter the proposal in terms of height, size, design, and location and may control the extent and location of any tree clearing and/or earth change (grading, etc.). When blasting is proposed the Commission may require that minimal charges be used to protect the environmental quality of the ridge. 
H. PROHIBITED OPERATIONS AND USES IN RIDGELINE SETBACK AREAS. 	The following shall be prohibited in the Ridgeline Setback Area: 
1. 	
Development, earth changes, and clear-cutting within 75 feet of the Traprock Ridgeline as defined in this regulation, except for development, earth changes or selective clear cutting of or on any lot of record. 

2. 	
Underground storage tanks containing hazardous waste or materials including petroleum products. 

3. 	
Any other provision of these regulations to the contrary notwithstanding, no lighting poles shall be higher than 10 feet, and all luminaries shall be designed to prevent the visibility of the light source from off the property.  The use of strobe lights on any antenna or other structure is prohibited. 

4. 	
Earth changes, which produces finished grades which are steeper than the pre-existing natural grades other than in EE zones. 

5. 	
Air conditioning, heating or ventilation equipment which projects above the plane of any roof surface, other than accessory chimneys. 


I. 	USE VARIANCES PROHIBITED. 
In accordance with Connecticut General Statutes Section 8-6, no variance shall be granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals, which would allow any use of land within the Ridgeline Setback Area, which would violate any subset of this regulation. 
J. 	NON-CONFORMING BUILDINGS 
Nothing contained within this regulation shall prevent the reconstruction of a building in existence prior to the effective date of this regulation provided such reconstruction conforms to the provisions found in Article IV Section 1B of these regulations, and such reconstruction does not produce a substantial change in appearance, character, or construction. 
K. SITE PLAN REQUIREMENTS 
An application for site plan approval or special permit shall be accompanied by the following site information: 
1. 	
An A-2 survey showing the proposed or existing location of each structure, driveway and other man-made feature on the lot, existing and proposed contours including the maximum height of all such structures. 

2. 	
The location of all wooded areas and those specific trees to be altered or removed. 

3. 	
Elevations of all proposed structures including materials and colors. 

4. 	
Where, in the opinion of the reviewing authority, existing vegetation is insufficient to provide adequate screening of visual impact areas on a particular lot, the applicant shall prepare a landscape plan specifying the location, number, type and size of plant and tree material that will be added to the property. 


The Commission may require the applicant to provide field markers depicting the highest elevation of each proposed building or structure as well as photographs taken from off-site locations within the Town of Farmington from which proposed activities within a ridgeline setback area may reasonably be expected to be seen. 
Section 27: AIRPORT APPROACH OVERLAY ZONE 
A. STATEMENT OF PURPOSE 
The Airport Approach Overlay Zone (AAO Zone) is established for the purpose of reducing hazards which endanger lives and property at and near the Robertson Airport located in Plainville, Connecticut, adjacent to the Farmington town line. The Airport Approach Zone is an overlay zone which extends over each zone in the Town of Farmington. The standards imposed by the regulations of the underlying zone shall remain in effect except as modified or supplemented by the provisions of the AAO zone.  
B. PERMITTED USES 
In the AAO zone, any use which is allowed by right or special permit in the zone upon which the AAO zone is superimposed is permitted, except any use which by reason of electrical interference with radio communications may be a hazard to aircraft. 
C. HEIGHT RESTRICTION 
No structures, trees, buildings, antennae, towers or power communication lines shall be erected or allowed to grow to a height in excess of the height of the surfaces defined herein. The surfaces defined below are established in relation to the Robertson Airport runway existing in the Town of Plainville. A map entitled “Robertson Airport, Plainville, Connecticut Approach Zone Map Scale 1” = 1000’ Dated 3/26/99 Tomasso Brothers, Inc. New Britain, CT Branko Tomicic, L.S. 070104” depicts the surfaces in relationship to the Robertson Airport runway. This map is on file in the office of the Town Planner for guidance purposes only. The actual locations of all surfaces are as defined herein: 
a. 	
Primary Surface – A 500-foot wide surface longitudinally centered on the Robertson Airport runway. The primary surface extends 200 feet beyond each end of that runway. The elevation of any point on the primary surface is the same as the elevation of the nearest point on the runway centerline. 

c. 	
Approach Surface -A surface longitudinally centered on the extended runway centerline and extending outward and upward from each end of the Primary Surface for a horizontal distance of 3,000 feet at a 20 to 1 slope. The inner edge of the Approach Surface is 500 feet 


wide and it expands uniformly to a width of 1,400 feet.  
b. 	
Horizontal Surface – A horizontal plane 150 feet above the established airport elevation, the perimeter of which is constructed by swinging arcs of 5,000-foot radii from the center of each end of the primary surface of the runway of Robertson Airport and connecting the adjacent arcs by lines tangent to those arcs. 

c. 	
Transitional Surface – These surfaces are located on each side of the runway and extend outward and upward on both sides of the runway at right angles to the runway centerline, extended at a slope of 7 to 1 from the sides of the Primary Surface and from the sides of the Approach Surfaces until they intersect with the Horizontal Surface.  

d. 	
Conical Surface – A surface extending outward and upward from the perimeter of the Horizontal Surface at a slope of 20 to 1 for a horizontal distance of 4,000 feet. 


Section 28: MEDICAL OFFICE CAMPUS ZONE (MOC ZONE) 
A. PURPOSE: The purposes of the Medical Office Campus Zone are: 
1. 	
To enhance the development, coordination and delivery of office-based health and medical services in proximity to the University of Connecticut Health Center (“Health Center”), recognized as a gateway to the Town and region, through planning of permitted and specially permitted uses and implementation of detailed, uniform, campus-based design and aesthetic standards for architecture, signage, landscaping, lighting, dimensions and traffic access for medical offices and related uses. 

2. 	
To promote economic development in proximity to the Health Center, as set forth in the Town of Farmington’s Plan of Conservation and Development. 

3. 	
To implement smart growth strategies for the area proximate to the Health Center by complementing and enhancing existing structures, utilizing existing infrastructure and recent traffic improvements, coordinating allowed uses with available public transportation and highway access, and using economies of scale to ensure that such site details as parking, impervious coverage, and signage are provided in proportion to the needs of the overall campus. 

4. 	
To coordinate land use planning in proximity to the Health Center with the state legislature’s establishment and funding of the University of Connecticut Health Network and Connecticut Bioscience Initiative. 


B. PERMITTED USES: The following uses requiring only a Zoning Permit as specified in Article V. 
1. 	
Accessory Uses in connection with an approved special permitted use in Section C, provided that all such uses shall be consistent with the architectural, signage and landscaping of the campuses permitted uses. 

2. 	
Pre-Existing, Non-Conforming Structures or Uses, in compliance with Article IV, Section 1. 


C. USES ALLOWED BY SPECIAL PERMIT ONLY: 

1. 	
Medical and Dental Offices and Clinics 

2. 	
Diagnostic or Medical Laboratories 

3. 	
Rehabilitation Centers, including physical therapy facilities and sleep centers providing overnight accommodations to patients in recovery or rehabilitation, and to authorized visitors. 

4. 	
Surgery Centers, including outpatient centers with overnight accommodations to patients in recovery or rehabilitation and to authorized visitors. 

5. 	
Basic or Applied Research, Development or Production Facilities related to medicine, medical services, bioscience, biotechnology, pharmaceuticals, or photonics. 

6. 	
Child Day Care Centers 

7. 	
Private and Public Parking Structures 

8. 	
Food Service for employees working within the building and visitors, but not constituting a restaurant open to the public. 

9. 	
On-site Parking on an adjacent lot not containing a principal use allowed by this regulation, provided that vehicles have direct access between the adjacent lots to a permitted principal use, and the total number of parking spaces required is determined in accordance with Subsection G of this regulation. 


D. HEIGHT AND AREA REQUIREMENTS: 
1. 	
Minimum Lot Area for a Medical Office Campus shall be 35 acres. In determining the boundaries of a Medical Office Campus Zone, the eligible land shall include the area of any lot or lots where the Zone’s purposes as stated above will be promoted.  The campus may include lots separated by a public street or highway, provided that land comprising a public street or highway shall not be included in the minimum lot area. 

2. 	
Height of Buildings shall not exceed 44 feet, provided that 46 feet shall be allowed if the building includes a surgical center. 

3. 	
Building Size shall not exceed 80,000 square feet of gross useable floor area. 

4. 	
Yards 


a.  Front yard:  40 feet  
b.  Rear yard:  30 feet  
c.  Side yard:  30 feet, provided that if the side or rear yards of lots within the  

Medical Office Campus Zone are adjacent, i) to other MOC zone lots or ii) to land owned by the State of Connecticut, the site plan may utilize a zero lot line. 
d. 	Yard Exceptions:  The Commission may reduce the yard and parking space setback requirements in its sole discretion where the yard of a property abuts the I-84 highway connector or a State highway having a right of way equal or greater than 80 feet in width. (effective November 8, 2013) 
5. 	
All Principal Buildings in a Medical Office Campus Zone shall be separated from each other by no less than 50 feet. 

6. 	
Minimum Lot Frontage shall be 100 feet. 

7. 	
Impervious Site Coverage shall be calculated on a campus-wide basis and shall not exceed 50 percent. 


E. LOCATION: 	A Medical Office Campus Zone shall be located only in the “Health Center” neighborhood as set forth in the Town’s Plan of Conservation and Development, adopted February 2008. 
F. 	ARCHITECTURE: A special permit/site plan application for any new structure in a Medical Office Campus Zone shall include specification of exterior building features such as columns, arches, banding, roofing, masonry, and glass, so as to achieve uniformity with existing structures within the campus.  
G. OFF STREET PARKING: Off street parking shall be provided in conformance with Article IV, Section 8, as those regulations apply to Medical Offices with Clinics, with the following additional provisions: 
1. 	
Parking spaces that serve an existing commercial structure and use that will become non­conforming by rezoning of its location to the Medical Office Campus Zone, may be dedicated to that use through signage and pavement markings, provided that the Commission shall approve the number and location of the proposed dedicated spaces. 

2. 	
The required number of parking spaces shall be calculated on a campus-wide basis. 

3. 	
The location of parking spaces relative to building entrances shall be tailored to the buildings’ primary use as medical and dental offices and clinics, by ensuring safe and easy access to people with handicaps and disabilities. 

4. 	
Parking spaces shall be set back no less than 30 feet from any property line, provided that if the side or rear yard of lots within the Medical Office Campus Zone are adjacent, the site plan may utilize a zero lot line. 


H. LANDSCAPING: 	Landscaping shall be provided in conformance with Article IV, Section 13, provided that plantings within the front yard as per Section 28.D.4.a. above shall be determined based on field conditions and controlled by a condition of approval and with the exception of the buffer yard berm but with 1.0 x plant units.  In addition, a special permit/site plan application shall be accompanied by specifications of foundation plantings, walkway plantings, courtyard plantings, entrance plantings, island plantings, and irrigation system locations that will achieve uniformity through the campus.  
I. 	LIGHTING: Exterior lighting shall comply with Article IV, Section 14.  A special permit/site plan application shall include specification of height, color, and materials for all sidewalk fixtures, so as to achieve uniformity across the campus.  The Commission may require a reduction in lighting after 10:00 p.m. or when otherwise found to be warranted in order to protect nearby residential properties.  
J. 	SIGNAGE: Shall comply with the provisions of Article IV, Section 7 that apply in the PR zone, with the following additional provisions: 
1. 	
A special permit/site plan application shall be accompanied by a campus-wide master signage plan that will ensure that all new or replacement signage will achieve uniformity across the campus.  Such master plan shall identify existing detached signs and shall specify locations, mounting, overall size, colors, materials, fonts and lighting. 

2. 	
The master signage plan shall provide for detached signs with monument bases with material brick or precast to match existing buildings and provide uniformity. 

3. 	
Notwithstanding the provisions of Article IV, Section 7.F., if located within a front yard, signs shall not exceed 11 feet in height and 60 square feet in total area per side. 

4. 	
Signs may be illuminated by exterior lighting if approved by the Commission. Exterior lighting shall be confined or directed to the surface of the sign so that no direct rays or glare are visible beyond the sign face.  No such lighting shall create a danger to vehicular traffic or a nuisance to resident properties.  If external illumination is allowed the Commission may require a dimming devise to be installed if the lighting proves to be intense and/or may require the exterior illumination to go dark after 10:00 p.m. 

5. 	
Notwithstanding the foregoing, provided a single tenant occupies an entire floor of any building in the MOC Zone, the total area of all attached signs shall not exceed 300 square feet for the front of the building. 


K. HOURS OF OPERATION: 	A special permit/site plan application for a new structure within a Medical Office Campus Zone shall include proposed hours of operation and the reasons for such hours.  The Commission shall review such schedule and any impacts on neighboring properties. 
L. SIDEWALKS: Newly constructed sidewalks shall be at least six feet wide and shall be installed throughout the campus to provide pedestrians access among all buildings.  Existing sidewalks that are less than six feet wide may remain.  Entrances to medical office buildings shall be built with heated sidewalks. 
M. STAGES: 	A tract of land in the Medical Office Campus Zone may be developed in stages, as approved by the Commission. 
N. RESOLUTION OF CONFLICTING STANDARDS: 	Notwithstanding Article I, Section 4 of these regulations, in the event that any provision of this Medical Office Campus Zone regulation conflicts with a provision of the PR Zone regulation, this Medical Office Campus Zone regulation shall govern. 
O. ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS: 
1. 	
Public bus stops shall be located so as to be most accessible to all campus buildings and access points. 

2. 	
Delivery and pick-up locations for laboratories shall be specifically identified. 

3. 	
Delivery and pick-up locations for package and courier services shall be located so as to be most accessible to all campus buildings.  

4. 	
Exterior mechanical equipment such as cooling towers and chillers shall be color-coordinated to match the buildings served. 

5. 	
Within the campus, locations shall be identified for installation of picnic/outdoor eating tables. 


P. 	EXPIRATION OF SPECIAL PERMIT: The approval of an application for special permit shall be void and of no effect unless construction authorized commences within one year from the date the approval is granted by the Commission.  For purposes of this regulation, the term “construction” shall be defined as the installation of a permanent building foundation.  The Commission may grant up to two six-month extensions of this period upon written request by the applicant.  The Commission shall withhold approval of any or all extensions unless the development plan is brought into conformance with any relevant zoning regulations, which have been amended subsequent to the original approval and if the applicant fails to provide adequate evidence that construction is able to begin within the extended time period sought.  This evidence shall include, but not be limited to, the acquisition of any or all required government approvals and project financing.  Any appeals of such special permit, site plan, inland wetlands or subdivision approval shall extend the aforementioned one-year period the length of such appeal. 
This amendment is effective July 17, 2010. 
Section 29: FARMINGTON CENTER ZONE (FC) 
A. PURPOSE. 	The purpose of the Farmington Center Zone is to preserve and protect the existing historic landscape and structures within the zone as well as considering potential infill and redevelopment that will complement the same.  The following design regulations shall guide mixed-use development; historic development patterns, view and vistas; a village streetscape; and pedestrian access and safety in concert with the objectives found in the Farmington Plan of Conservation and Development. 
B. PERMITTED USES. The following uses requiring only a Zoning Permit as specified in Article 
V. 
1. 	
Signs. Signs shall be permitted as specified in Article IV Section 7. However no more than 50% of the interior of a window or glass door may be covered with signs. 

2. 	
Accessory Uses in conjunction with an approved special permitted use in Section C. 

3. 	
Home Office as described and regulated by Article I. Section 9. and Article II. Section 1. of these regulations. 


C. USES ALLOWED ONLY BY SPECIAL PERMIT. 	In addition to specific requirements listed here, the standards provided in Article IV Section 12 and Article II Section 29.A. shall also apply to applications submitted under this section.  Article IV Section 12 shall also apply to application procedures, hearing and notice requirements and site plan information. 
1. 	
School. 

2. 	
Public Utility Building and Structure. 

3. 	
Municipally owned or leased building and structure. 

4. 	
Community Building for use by residents of the community or neighborhood and maintained and operated for community purposes. 

5. 	
Retail Store and Personal Service Shop. 

6. 	
Fast Food Restaurant, Dairy Bar, Grill, Coffee Shop except mobile type of eating and drinking place, place offering curb service and drive through windows.  Where alcoholic beverages are sold, the limitations of Article IV Section 5. shall apply. 

7. 	
Shop for making articles to be sold primarily at retail on the premises, provided that those engaged in making the articles shall not exceed five in number. 

8. 	
Gallery. 

9. 	
Business Offices, Medical Offices. 

10. 
Bank. 

11. 
Club and Fraternal Organization. 

12. 
Private or Public Parking Facility. 

13. 
Restaurant (low turnover).  	Where alcoholic beverages are sold, the limitations of Article IV. Section 5 shall apply. 

14. 
Apartments with single family units combined in a single use or mixed use structure under single common ownership. 

15. 
Condominiums consisting of single family units combined in a single use or mixed use structure as permitted under the Common Interest Ownership Act of the Connecticut General Statutes. 


D. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR ALL DEVELOPMENT WITHIN THE FARMINGTON CENTER ZONE. 
1. 	
Construction, rehabilitation and reconstruction of properties within this zone and in view from a public roadway must conform to the standards and requirements found here as well as the standards and requirements found in Article II Section 29.A. (Farmington Village District Zone). 

2. 	
A tract of land within the Farmington Center Zone may be developed in stages.  However, the Commission may require that certain data be submitted for the entire tract.  This may include site topography, natural resources data, traffic, parking and circulation, schematic architectural drawings, grading, erosion and sedimentation control and storm drainage. 

3. 	
Height and Area Requirements. 


a.  	
Maximum height of buildings:  40 feet, except 50 feet where all or a part of the required parking for such units is in an underground garage beneath the building. 

b. 	
Minimum height of buildings:  Two floors of finished space with a minimum ceiling height of eight (8) feet. Each floor shall be completely set above grade as measured from all sides of the building.  This provision may be waived by a vote of 5/6 of the full Commission provided a favorable recommendation is received from the Farmington Architectural Design Review Committee. 

c.  	
Yards: Front Yard: 0 feet unless otherwise specified by the Commission. 


Rear Yard:	 10 feet unless abutting a residential zone where the Commission may require a B bufferyard. Side Yard: 0 feet unless abutting a residential zone where the Commission may require a B bufferyard. Side Yard Along a Street:  0 feet unless otherwise specified by the Commission. 
d. 	
Minimum lot size:  None 

e. 	
Minimum frontage:  None 

f. 	
Minimum Building length:  The minimum length of a building shall be 25 feet.  This standard shall be measured along that portion of the building situated closest to a street. 

g. 	
Maximum floor area:  No building constructed after the effective date of this regulation (insert date) shall contain a retail business or office use having a gross floor area greater than 5,000 square feet. The Commission may approve an increase in the allowable gross floor area for a retail business or office use to a maximum of 15,000 square feet upon a favorable recommendation of the Architectural Design Review Committee and upon the Commission’s finding that the proposed plan does not result in the demolition of any existing building and that the building design shall resemble and be in harmony with individual store fronts permitted and/or existing in the Farmington Center Zone through 


use of architectural features such as: 
1. 	
staggering the depth from the street to the face of the building; 

2. 	
changing roof heights; 

3. 	
use of different but complimentary building materials; 

4. 	
changes in fenestration; 

5. 	
use of awnings/canopies; and 

6. 	
exterior lighting 


For purposes of this subsection gross floor area means the horizontal area of all floors of a building measured from the exterior of outside walls, excluding the following non-customer areas contained within the building footprint: (1) an enclosed mezzanine used for purposes such as office and storage; and (2) a basement used for storage and food preparation. 
4. 	Off Street Parking. This provision shall supersede the similar standards found in Article IV Section 8. 
a. 	
All Office Uses:  one (1) space for each 285 square feet of gross useable floor area. Gross useable floor area should be assumed as eighty percent (80%) of total floor area where no floor plan exists at the time of application. 

b. 	
Retail, Personal Service Shop, Shop and Bank: one (1) space for each 285 square feet of sales and customer area plus one (1) space for each 285 square feet of gross useable floor area of office space. 

c. 	
Dwelling Units:  one and one-half (1.5) spaces for a one-bedroom unit. Two (2) spaces for units having two or more bedrooms.  In determining the number of spaces, enclosed garage spaces and garage apron spaces meeting the dimensional criteria of a parking space set forth in these Regulations shall be considered to be acceptable provided, however that such apron spaces are under the same ownership or control as the garage space. 

d. 	
Restaurant, Fast Food or Low Turnover:  one (1) space for every three (3) seats plus one 


(1) space for each 285 square feet of customer area (without seats) plus one (1) space per employee at the largest shift. 
Provisions for parking within the Farmington Center zone are based upon the concept of shared parking.  The Commission may require that as part of an approval for a development in this zone legal rights of access and use of such parking areas be provided for others.  No owner or tenant shall designate a parking space for their or others exclusive use without the approval of the Commission. 
In calculating the required number of parking spaces for a use or uses on a particular site or offsite (see next paragraph), the Commission may consider over lapping use of parking spaces based upon the various hours of operation and peak usage for each use. 
Required parking spaces for uses located in the Farmington Center zone shall be provided onsite. 
However, by vote of 5/6 of the full Commission such spaces may be provided off site provided they are located within 500 feet of the entrance to the building housing such use and an agreement of a term found acceptable to the Commission is executed for use of such spaces. 
The setback requirements for parking areas found in Article IV Section 8.A of these regulations shall not be applicable to the Farmington Center Zone. 
E. LIGHTING. Exterior lighting shall be of such intensity or located or directed in such a way so as not to produce glare on public streets or neighboring property.  The Commission may require a reduction in lighting after 10:00 p.m. or when otherwise found to be warranted in order to protect nearby residential properties. 
F. HOURS OF OPERATION FOR SPECIAL PERMIT USES. 	At the time of the public hearing the Commission shall require the submission of projected hours of operation.  The Commission shall review the impact of such hours on the immediate neighborhood as well as current and projected traffic circulation patterns.  As part of the special permit, reasonable limitations on hours of operation may be imposed.    
G. LOT COVERAGE. 	No more than 85 percent of the lot may be covered with impervious surfaces except that the Commission may approve by a 5/6 vote of the full Commission up to 100 percent coverage in the case of a reduction of lot area from a conveyance of land to a public entity.  
H. RESIDENTIAL USE. 
1. 	
No residential dwelling unit located within the Farmington Center Zone shall contain more than two bedrooms, except a third bedroom is permitted in dwelling units where such dwelling units contain not less than 1,500 square feet of finished living area and all or a part of the required parking for such units is in an underground garage beneath the building.  Each dwelling unit shall consist of at least two rooms, exclusive of hall and bathroom, and there shall be at least 400 square feet of living area for a one-bedroom unit.  Each additional room shall have at least 100 square feet. 

2. 	
There shall be no outside display or storage associated with any residential use unless otherwise approved by the Commission.  Outdoor clotheslines are prohibited. 


I. 	LANDSCAPE REQUIREMENTS. The specific requirements found in Article IV Section 13 of these regulations shall not be applicable to the Farmington Center Zone. However, parking areas containing more than ten cars shall contain landscaped areas within such parking area equal to at least 10 percent of the gross parking area.  Gross parking area shall include the area of parking stalls, aisle ways and associated landscaping.  Landscape buffer yards as specified in Article IV Section 13 shall be provided as deemed necessary by the Commission to provide protection to adjacent residential properties. 
J. 	VARIANCE. All applications for variance submitted for property located within the Farmington Center Zone shall be referred to the Town Plan and Zoning Commission and the design review committee for a report.  All such reports must be furnished to the Zoning Board of Appeals within 45 days from the date of submission.  
K. EXPIRATION OF PERMIT. 	The approval of an application for special permit shall be void and of no effect unless construction of the project commences within one year from the date the approval is granted by the Commission.  For purposes of this regulation the term construction shall be defined as the installation of a permanent building foundation and a framed structure with completed watertight roof, windows and siding.  The Commission may grant up to two six-month extensions of this period upon written request by the applicant.  The Commission shall withhold approval of any or all extensions unless the development plan is brought into conformance with any relevant zoning regulations, which have been amended subsequent to the original approval and if the applicant fails to provide adequate evidence that construction is able to begin within the extended time period sought.  This evidence shall include, but not be limited to, the acquisition of any or all required government approvals and project financing.  Any appeals of such special permit, site plan, inland wetlands or subdivision approval shall extend the aforementioned one-year period the length of such appeal. 
L. The Commission, in 	conjunction with the approval of a development proposal under this regulation, may establish a reasonable timeframe for the commencement and completion of various improvements.  In order to ensure compliance with such a timetable the Commission may require the posting of a performance bond in a type and amount, which is found to be satisfactory. 
M. The Commission, in 	conjunction with the approval of a development proposal under this regulation, may require the posting of a performance bond to ensure the maintenance of various improvements.  The Commission shall determine the type and sum of such bond. 
Section 29A. FARMINGTON VILLAGE DISTRICT ZONE (FV) 
A. PURPOSE. The purpose of this section is to promote, protect and enhance the unique and distinctive character, historic settlement pattern and architecture and landscape of Farmington center and to function in support of the Farmington Center Zone and its purposes pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes 8-2j. 
B. DEFINITIONS. For the purpose of applying the provisions of this section the terms below shall be defined as follows: 
A.D.R.C. – Architectural Design Review Committee. 
MAJOR STREET – Farmington Avenue (Route 4) and any other streets so designated by the Commission. 
APPROVING AUTHORITY – The Farmington Town Plan and Zoning Commission. 
DISTRICT or FARMINGTON VILLAGE DISTRICT – The Farmington Village District as delineated on the Zoning Map for the Town of Farmington. The District shall be an overlay zone and its boundaries are coincidental with the zoning district boundaries of the Farmington Center Zone and its requirements and standards shall be in addition to and not in lieu of the regulations pertaining to the Farmington Center Zone. 
C. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS. 
1. This regulation shall apply to new construction, substantial reconstruction and rehabilitation of properties within the District and in view from public roadways including but not limited to: 
a.
 The design and replacement of new, expanded or altered buildings including materials and colors. 

b.
 The maintenance of public views. 

c.
 The design, paving materials and placement of public and private roadways. 

d. 
The design and placement of new and modified landscape areas, lighting, fencing and walls. 

e.
 The replacement or elimination of exterior structural surfaces and features, including roofing materials and siding. 

f.
 Any change to the exterior color of a structure. 

g.
 The demolition of any structure or part thereof or the elimination of any landscape area. 

h.
 The design (including color), installation and modification of any sign. 


This provision shall not apply to repairs to buildings where such repairs involve the replacement of building elements with like materials, colors, etc. and such repairs do not expand or decrease the area, vertical or horizontal footprint of the building, change roof line or roof type or add or remove building elements. 
D. PROCEDURE. Activities that are governed by this regulation shall be presented to the Town in accordance with the requirements and procedures found under the Farmington Center Zone and under Article IV Section 12 as applicable. All proposals concerning the activities listed in Section C above shall be referred to the A.D.R.C. for a report and recommendation. The 
A.D.R.C. shall provide such report to the Town Plan and Zoning Commission within 45 days after the date the complete application is received by the Planning Office. In addition to the information, exhibits, drawings and plans required by these regulations the A.D.R.C. may also require one or more of the following items where it is reasonably required to adequately evaluate a proposal: 
1.
 Cross-section drawings. 

2.
 Perspective drawings 

3.
 The superimposition of the proposal on a computer created image of the existing area. 

4.
 A streetscape illustrating the new proposal to scale and indicating the dimensional relationship between the project and structures on adjacent parcels. 

5.
 Samples of colors and materials. 

6.
 A three-dimensional model of the proposal. 

7. 
Half size sections through all trim details. 

8. 
Historical pictures of the subject site and surrounding area as available. 


E. ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN REVIEW COMMITTEE. 	The Architectural Design Review Committee is a body composed of nine (9) members and created pursuant to CGS 8-2j.  The Town Planner shall serve as the professional staff to the A.D.R.C. but not be a voting member. The Committee at a minimum shall contain one architect or landscape architect.  All appointments shall be made by the Town Plan and Zoning Commission.  When appointing members the Planning and Zoning Commission may conduct public interviews and give preference to individuals who possess experience in disciplines such as: architecture, landscape architecture, planner with experience in design, artist, developer, historic preservationist and / or members of the Unionville or Farmington Historic District Commission. 
Members shall serve on the committee for a term of three years. Initial membership shall be comprised of the members of the Unionville Architectural Design Review Committee as existing on March 30th 2018 and shall serve their current terms until replaced.  Persons filling a vacancy shall be appointed for a period coincident with the completion of such term.  Members shall continue to serve after the completion of their term until such time they have officially been reappointed or replaced. 
For complex projects, the Commission may also select and contract with a Village District consultant to serve in this capacity for any project in accordance with CGS 8-2j and §98-4 Costs of special studies or consultations of the Farmington Code of Ordinances.  Such Village District consultant shall be a registered architect or an architectural firm. 
The A.D.R.C. may meet informally with property owners or prospective developers prior to the formal submission of an application to the Town Plan and Zoning Commission. The A.D.R.C. shall provide design support to the Commission consistent with the design and landscape standards/guidelines found in regulations, the principles expressed in the Village District Plan, the architectural heritage of the area and the distinctive characteristics of each District. 
All proposals concerning the activities listed in Section C above shall include a project narrative prepared by the project architect detailing the proposed materials and colors and other details and plans and shall be referred to the A.D.R.C. for a written report and recommendation.  The 
A.D.R.C.
 shall provide a written report to the Town Plan and Zoning Commission within 45 days after the date the complete application is received by the Planning Office. The written report shall be entered into the public record and considered in the decision. 

F. 
DESIGN OBJECTIVES AND STANDARDS. 	The Town of Farmington’s design review process provides a framework for citizens, developers and interested persons to work toward achieving a better-built environment through attention given to fundamental architectural and site design principles. 


These guidelines serve the following three principal purposes: 
• 	
to guide the work of the planning and design professionals who will be preparing specific site and building plans for future development; 

• 	
to serve as an itemization of issues to assist both staff and commissioners during the permitting process; and 

• 	
to encourage site planning and architectural design that will maintain and enhance the character of the Farmington Village District and ensure that new development sensitively fits into the village and is available and accessible to all through the implementation of the principals of Universal Design. 


The guidelines outline and identify those components of the design with which individual applications for planning and zoning permits must demonstrate “reasonable consistency”. In these guidelines “reasonable consistency” means that variation from specific provisions, as recommended by the Architectural Design Review Committee and approved by the Planning & Zoning Commission, is acceptable provided that the overall intent of the provision is achieved. 
I.	   CONTEXT 

1. The building and layout of buildings and associated site improvements shall reinforce or enhance the predominant and desired existing development and streetscape patterns as determined by the Planning & Zoning Commission. The applicable patterns are found in publications entitled “Farmington-New England Town Through Time” and “Farmington Connecticut-350 Years In Pictures”. 
2. 
The placement of buildings and associated site improvements shall assure there is no adverse impact on the District. 

3. 
Locally significant features of the site such as distinctive buildings or sight lines of vistas from within the District shall be integrated into the site design. 

4. 
Reasonable efforts shall be made to preserve, restore, reuse or enhance historic structures. 


II.	
  SITE 

A. 
Pedestrian Circulation 


1. 	
Continuous internal pedestrian walkways should be provided from the parking areas to the primary customer entrances of all principle buildings. These walkways should be designed using the principals of universal design and connected to public spaces and other walkways or trails on adjacent properties. 

2. 	
Open spaces shall be provided and 
designed to facilitate safe pedestrian 
access to adjoining parking areas 
and developed properties. 


3.	
   Internal pedestrian walkways shall be distinguished from driving surfaces by the use of durable, low maintenance surface materials such as pavers, bricks, or scored concrete to enhance pedestrian safety and comfort as well as the attractiveness of the walkways. 

4. 	
Adequate provisions shall be made for deliveries and loading so as not to interfere with safe pedestrian movement. Dumpsters shall be properly screened and odors from trash properly confined 

5. 	
Sidewalks should be designed using the principals of universal design and provided along the frontage of public rights-of-way and should be constructed of durable pavers, concrete, or brick. 

6. 	
In addition to ADA compliant design, the principles of universal design that provide for the built environment to be aesthetic and usable to the greatest extent possible by everyone. 

7. 	
Private walks from parking areas or between buildings should be compatible with public sidewalk treatments and should be located at sensible points to facilitate movement between these areas and the public spaces. 

8. 	
Outdoor dining and seating areas are encouraged in the front and side yards of buildings. 


B. Access and Parking 
1. 	
Proposed streets shall be laid out in a manner that will reinforce the existing character of the area. Their placement and width should be designed to safely accommodate expected traffic with the least amount of impact to existing structures. 

2. 
Off-street parking shall be located to the rear of the building. If side yard parking is approved dining and/or seating areas and architectural and/or vegetative screening shall be placed between the parking area and any public road / public space. 

3.
 Vehicular access to buildings and parking areas shall be from streets other than major streets where practicable. 



4.
 Vehicular circulation and the design and placement of parking shall be developed to prevent or reduce vehicular/pedestrian circulation conflicts. 

5.
 Parking over the minimum required by applicable zoning regulations should be discouraged and if allowed should be designed and constructed in accordance with low-impact design principles. 

6.	
  Granite curbs in entrance drives and other areas of high vehicular traffic are preferred over concrete / asphalt to reduce long-term maintenance costs. 

7. 	
Bike racks are encouraged and should be placed in areas of high visibility. 

8. 	
Parking structures should be designed with ground floor uses compatible with neighboring areas in order to blend with surrounding structures and continue the rhythm of storefronts along the street, where appropriate. 





C. Landscaping and Aesthetic Treatments 

1.
  The landscape design shall complement or enhance the district’s landscape patterns; provide for an appealing streetscape and mitigate the visual impact of streets, parking areas and manmade objects and features through the use of plants and trees, fencing and masonry walls. 

2.
  Decorative site amenities and treatments (benches, trash receptacles, hand railings, light fixtures, etc.) are recommended to establish or enhance a sense of place and should thematically relate to each other, the building’s architecture as well as the 


surrounding character. 
3.
 Incorporate	 plazas, sitting areas, public art or formal gardens to visually and functionally unify a development with multiple buildings. 

4. 	
Low impact development mechanisms such as permeable pavement, grassed swales and bioretention basins should be employed when feasible. 

5. 	
Landscaping around buildings should establish continuity within the site, soften the harshness of regrading, and introduce human scale at the sidewalk level. 

6.	
  Select species based on intended function and placement such as larger cultivars for shading parking lots and screening buildings and smaller more decorative varieties near the fronts of buildings and entrances. Native species are encouraged and CT DEEP identified invasive species are not allowed. 

7. 	
Only vegetation reaching suitable height and habit within one year of planting should be considered for screening purposes. 

8. 	
Loading areas, outdoor storage, service vehicle parking, ground-mounted equipment, refuse collection areas and other service functions must be screened. Screening materials should be a combination of durable yet high-quality materials and evergreen vegetation and shall also be visually consistent with the development and the surroundings. 

9. 	
Additional landscaping or more mature plantings may 
be required under certain circumstances to mitigate the 
proposed development. 


10. 	
The incorporation of interpretative displays to 
communicate historic or relevant information about the 
site or buildings is encouraged. 


11.
 Exterior walls of parking garages visible from public streets within the project and across from other buildings should be concealed with liner structures or should have architecturally appropriate design and cladding facing the street. 



D. Lighting 
1. 	
Reproduction or decorative light poles and fixtures should be specified and consideration should be given to scale and style within the context of the intended development as well as with the surrounding properties. 

2.	
  All fixtures shall meet full cut-off or specifications to eliminate upward scatter and light encroachment on to adjacent properties. 

3. 	
Exposed concrete base foundations to light poles should be minimized to the extent practical. 


E. Signage 
1. 	
New freestanding signs are prohibited, with the exception of monument signs constructed with natural materials 

2. 	
Signs should be designed as an integral architectural element of the building and site, and should also reflect the character of the surrounding area. 

3. 	
There shall not be any internally illuminated signs including halo, channel cut and neon visible from a street or driveway, including interior window signage Interior window signage shall not occupy more than 20% of the windows overall area. 

4. 	
In a multiple storefront building, the signage should be of a size, location, material and color that relates harmoniously to the overall building.  The signs should also reflect a consistent design theme. 

5. 
Incorporate way-finding signage when circulation is complex and safe pedestrian movement is of concern or to direct pedestrian movements to adjacent properties of interest. 




III. 
BUILDING 

A. 
Orientation and Scale 


1. 	
Buildings should be sited in a manner that 
maintains the existing street wall or create 
a strong street wall and shall have their 
primary orientation toward the street 
rather than parking area. For properties 
occupying the corner of two public roads 
or in cases where a new access is being 
created off a public road, building 
placement should reflect the existing street wall. 


2. 	
Proposed buildings shall complement and reflect the scale, proportion, massing and detailing in the District. 

3. 	
Buildings to the greatest extent possible shall be placed and oriented to the front of a lot and close to a street and should maintain a pleasing spatial relationship with the roadway and other nearby buildings in relation to their height and mass and that of others. New buildings generally shall not be setback by more than ten (10) feet from the property line and shall occupy 70% of the lot frontage. 

4.
 Front facing walls of retail establishments shall contain display windows appropriate in size and number as determined in the design review process. 

5. 
Walls facing public streets, plazas or other public spaces should include glass, windows, display areas or other features that diminish the appearance of a blank wall. 

6.	
  The street level and/or ground level façade shall be transparent 






between the height of three feet and eight feet above the walkway grade for no less than 70% of the horizontal length of the building. Windows shall be recessed and should include visually prominent sills, shutters, or other such forms of framing. 
B. Façade and Entrances 
1. 	
Buildings shall have their principal access directly off a 
public street and sidewalk. 


2. 	
Windows and doors should be balanced in their 
placement on building facades. Though literal 
symmetry is not necessary, a general balance among 
façade elements is desirable. 


3.	
  Exterior facades, including eaves, columns, pilasters, cornices, windows and window surrounds, canopies, fascia and roofs, shall be proportionate with the proposed building and compatible with existing architectural precedents in the District. 

4. 
Principal buildings should include elements such as canopies, columns, and arches that establish a human scale. 

5.
 In buildings with multiple tenants or uses, exterior building elements such as doors, windows, materials, storefronts, signage, lighting should be compatible (but not necessarily identical). 






C. Scale, Massing and Proportion 

1. 	
The construction of accessory buildings shall be prohibited. 

2. 
Large building masses should be divided into heights and sizes that relate to human scale by incorporating changes in building mass or direction, projections, recesses, sheltering roofs, windows, trees, small scale lighting or other distinctive elements that remain compatible with the building architecture. 

3.	
 Projections or recesses 


should be utilized along with color, texture and/or material changes in order to achieve visual relief of walls or extended facades. 
4. Banding of exterior materials and/or architectural details should be incorporated at eye-level to break up large facades and create human scale elements. 

D. Materials and Colors 
1. Predominant building materials to be used shall include brick, wood, stone or other natural materials Glass shall not constitute the majority of a building exterior. Manmade materials may be used where recommended by Architectural Design Review and approved by the Planning & Zoning Commission. 

2. 
Dryvit or exterior insulation finish systems, smooth-face concrete blocks, tilt-up and pre-fabricated concrete panels and pre-fabricated steel panels shall only be used for structured parking. 

3.
 Predominant exterior building materials should be non-glossy and have subtle, neutral or earth tone or historic colors. 


E. Rooflines 
1. 	
Building design shall reflect the rooflines of surrounding properties to avoid incompatible styles and materials, and the roof mass should create a consistent composition but extensive roof faces fronting public streets should be avoided. 

2. 	
Roofing materials exposed to view shall be slate, wood, asphalt or standing seam metal shingles. 

3.
 All roof-mounted equipment shall be concealed from public streets and rights-of-way right-of­way by using detailing incorporated into the architectural design of the building as opposed to an applied barrier. 



F. Equipment and Service Areas 
1.	
  Install new utility systems underground and bury existing above ground services. Utility feeds and metering devices should be screened and may not be located on the building’s front facade. 

2. 	
All utilities and mechanical equipment mounted on the ground shall be screened using a combination of high quality architectural treatments and evergreen vegetation. 

3. 	
Wherever possible, loading docks, solid waste facilities, recycling facilities and other service elements should be placed to the rear or side yard of the building in visually unobtrusive locations with minimum impacts on view. 

4. 	
Refuse containers and associated facilities should be hidden by an opaque wall or fence of sufficient height to screen the bin and any building appurtenances, but not less than 6 feet in height. 


This amendment is effective December 15, 2012 and amended April 21, 2017. 
SECTION 30: MEDICAL OFFICE/RESEARCH FLOATING ZONE (MORF ZONE) 
A. 	PURPOSE -A floating zone designed to permit and encourage variety and flexibility in uses but also retaining the Commission’s legislative authority to guide and ensure proper development in accordance with the Plan of Conservation and Development and these regulations.  The Commission may approve, disapprove or approve with modifications the application of this floating zone and a plan for the development of land which plan may deviate from the standards in the underlying zone. 
B. APPLICABILITY – This floating zone may be applied to any lot or assemblage of lots (with owner consent) in excess of three (3) acres currently located in the area designated Medical Office / Research in the Town’s Plan of Conservation and Development and more particularly described as follows:  bounded by Middle Road on the north and west, Munson Road on the east and South Road on the south.  
In rendering a decision on a zone change the Commission acts in a legislative capacity and shall be afforded wide and liberal discretion.  The Commission shall use its knowledge of the area, public comment, its Plan of Conservation and Development and Article IV Section 12 of this Regulation. 
C. 	PROCEDURE-APPLICATION PROCESS SITE PLAN REQUIREMENTS – An application for approval of a Medical Office/Research Floating Zone shall be made in writing to the Planning and Zoning Commission signed by the owner or owners of the land which are the subject of the application, together with any other applicant.  The application shall include ten prints of the site plan of the property drawn to scale showing the information as required in the Zoning Code. 
1. 	
The Commission shall refer the proposed plan to the Farmington Economic Development Committee for an advisory report. 

2. 	
The Planning and Zoning Commission shall hold a public hearing on the proposal. 

3. 	
The Planning and Zoning Commission may attach any conditions to its approval as it considers necessary in order to assure continued conformance with the zoning regulations. 

4. 	
A suitable notation shall be made in the Zoning regulation and on the Zoning Map identifying any property for which a Medical Office/Research development floating zone has been approved. 


D. 	PERMITTED USES: The following uses requiring only a Zoning Permit as specified in Article 
V. 
1.
 Accessory Uses in connection with an approved use, provided that all such uses shall be consistent with the architectural, signage and landscaping of the approved uses. 

2.
 Pre-Existing, Non-Conforming Structures or Uses, in compliance with Article IV, Section 1. 


E. 	USES ALLOWED BY ZONE CHANGE / SITE PLAN REVIEW: 
1. 	
Medical and Dental Offices and Clinics 

2. 	
Diagnostic or Medical Laboratories 

3. 	
Rehabilitation Centers, including physical therapy facilities and sleep centers providing overnight accommodations to patients in recovery or rehabilitation, and to authorized visitors. 

4. 	
Surgery Centers, including outpatient centers with overnight accommodations to patients in recovery or rehabilitation and to authorized visitors. 

5. 	
Basic or Applied Research, Development or Production Facilities related to medicine, 
medical services, bioscience, biotechnology, pharmaceuticals, or photonics. 


6. 	
Private and Public Parking Structures 

7. 	
On-site Parking on an adjacent lot not containing a principal use allowed by this regulation, provided that vehicles have direct access between the adjacent lots to a permitted principal use, and the total number of parking spaces required is determined in accordance with Subsection G of this regulation. 


F. 	MEDICAL OFFICE / RESEARCH DEVELOPMENT GUIDELINES – The intent of the floating zone is to keep development at an appropriate scale and to design elements to strengthen the community and its grand list by allowing compatible uses in accordance with the Plan of Conservation and Development. 
The following criteria shall be considered when evaluating site plans for possible application of this zone to any particular site: 
G. 	HEIGHT AND AREA REQUIREMENTS: 
1. 
Minimum Lot Area for a Medical Office/Research Floating Zone shall be 3 acres. 

2.
 Height of Buildings shall not exceed 44 feet, provided that 46 feet shall be allowed if the building includes a surgical center. 

3.
 Building Size shall not exceed 80,000 square feet of gross useable floor area. 

4.
 Yards 


a.
 Front yard: 40 feet 

b.
 Rear yard: 30 feet 

c.
 Side yard: 30 feet, provided that if the side or rear yards of lots within the Medical Office/Research Floating Zone are adjacent, i) to other MORF zone lots the site plan may utilize a zero lot line, or ii) to other institutional use, then 5 feet. 


5. 
All Principal Buildings in a Medical Office/Research Floating Zone shall be separated from each other by no less than 50 feet. 

6.
 Minimum Lot Frontage shall be 100 feet. 

7.
 Impervious Coverage shall not exceed 50 percent cumulatively for all lands rezoned to MORF within the area designated as Medical Office/Research Floating in the Town’s Plan of Conservation and Development, per this Section 30. The maximum impervious coverage per development site shall not exceed 65 percent. 


H. 	ARCHITECTURE: A zone change / site plan application for any new structure in a Medical Office/Research Floating Zone shall include specification of exterior building features such as columns, arches, banding, roofing, masonry, and glass, so as to achieve uniformity with existing structures within the MOC campus. 
I. 	OFF STREET PARKING: Off street parking shall be provided in conformance with Article IV, Section 8, as these regulations as it applies to Medical Offices with Clinics, with the following additional provisions: 
1.
 The location of parking spaces relative to building entrances shall be tailored to the buildings’ primary use as medical and dental offices and clinics, by ensuring safe and easy access to people with disabilities. 

2.
 Parking spaces shall be set back no less than 30 feet from any property line, provided that if the side or rear yard of lots within the Medical Office/Research Floating Zone are adjacent, the site plan may utilize a zero lot line, or ii) if the side yard is adjacent to other institutional use, the site plan may utilize 5 feet. 


J. 	LANDSCAPING: Except where the Medical Office/Research Floating Zone is adjacent to a non-residential or institutional use, landscaping shall be provided in conformance with Article IV, Section 13, provided that plantings within the front yard as per Section 28.D.4.a. above shall be determined based on field conditions and controlled by a condition of approval and with the exception of the buffer yard berm but with 1.0 x plant units. In addition, a zone change/site plan application shall be accompanied by specifications of foundation plantings, walkway plantings, courtyard plantings, entrance plantings, island plantings, and irrigation system locations that will achieve uniformity. The Commission reserves the right to increase buffer areas and materials for projects adjacent to residentially zoned properties not covered by this floating zone. 
K. 	LIGHTING: Exterior lighting shall comply with Article IV, Section 14. A zone change/site plan application shall include specification of height, color, and materials for all sidewalk fixtures, so as to achieve uniformity. The Commission may require a reduction in lighting after 10:00 p.m. or when otherwise found to be warranted in order to protect nearby residential properties. 
L. 	SIGNAGE: Shall comply with the provisions of Article IV, Section 7 that apply in the PR zone, with the following additional provisions: 
1.
 A zone change/site plan application shall be accompanied by a signage plan that will ensure 

that all new or replacement signage will achieve uniformity with MOC zone signage. Such master plan shall identify existing and proposed attached and detached signs and shall specify locations, mounting, overall size, colors, materials, fonts and lighting. 

2. 
The master signage plan shall provide for detached signs with monument bases with material of brick or precast to match existing buildings and provide uniformity. 

3. 
All signs shall be illuminated by exterior front lighting. 


M. HOURS OF OPERATION: A zone change/site plan application for a new structure within a Medical Office/Research Floating Zone shall include proposed hours of operation and the reasons for such hours. The Commission shall review such schedule and any impacts on neighboring properties. 
N. 	SIDEWALKS: Newly constructed sidewalks shall be at least six feet wide, and shall be installed throughout the development to provide pedestrians access among all buildings. Existing sidewalks that are less than six feet wide may remain. Entrances to medical office buildings shall be built with heated sidewalks. 
O. 	STAGES: A tract of land in the Medical Office/Research Floating Zone may be developed in stages, as approved by the Commission. 
P. 	ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS: 
1. 	
Public bus stops shall be located so as to be most accessible to all buildings and access points. 

2. 	
Delivery and pick-up locations for laboratories shall be specifically identified. 

3. 	
Delivery and pick-up locations for package and courier services shall be located so as to be most accessible to all buildings. 

4. 	
Exterior mechanical equipment such as cooling towers and chillers shall be color-coordinated to match the buildings served. 

5. 	
Locations shall be identified for installation of outdoor eating tables, other amenities including consideration how the development will contribute to the overall pedestrian circulation in the immediate neighborhood. 

6. 	
The site plan shall identify all areas for dumpsters and rubbish removal and adequate landscaping and screening to protect adjacent residentially zoned properties not covered by this floating zone.  Conditions of approval may include limiting hours of garbage pick-up. 


Q. 	EXPIRATION OF SITE PLAN: The approval of the site plan shall be void and of no effect unless construction authorized commences within one year from the date the approval is granted by the Commission. For purposes of this regulation, the term “construction” shall be defined as the installation of a permanent building foundation. The Commission may grant up to two six-month extensions of this period upon written request by the applicant. The Commission shall withhold approval of any or all extensions unless the development plan is brought into conformance with any relevant zoning regulations, which have been amended subsequent to the original approval and if the applicant fails to provide adequate evidence that construction is able to begin within the extended time period sought. This evidence shall include, but not be limited to, the acquisition of any or all required government approvals and project financing. Any appeals of such special permit, site plan, inland wetlands or subdivision approval shall extend the aforementioned one-year period the length of such appeal. 
Section 31. SPECIAL INNOVATION FLOATING ZONE 
1.	
   APPLICABILITY – In addition to the permitted and special permit uses found in the underlying zones a Special Innovation Floating Zone may be established on any lot or assemblage of lots in excess of two (2) acres within the UCONN Health Center neighborhood as identified in Chapter 7 of the Plan of Conservation and Development or in the Professional Office Zone. The above mentioned two (2) acre minimum shall not apply to parcels adjacent to existing Special Innovation Floating zoned parcels. 

2.	
    PURPOSE – This floating zone is hereby established to allow and encourage variety and flexibility in land development that will be in harmony with the Plan of Conservation and Development. The permitted uses in the floating zone are higher density office development than the underlying zone and mixed-use development by permitting multi-family development and retail/commercial development on the same parcel within the UCONN Health Center neighborhood and the PR zone. The floating zone encourages this variety and flexibility while also retaining the Commission’s legislative authority to guide and ensure proper development. 

3.
   PROCEDURE-APPLICATION PROCESS-PLAN REQUIREMENTS – 


A. Pre-Application Conference The applicant is strongly encouraged to initiate a pre­application conference with the Commission and its staff pursuant to CGS Section 7-159b. The purpose of the conference is to discuss the conceptual aspects of the proposed development and to present a conceptual plan, for informal consideration by the Commission. The conceptual plan shall be designed to allow the Commission to make a general comparison between the proposed and the development allowed under existing zoning. During the pre-application conference, neither the informal review of the conceptual plan nor the Commission's suggestions shall be deemed to constitute endorsement of approval of any portion of the application. 
B. An application for approval of a floating zone and a development plan shall be made by application to the Planning and Zoning Commission. The application shall include an electronic copy of all required plans and documents and the following: 
(1) 
Six prints of a A-2 and T-2 survey and a fully engineering site development plan for the proposed development, storm water and traffic studies; 

(2) 
Six prints of all proposed building floor plans and elevations, drawn to a scale of not less than 1/16 inch equals one foot, including an indication of all materials proposed to be used in all buildings. 

(3) 
Six prints of a landscaping plan indicating the location, size and species of all plant materials proposed to be preserved and planted. 

(4) 
For each building and land area proposed to be used for other than residential purposes, a description of the proposed uses, hours of operations, number of employees and other occupants; 


The Commission shall refer the proposed plan to Town Departments and the Architectural/Design Review Committee for review and comment.  The Commission shall hold a public hearing on the proposal in accordance with Section 8-3 of the Connecticut General Statutes.  Applications for changes in approved site development plans shall be made to and acted upon by the Planning and Zoning Commission.  The Commission may hold a public hearing regarding applications for changes to the approved plan.  
5. 	ESTABLISHMENT -In rendering a decision on application of a floating zone and a development plan the Commission acts in a legislative capacity and shall be afforded wide and liberal discretion. The Commission shall use its knowledge of the area, departmental comments, public comment, its Plan of Conservation and Development and this Regulation to render its decision. The Commission may approve, disapprove or approve with modifications the application of the floating zone and a development plan for the development of land which may deviate from the standards in the existing zoning regulations. The Commission may attach any conditions to its approval as it considers necessary in order to assure the best development possible. Prior to approval the Commission shall find the following: 
a.
 The proposed is in harmony with the overall objective of the Plan of Conservation and Development; 

b.
 The proposed is superior to a plan possible under the existing zoning regulation for the parcel; and 

c.
 The proposed is in harmony with the actual or permitted development of adjacent properties. 


ARTICLE III.  HEIGHT AND AREA REGULATIONS 
Section l. SCHEDULE OF ZONE REQUIREMENTS 
All buildings or structures hereafter erected or altered shall, unless otherwise exempted by the provisions of Article IV. Section 1. of the regulations, conform to the requirements for the zone in which such building or structure is located as found in Section 6. Height and Area Schedule. 
Section 2. FLOOR AREA REQUIREMENTS FOR RESIDENCES * 
All buildings hereafter erected, structurally altered, or enlarged for use in whole or in part as dwellings shall have the following minimum requirements for living quarters: 
A. In R80, R40 and R30 Zones for all principal dwellings, 1,200 square feet of finished living area; 
B. In R20 Zones for all principal dwellings, 1,000 square feet; 
C. In R12 and R9 Zones for all dwellings, 900 square feet. 
D. In two, three and four family dwellings each unit having one bedroom shall contain 525 square feet of finished living area and for each additional bedroom, 120 square feet of finished living area. The preceding minimum floor areas shall also apply to all other multiple family housing where the minimum floor area is not elsewhere established by these regulations. 
* 	The purpose of the minimum floor area requirements is to assure that a dwelling will safely and reasonably accommodate the uses to which it is likely to be put. The minimum floor areas shown above are believed to be reasonable and appropriate. However, the Commission will consider a request for a special permit for the diminution of said minimum floor area requirements if the applicant persuasively establishes that a floor area less than the minimum provided for will provide safe and reasonable use of the premises and otherwise satisfy the purposes of the zoning regulations. See Article IV. Section 12. for application procedures, hearing and notice requirements. 

Section 3. YARD EXCEPTIONS 
A. Unless otherwise specifically prohibited by other provisions of these regulations any driveway, walkway, uncovered step or stair, detached wall, light post, flagpole (one per lot), utility unit or similar accessory structure may be erected or located within any yard area established by Article 
III. Section 6. Aboveground fuel tanks shall be permitted in any required side or rear yard at least ten feet from the property line or five feet when the tank is screened from view of the adjoining property.  However no fence or detached wall may be erected or located within any required yard along a street which is greater than four feet in height unless otherwise approved by the Commission. In approving such fences, the Commission shall give due consideration to the protection of the existing streetscape and any scenic views or vistas. The Commission may require the installation of plant material or other suitable material to soften the view of such fence or wall. 
Covered steps, porches which are not enclosed, terraces and decks may extend into a required yard provided they are distant from the front yard lot line at least 20 feet, and 10 feet from other lot lines, except from other lot lines along a street where the setback shall be at least 15 feet in the R9 and R12 Zones and at least 20 feet in all other residential zones. 
These provisions shall not apply to nonresidential buildings or uses. 
B. Other usual projections, such as windowsills, cornices and chimneys may extend into any required yard not more than six inches; and a bay window may extend not more than two feet. The roof overhang of a building may extend not more than one and one-half feet into a required yard. 
C. Corner lots shall have a required front yard on only one street front, but the width of any side yard on a street side shall be not less than 15 feet in the R9 and R12 Zones and 25 feet for all other residential lots. Through lots or lots having lot lines along three or more streets shall have a required front yard on only one street, however the lot line along a street which is opposite from the front yard shall be a rear lot line. 
The Commission shall determine at the time of subdivision application which of the street lines shall serve as the front, rear or side lot lines. In the case where no subdivision is involved or where such setback lines were not identified on a previously approved subdivision plan, the property owner shall make such determination. 
Section 4. INTERIOR LOTS 
A. The Commission may approve the creation of an interior lot only under the following conditions: Where the lot to be divided was established prior to the effective date of these regulations (April 27, 1950) with less than twice the lot frontage required for the zone in which it is situated and it would not be desirable to service such proposed lot or lots by a street as defined under the definition for frontage; or where the establishment of an interior lot would further protect or preserve any of the natural or man-made resources found in Article II. Section 19.B.2. of these regulations. Under either condition the Commission shall also require compliance with Article 
IV. 
Section 12.B. of these regulations. 

B. 
The Commission may approve only in accordance with the conditions stated in Section 4.A. above as part of a subdivision, or when no subdivision approval is required, by special permit in accordance with Article IV. Section 12. of these regulations, the use of an access way at least 20 feet wide to serve a residential lot which does not otherwise comply with the minimum frontage requirements for the zone in which it is located. An access way shall be defined as a strip of land providing access to an improved public street from an otherwise landlocked lot. The owner of a lot served by an access way must own such access way in fee simple. The use of a lot served by an access way is restricted to one single-family dwelling. 

C. 
Where an interior lot in an R80 Zone exceeds twice the area requirement of the zone or in all other residential zones where such lot exceeds four times the area requirement of the zone the Commission may require the access way to be 50 feet in width. 

D. 
Each interior lot shall be served by its own driveway except as otherwise approved by the Commission. In making its decision the Commission shall consider the topography, soils and vegetation of the site, as well as existing development and projected development in the immediate area. Where possible, curb cuts will be minimized through the use of shared driveways. 

E. 	
Interior lots in all residential zones, except the R80 Zone, shall contain at a minimum twice the lot area required for non-interior lots for the zone in which they are located. 

F. 	
The lot line to which the access way leads shall be deemed the front line of the interior lot. The required frontage prescribed for the zone in which such interior lot is located shall be provided at least at the front yard setback line. Such interior lot shall conform to all yard requirements prescribed for the zone in which it is located. The Commission may require the provision of landscaping along the access way to protect existing homes from glare and noise. 

A. 
There shall be no limitation on the height of a fence located within the rear yard or a side yard behind the front building line or other required side yard along a street. (See also Article IV. Section 4.) 


Section 5. FENCES IN OTHER THAN FRONT YARD 
Section 6. HEIGHT AND AREA SCHEDULE – For all other zones not listed here, see text. 
ZONE  DWELLINGS PERMITTED  MAXIMUM HEIGHT  MIN. FLOOR AREA  MINIMUM FRONTAGE  MINIMUM ACREAGE OR LOT SIZE  MINIMUM YARDS  
FRONT  SIDE  EACH  REAR  
R80  1 Family  35’  1,200  200’  80,000 sf  50’  40’  50’  
R40  1 Family  35’  1,200  150’  40,000 sf  50’  25’  50’  
R30  1 Family  35’  1,200  125’  30,000 sf  40’  15’  25’  
R20  1 Family  35’  1,000  100’  20,000 sf  40’  10’ for one 30’ for both  25’  
R12  2 Family  35’  900  75’  12,000 sf  30’  10’  25’  
R12LG  1 Family  35’  900  75’  12,000 sf  30’  10’  25’  
R9  4 Family  35’  900  1 fam. 60’ 2 fam. 70’ 3 fam. 80’ 4 fam. 90’  9,000 sf 12,000 sf 18,000 sf 24,000 sf  20’  10% of frontage but not over 10’  25’  
R9LG  1 Family  35’  900  60’  9,000 sf  20’  Same as R9  25’  
R80 Open Space –Same a R40  R40 Open Space – Same as R30  
R30 Open Space – Same as R20  R20 Open Space – Same as R12  Multiple Family Cluster – See Text  
R80, R40, R30, R20 Clusters  1 Family  35’  Same as underlying zone  See Text  See Text  See Text  
R9 Cluster  24 max. 8/bldg.  35’  900  200’  8,712 sf/unit  20’  20’  25’  
RDM  5/acre  35’  600  5 acres  
AH  See Text  See Text  See Text  4 acres  See Text  
PR  None  36’  200’  80,000 sf  65’  50’ 100’ abut. Res.  30’ 60’ abut. Res.  
BR  None  36’  200’  80,000 sf  65’  50’  50’ abut. Res. 30’ abut. Comm.  
B1  None  36’  100’  20,000 sf  20’  15’  15’  
CR  None  36’  150’  40,000 sf  40’  20’ for one 50’ for both  25  
C1  None  40’  150’  40,000 sf  Same as CR  

143 

ARTICLE IV.  SPECIAL REGULATIONS 

Section 1. NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES, LOTS AND USES 
A. Any structure, lot or use legally existing at the time of the adoption of these regulations or any amendments thereto, which does not conform to the provisions of these regulations, shall be designated a nonconforming structure, nonconforming lot or nonconforming use. The following rules shall apply to such nonconformities. 
B. NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES 
1. 	Any building or structure legally in existence at the time of the adoption or amendment of these regulations which does not comply with either the minimum floor area, height, bulk, lot coverage, landscaping or other dimensional requirements of these regulations shall be considered a nonconforming structure. Such structures may continue to be used, subject to the following conditions: 
a. 	
A nonconforming structure may be expanded, altered or extended provided such expansion, alteration or extension does not violate or further violate any of the height, bulk, setback or landscaping requirements for the zone in which it is situated except in the case of residential nonconforming structures in business or industrial zones which shall be governed by Article IV. Section 1.D.1. A nonconforming structure may not be moved to another lot or to another portion of the same lot except where such movement would be in compliance with all height, bulk, setback and landscaping requirements for the zone in which it is to be situated. 

b. 	
A nonconforming structure or building may be repaired or maintained, however it may not be demolished and replaced by a new nonconforming structure except as provided for in this section; or in the case of signs, Article IV. Section 7.B.6. 

c. 	
A nonconforming structure or building which is damaged or destroyed by fire, explosion or natural disaster may be rebuilt, provided such reconstruction does not violate the provision of Article IV. Section 1.B.1.a. and provided the reconstruction is completed within two years of the calamity. 

C. 
NONCONFORMING LOTS 


1. 	
Any lot which does not conform to minimum area or frontage requirements for the current zone in which it is located shall be designated a nonconforming lot, providing such lot shall have been recorded by deed or shall have been shown on map tentatively approved by the Commission and filed in the Town Clerk’s office prior to the effective date of these regulations (April 27, 1950), or prior to the adoption of any amendment of these regulations, which would otherwise make such lot unlawful. 

2. 	
Only one single family dwelling and accessory buildings may be erected on a nonconforming lot located in a residential zone, except as stated below, provided all other requirements of the height and area schedule are complied with. The area or frontage of a nonconforming lot shall not be reduced. 

3. 	
Where a nonconforming lot located within a residential zone presently contains or contained subsequent to April 27, 1950 a use, structure or building which is currently or previously accessory to a principal use, structure or building located on a contiguous parcel of land, such lots for the purpose of this regulation are deemed to be merged and therefore no zoning permit or building permit shall be issued for the construction of a single family dwelling on such nonconforming lot. 


D. NONCONFORMING USES 
1. 	Any use of a building or lot which was in existence prior to the adoption of these regulations (April 27, 1950), or amendments thereto, and is not permitted as of right or by special permit for the zoning district in which it is located shall be designated a nonconforming use. Such use may continue subject to Paragraphs 3., 4. and 5. below, or be changed only to a conforming use, but shall not be extended or expanded.* This prohibition shall include but not be limited to the following: 
The expansion of floor area, volume area or lot area dedicated to such nonconforming use. 
The expansion of seasonal or occasional nonconforming uses to a year round or continuous use. 
The expansion of operating hours of a nonconforming use which results in a change of nature of such use. 
The addition of new facilities, equipment, products or services to a nonconforming use which results in a change of nature of such use. 
* However residential uses or structures located in a business or industrial zone may be expanded or enlarged provided any building expansion complies with the yard and height requirements of the R20 Zone and the number of dwelling units does not increase. 
2. 	No nonconforming use shall, if once changed to a conforming use, be changed back to such nonconforming use. 
No nonconforming use shall be moved from one portion of a premises to another portion of a premises unless it complies with the use provisions of the zone to which it is relocated. 
No nonconforming use shall be moved from one lot to another lot unless it complies with the use provisions of the zone to which it is relocated. 
3. 	A building or structure containing a nonconforming use, with the exception of a residential use in a business or industrial zone, may be maintained or repaired provided no structural alterations are made. No such building or structure shall be demolished and replaced by a new building or structure except where the use is changed to a conforming use or except as otherwise provided for in this section. 
A building or structure containing a nonconforming use which is damaged or destroyed by fire, explosion or natural disaster may be rebuilt, provided such reconstruction does not violate the provisions of Article IV. Section 1.D.1. and Section 1.D.2. and provided the reconstruction is completed within two years of the calamity. 
A building or structure containing a residential use and located in a business or industrial zone may be maintained or repaired including the making of structural alterations. Such buildings or structures may be demolished and replaced by a new building or structure provided any expansion of said building or structure does not violate the yard or height requirements of the R20 Zone and if such building or structure is relocated on the site, it shall conform to the yard requirements of the R20 Zone. 
4. 	A nonconforming use shall not be resumed if such use has been abandoned. 
Section 2. BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES ACCESSORY TO ONE TO FOUR FAMILY HOMES 
A. Accessory buildings	 and structures, (exclusive of farm buildings, swimming pools and appurtenances such as decking, tennis courts, satellite receiving antennas and amateur radio towers) shall be subject to the following requirements: 
1. 	
Shall be located behind the longest rear wall of the principal building or in the rear half of a lot containing frontage on one street. In the rear yard as measured from the longest rear wall of the principal building but not beyond the middle third of a through lot as measured from the street the principal use is closest to. In the case of a corner lot, to the rear of the home as measured from the longest wall with respect to both streets or in the rear half of a lot as measured from both streets or a combination thereof. To the rear of the home as measured from the longest wall with respect to two streets or in the rear half of the lot as measured from two streets or combination thereof where a lot is bounded by three or more streets. 

2. 	
Shall be at least 25 feet from any street line. 

3. 	
Shall not exceed a height of 15 feet. 

4. 	
Shall be at least 5 feet from the rear and side lot lines. 

5. 	
The maximum size of a detached building or structure shall not exceed the area specified in the following table unless a special permit is granted by the Commission. 


ZONE LOT SIZE 	MAXIMUM FOOTPRINT OF DETACHED BUILDING OR STRUCTURE 
R9 – R80 <10,000 sq. ft. 	550 sq. ft. 
R12 – R80 10,000 sq. ft. + 700 sq. ft. 
The area of a footprint of an accessory building or structure shall be measured from the outside of exterior walls. 
B. Accessory farm buildings shall be subject to the following requirements: 
1. 	
May be located in the side yard but must be at least 100 feet from any street line. 

2. 	
Roadside stands may be located in front yards but must be set back at least 25 feet from any street line. 

3. 	
Shall be at least 5 feet from the rear and side lot lines. However, buildings or structures housing or sheltering animals shall be located a minimum of 75 feet from any side or rear property line. 


C. Swimming pools and appurtenances such as decking and tennis courts shall be subject to the following requirements: 
1. 	
Shall be located behind the longest rear wall of the principal building or in the rear half of a lot containing frontage on one street. In the rear yard as measured from the longest rear wall of the principal building but not beyond the middle third of a through lot as measured from the street the principal use is closest to. In the case of a corner lot, to the rear of the home as measured from the longest wall with respect to both streets or in the rear half of a lot as measured from both streets or a combination thereof. To the rear of the home as measured from the longest wall with respect to two streets or in the rear half of the lot as measured from two streets or combination thereof where a lot is bounded by three or more streets. 

2. 	
Shall be at least 25 feet from any street line. 

3. 	
Shall meet the side and rear yard requirements for the zone in which it is located shown in Article III. Section 6. of these regulations, except in the R40 and R80 zones where the rear yard requirement shall be 25 feet. 


D. Satellite receiving antennas shall be subject to the following requirements: 
1. 	
Shall be located behind the longest rear wall of the principal building or in the rear half of a lot containing frontage on one street. In the rear yard as measured from the longest rear wall of the principal building but not beyond the middle third of a through lot as measured from the street the principal use is closest to. In the case of a corner lot, to the rear of the home as measured from the longest wall with respect to both streets or in the rear half of a lot as measured from both streets or a combination thereof. To the rear of the home as measured from the longest wall with respect to two streets or in the rear half 

of the lot as measured from two streets or combination thereof where a lot is bounded by three or more streets. 

2. 	
Shall be at least 25 feet from any street line. 

3. 	
Shall not exceed a height of 15 feet to be measured from ground level to the highest point of the antenna. 

4. 	
Shall meet the side and rear yard requirement for the zone in which it is located shown in Article III. Section 6. of these regulations. 


E. Amateur radio towers shall be subject to the following requirements: 
1. 	
Shall be located behind the longest rear wall of the principal building or in the rear half of a lot containing frontage on one street. In the rear yard as measured from the longest rear wall of the principal building but not beyond the middle third of a through lot as measured from the street the principal use is closest to. In the case of a corner lot, to the rear of the home as measured from the longest wall with respect to both streets or in the rear half of a lot as measured from both streets or a combination thereof. To the rear of the home as measured from the longest wall with respect to two streets or in the rear half of the lot as measured from two streets or combination thereof where a lot is bounded by three or more streets. 

2. 	
Shall be at least 25 feet from any street line. 

3. 	
Shall be permitted as of right as a freestanding structure or attached to the principal structure, when the height of the tower including the antenna mast does not exceed 45 feet in height. 

4. 	
Shall be allowed by special permit as a freestanding structure or attached to the principal structure, when the height of the tower including the antenna mast is more than 45 feet in height but not more than 65 feet in height. The Commission will be guided by standards provided in Article IV. Section 12. 

5. 	
Shall be located a distance from all property lines equal to the height of the tower. 

6. 	
Shall include a fence, anti-climb device or other means of limiting access to the tower. 


F. 	A building attached to the principal building by a solid covered passageway no less than three (3) feet in width having a roof and a least one wall, a floor and doors on both ends; or attached by sharing a common structural wall with a door permitting access between both buildings shall be considered an integral part of the principal building and not an accessory building. 
Section 3. PUBLIC GARAGES AND SERVICE STATIONS 
A. In considering approvals for the erection or enlargement of a public garage for more than five motor vehicles, or a motor vehicle service station or gas filling station, or for the conversion of any premises not so used to be used for such purposes, due consideration shall be given to the proposed located of such facility in regard to schools, churches, theaters, traffic conditions, width of highway and effect on public travel. 
Section 4. VISIBILITY AT INTERSECTIONS 
On a lot located at the intersection of two streets within any zone, no object more than two and one-half feet in height as measured from the edge of pavement of each of the roadways shall be placed or maintained within the triangular area formed by the intersecting edges of pavement and a straight line connecting points on such pavement edges, each of which points is 25 feet distant from the point of intersection. Such objects include but are not limited to plantings, fences, walls or lamp posts, however utility poles and street signs may be permitted within the triangle provided they do not interfere with the visibility of a motorist. 
Section 5. SALE OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES 
A. No building or use of land for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be approved in the Town of Farmington unless the following requirements can be met: 
1. 	
For a retail liquor outlet, no portion of the lot may be within a 1,500-foot radius of any other lot on which a retail liquor outlet is located; 

2. 	
For the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises, no portion of the lot may be within a 1,500-foot radius of any other lot used for the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises; and 

3. 	
No building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected or altered which is intended, arranged or designed to be used for the retail sale of alcoholic beverages, or for sale and consumption on the premises, if any portion of the lot is situated: 


a. 	
Within 500 feet radius of any lot used or to be used for a college, school, church, hospital or library; or 

b. 	
In any zone, except B1 and BR. 

B. 
Waiver of any of the above requirements in this section may be granted by a vote of five-sixths of all the members of the Commission after a public hearing is held in accordance with Article IV. Section 12.C.2. of these regulations and provided the Commission finds that such waiver: 


1. 	
Will not cause undue concentration of liquor outlets in the area; 

2. 	
Will be in harmony with the general purpose of the Zoning Regulations as it concerns the area; 

3. 	
Will not cause the proximity of the proposed outlet to schools, churches, public playgrounds and residential zones or lots used exclusively for residential purposes to adversely affect the health and safety of persons in the area; and 

4. 	
Will not cause the location and size of the proposed outlet, the size of the site in relation thereto, and its location with respect to access streets to hinder the appropriate development and use of adjacent land and buildings, or cause traffic hazards. 


Section 6. LOADING SPACE 
On any lot which is hereafter developed for business, industrial, hotel or institutional use, there shall be provided adequate space suitably located on the lot for the loading and unloading of goods and material. In determining adequacy and suitability of location, the Zoning Enforcement Officer shall be governed by the nature of the use, the volume of vehicular and pedestrian movement which passes the premises and the location of the principal building in relation to the street. 
Section 7. SIGNS 
A. PURPOSE. The purpose of this section is to control the location, size, number, manner of lighting and architectural appearance of signs located on all buildings and premises within all zones in order to ensure public safety, property value protection and the protection of the residential, business, industrial or historic character of each zone. 
B. GENERAL. 
1. 	
In reviewing a proposed sign or existing signs proposed for modification or alteration, the Commission shall consider the extent to which such signs are compatible with the character of the neighborhood and other signs which may be located on the property or in the general vicinity thereof, the extent to which such signs shall preserve and enhance property values and the extent to which the design and location of such signs shall protect against traffic distractions and hazards. 

2. 	
No permanent sign shall be erected, relocated or altered, except for normal maintenance and where a sign face is altered using similar colors, materials and lettering type, without a Zoning Permit issued by the Zoning Enforcement Officer following Commission approval. 

3. 	
The total area of a sign shall consist of the smallest rectangle that will contain the entire sign, excluding supports. However, when a sign consists of individual letters or symbols affixed to a freestanding or building wall, the area of such sign shall be measured as the composite of the smallest rectangles, which would contain each separate line of letters or symbols. The height of a sign shall be measured from ground level to the top of the sign, or any part thereof, including supports and lights. 

4. 	
Applications for sign approval shall be made on forms provided by the Planning Department and shall be accompanied by such plans and information specified on such forms. 

5. 	
The Commission may approve the alteration or replacement of a nonconforming sign provided such alteration or new sign does not exceed any present nonconformities. 

6. 	
No lot shall contain more than two flagpoles unless otherwise approved by the Commission.  

7. 	
The total area of a double-sided sign shall be deemed the area of the largest face and not the combination of the two faces. Each face of a double-sided sign shall not extend beyond forty-five degrees to one another. 

8. 	
Non-Existing Businesses: Any sign which no longer advertises a bonafide business conducted, product sold or activity being conducted shall be taken down and removed by the owner, agent or person having the beneficial use of the building, structure or lot upon which such signs may be found within thirty (30) days of such cessation of the business. 


C. SIGNS WHICH ARE EXEMPT FROM THIS SECTION. The following types of signs shall be exempt: 
1. 	
Government flags.  However, there shall be no more than three flags on a property unless additional flags are approved for use and display by the Commission. Such flags may only be displayed on poles or posts affixed to the ground or otherwise approved by the Commission. 

2. 	
Signs required by law or regulation shall to the extent consistent with such law conform to this section. 

3. 	
Signs used for the control of traffic or the regulation of parking as approved by either the Commission or a government authority. 

4. 	
Signs located within the interior of a building with the exception of those signs which revolve, rotate, flash, move or give the appearance of movement and except those signs which are internally illuminated including but not limited to neon signs. 

5. 	
Signs required by the State or Federal government in conjunction with a publicly assisted or financed development project. 

6. 	
A non-illuminated sign advertising that a business is open, whether located inside or outside a structure and provided that such sign is limited to no more than twelve square feet in area. 


D. SIGNS PERMITTED IN RESIDENTIAL ZONES. 
1. 	
One sign not over two square feet in area generally limited to the name of the occupant and address of the premises. 

2. 	
The name of a farm and of the proprietors thereof may be attached to or painted on the wall of a farm building or on a detached pole provided: 


a. 	
The farm building or pole is at least 50 feet from any lot line; 

b. 	
The total area of the sign shall not exceed 20 square feet; and 

c. 	
If freestanding, the height of the sign shall not exceed 10 feet. 


3. 	
Bulletin boards on church or school property not exceeding 16 square feet in area and 8 feet in height. 

4. 	
The Commission may approve an attached or detached sign for a subdivision development, multiple family housing development or special permit use in a residential zone in accordance with the standards set forth in Sections 7.E. and 7.F. 


E. ATTACHED SIGNS PERMITTED IN PR, B1, BR, CR, C1, UC AND EE ZONES. 
1. 	
One attached sign per business establishment advertising the business or businesses conducted within the building. Where it is demonstrated by the applicant that more than one attached sign is required to adequately identify a business the Commission may approve additional signs on a particular building wall or on more than one building wall facing directly onto a street or driveway. 

2. 	
The total area of all attached signs shall not exceed one square foot for each linear foot of the front of the building. The front of the building shall be defined as the longest building wall which faces directly onto a street or driveway. For attached wall developments such as a shopping center, each business having direct access at grade shall be allowed a total area of attached signage not to exceed one square foot in area for each linear foot of building wall that the business occupies. 

3. 	
Attached signs shall not project more than 36 inches from the wall or surface to which they are attached, and not be painted directly on the surface of any building. 

4. 	
Any property containing more than two businesses shall submit a unified sign design for the Commission’s approval. 


F. 	DETACHED SIGNS PERMITTED IN PR, BR, CR, B1, UC AND C1 ZONES. 
1. 	General Requirements. 
a. 	
Detached signs may be approved for use in the PR, BR and CR, B1 and C1 Zones in conjunction with or subsequent to special permit approval of a development plan. 

b. 	
Height and area requirements of such signs shall be in accordance with the following: 


1) 	if located within the first two-thirds of the required front yard and less than 6 feet in height such sign shall not exceed 25 square feet; 
2) 	if located within the first two-thirds of the required front yard and from 6 feet to 10 feet in height such sign shall not exceed 12 square feet; and 
3) 	if located beyond the first two-thirds of the required front yard signs shall not exceed 10 feet in height and shall not exceed 50 square feet. 
c. 	
Where a sign is proposed to be located in a side yard the criteria of 1) and 2) shall apply. 

d. 	
In no case shall any sign exceed 10 feet in height. 

e. 	
Any detached sign shall be placed within a landscaped area. The extent and type of landscaping and the location of the sign shall be shown on the plan submitted to the Commission for approval. 

f. 	
Unless otherwise approved by the Commission, all detached signs shall be located no closer than fifteen feet to the edge of the roadway.  


2. 	
A shopping center and/or park-like development shall be allowed a sign bearing the name of such center or park at its main entrance. 

3. 	
The Commission shall determine the maximum number of detached signs permitted for each individual lot. 


G. TEMPORARY SIGNS -ALL ZONES. The following temporary signs are permitted in all zones and shall require a permit from the Zoning Enforcement Officer. 
1. 	
Signs advertising a public or semipublic charitable, social, educational or fundraising event provided the sign may not be erected more than 14 days prior to the event and must be removed no later than two days after the event.  Such signs shall be non-illuminated, not to exceed 50 square feet in area, and shall not be located in such a manner as to interfere with the safe movement of vehicles or pedestrians.  It is prohibited to install temporary signage of any kind at the following intersections:  the traffic island located on the south side of the intersection of Main Street and Farmington Avenue (Farmington); the traffic island located on the south side of the intersection of Farmington Avenue and South Main Street (Unionville); the traffic island located at the corner of Colton Street and Main Street (Farmington); the traffic island located at the intersection of High Street and Mountain Road (Farmington); the traffic island located at the intersection of Coppermine Road and West District Road (Farmington); the traffic island located at the intersection of Coppermine Road and Red Oak Hill Road (Farmington); the traffic island located at the intersection of Church Street and Main Street (Farmington); the traffic island located at the intersection of Garden Street and Porter Road (Farmington) as well as within 50 feet of the Welcome to Farmington sign located at the I-84 exit ramp and Farmington Avenue (Exit 39 Farmington).  Town staff shall have the option of removing any and all such temporary signs that are in violation of this provision after endeavoring to notify the sponsor of a permissible event.  Such signs shall be brought to and stored at the Town Hall. If unclaimed, these signs will be discarded after 10 days. 

2. 	
One non-illuminated sign advertising the sale or lease of a real estate development (new construction or substantial reconstruction), including but not limited to, a subdivision, office building(s), retail store(s), industrial building(s) or vacant commercially or industrially zoned land, provided: 


a. 	
The sign shall not exceed 32 square feet in area; 

b. 	
Shall be located at least 15 feet from the edge of the roadway and on the subject premises; and 

c. 	
A permit shall be issued for a six-month period only and may be renewed for additional six-month periods. 

d. 	
The sign may be displayed for a period not to exceed two years from the completion of such unless otherwise approved by the Commission. 


3. 	One non-illuminated “For Sale”, “For Rent” or “For Lease” sign advertising an existing individual single or multiple family dwelling unit, individual building lot or portion of an existing real estate development including existing office building(s), retail store(s), industrial building(s) or vacant commercially or industrially zoned land, provided: 
a. 	
The sign shall not exceed 6 square feet in area, however, in the case of a commercial or industrial building(s) exceeding 10,000 square feet in area and where the building vacancy exceeds 50%, the area of the sign may be increased to a maximum of 32 square feet by the Zoning Enforcement Officer. 

b. 	
Shall be located at least 15 feet from the edge of the roadway and on the subject premises; and 

c. 	
The sign shall be in place for a maximum six-month period and said period may be extended by the Zoning Enforcement Officer. 


4. 	
Non-illuminated building contractors’ sign located on buildings under construction or 15 feet off the edge of roadway not to exceed 12 square feet. The size of such sign may be increased to as much as 32 square feet with the approval of the Zoning Enforcement Officer in the case where such work involves an area exceeding 10,000 square feet or the construction or renovation of at least four dwelling units. Such sign(s) shall be removed immediately after work has been completed by such contractor.  

5. 	
Non-illuminated signs announcing the opening of a new or relocated business within the Town of Farmington, one per business. Not more than one sign shall be displayed at any given time for each premise unless otherwise approved by the Commission. Such signs shall not exceed 12 square feet in area and shall be attached to a post affixed to the ground, which is no more than six feet in height. All portions of the sign including post shall be set back at least five feet from the edge of a roadway, however, no sign shall be placed in a location which interferes with a driver’s sight line or which obstructs any public sidewalk. All signs shall be uniform in appearance as approved by the Commission and distributed by the Zoning Enforcement Officer, no additions or alterations to the sign are permitted. These signs may be displayed, following the receipt of a permit from the Zoning Enforcement Officer, for a period not to exceed 60 days from the date of the permit. Each sign must be located directly in front of the new or relocated business except in the case where the main entrance to such business does not face directly onto a public street or in the case where a business is located on a dead end 


street. In such aforementioned exceptions the sign may be located along the closest public through street. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to home occupations or to a location for any business, which has been in operation at such location for more than six months. 
H. OFFSITE TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNS shall require approval by the Farmington Traffic Authority. 
I. 	ILLUMINATION. 
1. 	Permanent signs, unless otherwise prohibited by other sections of this regulation, may be illuminated externally as approved by the Commission. Exterior lighting shall be confined or directed to the surface of the sign so that no direct rays or glare are visible beyond the sign face.  No such lighting shall create a danger to vehicular traffic nor a nuisance to residential properties. If external illumination is allowed the Commission may require a dimming devise to be installed if the lighting proves to be intense and/or may require the exterior illumination to go dark after 10:00 p.m. 
J. DIRECTIONAL SIGNS. 
1. 	The Commission may approve the installation of directional signs for office parks, industrial parks, shopping centers, churches, institutional uses and municipal uses. Such signs shall not exceed two square feet in area, contain black lettering on a white background and shall be mounted on poles not to exceed seven feet in height. 
a. 	
The Commission may approve the installation of one or more temporary directional signs for new or renovated developments such as listed in paragraph 1 above.  Such signs shall not exceed two square feet in area, contain black lettering on a white background and shall be installed or mounted so not to exceed seven feet in height. The Commission shall specify the duration such signs may be posted. 

b. 	
When two or more of such directional signs are at the same intersection or area, such signs shall be attached to the same post. 

K. 
PROHIBITED SIGNS. The following signs are prohibited: 


1. 	
Portable or wheeled signs except those advertising public or semi-public events, or signs on parked vehicles where the sign is the primary use of the vehicle; 

2. 	
Signs emitting artificial light directly or through transparent or translucent materials from a source of light in the interior of the sign, except as allowed in Paragraph I.2.; 

3. 	
Signs which revolve, rotate, flash or move in any manner, or give the appearance of movement; 

4. 	
Advertising flags, banners or streamers; 

5. 	
Signs which extend above the highest point of a roof. Roof-mounted signs may only be 

approved upon a finding by the Commission that the display of a sign on other portions of a building would not produce adequate visibility due to on site or off site topographic conditions, orientation of the building with respect to an adjacent street or highway or the location of neighboring buildings or structures on or off site which would tend to produce an obstructed view; 

6. 	
Signs which are internally illuminated including but not limited to neon signs, halo lit signs and including signs located inside building windows or which may be viewed through a window from a road, driveway or sidewalk; 

7. 	
Billboards; 

8. 	
Signs which are directly painted onto any portion of a building or structure; 

9. 	
Signs affixed to the roof of any canopy structure located at a gasoline filling station. 

10. 
Signs with LED or LCD letters or symbols.  


L. Heights, Size and Locational Exceptions. Where there is ample demonstration that the height, size or locational requirements of this section are inappropriate due to topography, location of a building on a lot or on an abutting lot or to other physical features affecting the parcel or building, the Commission may permit an increase of 50 percent in the size and height limitations specified in this section and may permit a location closer to the front property line than specified in Paragraph F. Such exceptions may be permitted only upon a five-sixths vote of the full Commission. 
Section 8. OFF STREET PARKING STANDARDS 
A. GENERAL PROVISIONS 
1. 	
On all premises off street parking facilities shall be provided for all uses except where the alteration, enlargement or change of an existing use would require no increase in the amount of parking spaces required under Paragraph B. of this section. 

2. 	
In the PR, BR and CR Zones no parking or loading area (including parking stalls and aisle way) shall be permitted within fifty (50) feet of any residential zone boundary. The Commission may require parking at distances greater than fifty (50) feet as circumstances reasonably justify. 

3. 	
All parking lots shall be hard surfaced except as approved by the Commission for parking areas, which are to be developed for a seasonal use, where such parking is in excess of the amount required by this regulation or when determined by the Commission that the use of pervious material would enhance or protect the natural environment. 

4. 	
In all business and industrial zones no parking or loading area (including parking stalls and aisle way) shall be allowed neither in the required front yard nor within fifteen (15) feet of any other property line. 


No such parking or loading area shall be permitted within the required front yard for special permit uses in residential zones. In addition, parking and loading areas for special permit uses in residential zones, with the exception of two, three and four family dwellings, shall not be permitted within twenty (20) feet of all other property lines. 
See also Section 13 (Landscape Regulations). 
5. 	
Any lighting used to illuminate any off-street parking shall be so arranged as to direct the light away from any adjoining property and streets. See also Section 14. 

6. 	
Each off-street parking space shall measure nine feet in width by twenty feet in length (9’ x 20’). 


Aisles between parking spaces for one-way travel shall be a minimum of: 
a. 
Twelve (12) feet for parallel parking, thirty (30) and forty-five (45) degree angle parking. 

b. 
Eighteen (18) feet for sixty (60) degree angle parking. 

c. 
Twenty-three (23) feet for ninety (90) degree angle parking. 


Aisles between parking spaces for two-way travel shall be a minimum of: 
a.  
Twenty (20) feet for two, three and four family dwellings. 

b. 
Twenty-three (23) feet for all other uses. 


The driveway width for one-way travel shall be a minimum of twelve (12) feet. 
The driveway width for two-way travel shall be a minimum of twelve (12) feet for two, three and four family dwellings and twenty-three (23) feet for all other uses not including single-family dwellings. The width of a driveway, that portion which is located within the required front yard or side yard along a street and serving one single family home shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet and a maximum of twenty-four (24) feet. The actual width shall be determined by the Town Engineer taking into consideration the designation of the intersecting street and the relative location of any garage in conjunction with such driveway to the street line. 
7. 	
Where a property includes two (2) or more uses, including those within a shopping center, the parking requirements shall be the composite of the requirement for each use. 

8. 	
The Commission may waive the immediate installation of up to twenty-five (25) percent of the parking requirement for any proposed land use if the applicant can sufficiently demonstrate to the Commission that if a waiver is granted, there will still be an adequate number of spaces for the proposed use. 


The applicant shall indicate on the parking plan where the spaces will be located should they become needed. In addition, the applicant shall place a note on the plan agreeing to construct the spaces which had been waived within six months after the date of any request by the Commission to do so. For purposes of calculating lot coverage, the area which is designated for possible future parking shall be considered paved. 
Criteria which the Commission shall be guided by in the granting of such a waiver are: 
a. 
The promotion of a ridesharing or vanpooling program by the applicant (for office uses only); 

b. 
A study submitted by the applicant which indicates parking will be adequate if the waiver is granted; 

c. 
The shared use of parking facilities (does not apply to retail stores); and 

d. 
The provision of a larger than required buffer yard. 


9. 	
Up to twenty-five (25) percent of parking spaces may be designated for compact car parking. The layout of these spaces shall discourage their use by mid and full size cars. Each space shall be a minimum of eight feet in width and sixteen feet in length (8’ x 16’). Aisle width shall be as specified in Section 8.A.6. above. The location of these spaces shall be approved by the Commission. Generally, the compact spaces shall be clustered in the same area. The purpose of this section is to encourage a design which will reduce the amount of impervious surfaces and provide additional landscaped area. 

10. 
A proposed driveway providing access from a street to nine (9) or more parking spaces shall have a maximum grade of six percent (6%) for the first forty (40) feet in from the paved portion of the road. 


A proposed driveway providing access from a street to eight (8) or less parking spaces shall have a maximum grade of eight percent (8%) for the first twenty (20) feet in from the paved portion of the road. 
The maximum grade for all driveways and aisles shall not exceed twelve percent (12%) except in the case of single-family homes where such grade may not exceed fourteen percent (14%). The transition to these maximum grades shall be gradual. 
The maximum grade along the cross slope of a driveway or aisle shall be five percent (5%). 
The maximum grade along the width of a parking space shall not exceed six and one-half percent (6-1/2%). 
11. 
Each parking space shall have free access to a driveway except in the case of single-family homes and where permitted by the Commission in an RDM Zone, AH Zone, S-A Zone, or any cluster development. 

12. 
One-way or two-way driveways which serve eight (8) or fewer parking spaces shall not 


be located less than fifty (50) feet from a street intersection as measured from the centerline of such driveway to the extension of intersecting curbs. 
One-way or two-way driveways which serve more than eight (8) parking spaces shall not be located less than one hundred (100) feet from a street intersection as measured from the centerline of such driveway to the extension of intersecting curbs. 
13. 
Parking spaces may be located in subsurface or elevated garages provided that no parking spaces so located shall be counted toward meeting any of the minimum parking requirements of these regulations except in accordance with the following sentence. Where it is necessary to meet the minimum requirement of these regulations through subsurface or elevated parking structures, then the floor area of each level or part thereof used to meet such minimum requirement shall be considered as impervious surface in determining lot coverage. 

14. 
The Commission may, by way of a special permit in accordance with Article IV, Section 12 of these Regulations, permit the reduction of the length of parking spaces to not less than 18 feet provided such spaces are adjacent to an aisle of not less than 24 feet in width where the stalls are aligned perpendicular to the aisle, or to an aisle of a width approved by the Commission where the stalls are aligned to provide for angled parking. 


B. SCHEDULE OF OFF STREET PARKING STANDARDS 
1. 	
SINGLE FAMILY DETACHED HOME in all zones: Two (2) spaces per home. 

2. 	
TWO THROUGH FOUR UNIT HOME: Two (2) spaces per unit. 

3. 	
DWELLING UNITS IN THE RDM ZONE: Two and three-tenths (2.3) spaces per unit. 

4. 	
HOTEL, MOTEL, ROOMING, LODGING, BOARDING HOUSE, BED AND BREAKFAST: One (1) space for each room for rent to transient guests plus two (2) additional spaces for each permanently occupied living unit, plus one (1) space per employee on the largest shift. 

5. 	
MEDICAL OFFICE including CLINIC: One (1) space for each 150 square feet of gross usable floor area or six (6) spaces for each full-time doctor or dentist, whichever is greater. For the purposes of these regulations, several part-time doctors or dentists shall be considered as one or more full-time doctor(s) or dentist(s) when their cumulative office hours equal a 40-hour (or more) workweek. 

6. 	
BUSINESS OFFICE, non-medical use: One (1) space for each 225 square feet of gross usable floor area. Gross usable floor area should be assumed as eighty percent (80%) of total floor area for office buildings where no floor plan exists at the time of application. 

7. 	
PRIVATE HOSPITAL: One and one-half (1.5) space for each bed. 

8. 	
NURSING, SANITARIUM, CONVALESCENT HOME: One (1) space for every three 


(3) beds. 
9. 	
FUNERAL HOME: Forty (40) spaces, plus twenty (20) for each parlor or chapel in excess of one. 

10. 
RETAIL AND PERSONAL SERVICE SHOP and BANK carried on independent of a shopping center: One (1) space for each 150 square feet of sale and customer area plus one (1) space for each 225 square feet of gross usable floor area of office space. Retail uses in a shopping center shall require five and one-half (5.5) spaces for 1,000 square feet of gross usable floor area. 

11. 
RESTAURANT, FAST FOOD, DAIRY BAR, GRILL, COFFEE SHOP: One (1) space for each 50 square feet of seating and customer area or one (1) space for every two (2) seats, whichever is greater, plus one (1) space per employee on the largest shift. Parking spaces must be provided at the above rate for all outdoor seating (seasonal and non­seasonal). 

12. 
RESTAURANT, LOW TURNOVER: One (1) space for each 100 square feet of seating and customer area, or one (1) space for every two (2) seats, whichever is greater, plus one 


(1) space per employee on the largest shift. Parking spaces must be provided at the above rate for all outdoor seating (seasonal and non-seasonal). Where a low turnover restaurant contains additional facilities or amenities such as a dance floor, lounge, freestanding bar or banquet or conference room without fixed seating the Commission may require the provision of additional parking based upon a rate equal to or less than one (1) space per 30 square feet for each facility. 
13. 
INDUSTRIAL (including MANUFACTURING), WAREHOUSE, PUBLIC UTILITY: One (1) space per employee on the largest shift. 

14. 
PLACE OF ASSEMBLY: (including church, theater, auditorium): One (1) space per every three (3) seats, provided that the Commission may by way of special permit in accordance with Article IV, Section 12 of these Regulations approve a parking plan that provides not less than one onsite parking (1) space per every four (4) seats. If requested by the Commission, the applicant for such a special permit shall submit a parking study demonstrating that the combination of onsite and other available offsite parking is not less than one (1) space for every three (3) seats. 

15. 
Where a use is not specifically listed, the Commission shall determine the required number of spaces. 

16. 
BILLIARD PARLOR: Two (2) spaces for each billiard table in the facility plus one (1) for each employee. 

17. 
When multiple uses are present on the premises, such as in a shopping center, the Commission may consider overlapping use of parking spaces based upon the various hours of operation and peak usage for each use. 

18. 
Pediatric	 or Youth Behavioral Health Center: One (1) space shall be provided per employee on the largest shift.  Where door-to-door transportation or valet drop-off/pick­


up is provided for children entering and exiting the center, no additional off-street parking is required.  Where no such service is proposed, the Commission shall require the applicant submit a parking study demonstrating the adequacy of the proposed on-site parking plan and may determine the adequate number of spaces. 
Section 8.A. OFF STREET BICYCLE PARKING STANDARDS 
A. 	DEFINITION. For the purpose of applying the provisions of this section the term below shall be defined as follows: 
BICYCLE PARKING FACILITY – Devices which support and secure a parked bicycle. Known as rack elements, they may be assembled together to form a complete rack and with proper spacing between racks, a bicycle parking lot. 
B. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS. 
1. 	The Commission may require the provision of bicycle parking facilities in conjunction with all new construction; special permits for changes in use; and in cases where the number of existing parking spaces is increased by ten percent or more for the following: 
a. 
All non-residential uses unless it is determined that such a facility will be unmanned during daylight hours and will not be serving customers onsite. 

b. 
All residential complexes which contain one or more community facilities such as a clubhouse, meeting room or common recreation area. 


In deciding whether to require such facilities the Commission may consider any resulting loss of parking spaces, negative effects on handicap or pedestrian access as well as any negative impact on the overall design of the site. 
2. 	
Bicycle parking facilities should be provided at a minimum having parking for two bikes, with one bicycle parking space provided for every twenty vehicle onsite parking spaces unless otherwise determined by the Commission. 

3. 	
Bicycle racks should be arranged so that parking for each bicycle is a minimum of two feet wide and six feet long.  Lines of racks should be arranged such that aisle widths of at least four feet are provided between rows of bikes.  A minimum of thirty-six inches should be provided between rack elements (side to side). Where a bicycle rack allows bicycles to be locked on both sides of the rack without conflict, each side may be counted as one required space. 

4. 	
Bicycle racks should be securely fixed to the ground surface and resist being cut or detached using common hand tools.  

5. 	
Bicycle racks should be located at least three feet from any wall or obstruction.  They should be located within view and convenient to the main building entrance.  In the case of a multiple   building complex (non-residential), bicycle racks should be located for each building.  In residential complexes, bicycle racks should be provided in a location convenient for each community facility.  Bicycle racks shall not interfere with pedestrian circulation and should be safely separated from vehicle parking and driveways.     

6. 	
Bicycle parking facilities may be moved or removed by the owner of any premises between November and April with the consent of the Town Plan and Zoning Commission if, in the owner’s opinion, it is necessary to facilitate the removal and/or storage of snow. 

7. 	
Bicycle parking facilities may be temporarily moved or removed by the owner of any premises if, in the owner’s opinion, it is necessary to facilitate paving or other construction in the vicinity of any such bicycle parking facilities.  Any such temporary moving or removing of a bicycle parking facility pursuant to this provision shall be done with the consent of the Town Plan and Zoning Commission. 


Section 9. 	STORAGE CONTAINERS, DUMPSTERS, TRAILERS, MOBILE HOMES AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLES 
A. STORAGE CONTAINERS AND DUMPSTERS 
1. 	
One storage container or dumpster may be placed on a parcel of land occupied or to be occupied by a one, two, three or four family home provided it is located in accordance with Article IV. Section 2.A. of these regulations. However, a dumpster used in connection with a construction activity may be located within the front yard for a period of time not to exceed 60 days. 

2. 	
Storage containers or dumpster located on parcels occupied by any other use, permanent or temporary, must be approved by the Commission. However a storage container or dumpster used in connection with an approved construction activity may be approved by the Zoning Enforcement Officer. Permanent dumpsters shall be screened in a manner as specified and approved by the Commission. 


B. TRAILERS 
1. 	A total of one open or enclosed utility or recreational trailers, neither to exceed 20 feet in length, may be placed on a parcel of land occupied by a one, two, three or four family home.  If the parcel exceeds 15,000 square feet the trailer size may be increased not to exceed 24 feet in length, parcels exceeding 20,000 square feet may have a total of two open or enclosed utility or recreational trailers not to exceed 27 feet in length.  Trailers shall be located behind the longest rear wall of the principal building or in the rear half of the lot and at least 10 feet from side and rear lot lines.  In the case of a through lot, in the rear yard as measured from the longest rear wall of the principal building, but not beyond the middle third of such lot as measured from the street the principle use is closest to. In the case of a corner lot, to the rear of the home as measured from the longest rear wall with respect to both streets or in the rear half of a lot as measured from both streets. Where a lot is bounded by three or more streets the trailer must be stored to the rear of the home as measured from the longest rear wall with respect to two streets or in the rear half of a lot as measured from two streets.  Open or enclosed utility or recreational trailers located on parcels occupied by any other use, permanent or temporary, shall be approved by the Commission. 
The length of a trailer shall be determined by the longest measurement from the first vertical member of the trailer body (not to include the trailer hitch or front frame) to the rear most body member.  The measurement shall include all overhangs/cantilevered portions of the trailer.  Any appendages permanently affixed to the hitch or front frame shall be included in the overall measurement of the trailer. In the event of a fifth wheel type trailer the forward most portion or first vertical member to the rear most body member shall determine the trailer length.  Flat trailer length shall be determined by the length of the frame/body excluding the hitch and or portion of the frame that makes up the hitch. 
11. 	
A utility or recreational trailer shall not be occupied for living and/or used for any other use, permanent or temporary, on a parcel of land occupied by a one, two, three or four family home without a special permit issued by the Planning and Zoning Commission and shall be limited in use and duration as deemed appropriate by the Commission. Except that the owner of land a recreational trailer is situated upon may permit its occupancy for living purposes by a guest for a period not exceeding two weeks.  The location for such trailer(s) shall conform to paragraph 1. 

12. 	
A utility or recreational trailer may be placed (occupied or unoccupied) on a vacant parcel of land zoned residential for more than a two-week period only after receipt of a special permit.  The trailer or recreational vehicle must have the ability to contain all waste materials for disposal at an approved location and shall not create a hazard to this property or neighboring properties.  See Article IV. Section 12. for application procedures, hearing and notice requirements and site plan information.  The location for such trailer(s) shall conform to paragraph 1. 

13. 	
Construction trailers used as a business office, sales office, or for storage purposes in connection with an approved construction activity may be permitted by the Zoning Enforcement Officer provided they are located in such a manner as to minimize their visibility and/or impact on neighboring properties, private or public.  Construction trailers shall be removed from a site no later than 30 days from the time the construction activity is completed. 

14. 	
All trailers on a parcel of land occupied by a one, two, three or four family home must be owned and registered to the occupant of said property with the State of Connecticut Department of Motor Vehicles, taxes paid to the Town of Farmington and must be 

operational and fit for its intended use. 

15. 	
Exceptions: The Commission may issue a special permit for exceptions to one or more of the conditions governing the storage of trailers that cannot be located or stored in compliance with the above standards and/or exceed the size or quantity limitations, subject to the following: 


a. 	
The Commission may require screening and /or landscaping to soften the effect and/or impact of the storage of trailers on neighboring properties. 

b. 	
The special permit shall be issued to the applicant and specific vehicle and is nontransferable to a new property owner or for a different trailer. 

c. 	
The Commission may impose additional conditions as deemed necessary to minimize the impact to the property and/or neighboring properties. 


See Article IV. Section 12 for application procedures, hearing and notice requirements, and site plan information. 
C. MOBILE HOME AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLES 
1. 	
For the purpose of this regulation a mobile home and/or a recreational vehicle including boats and aircraft shall be treated the same as a trailer and shall be stored in conformance with Article IV. Section 9.B. A mobile home and/or recreational vehicle will be considered as one unit (trailer) and subject to the same limitations on the number of trailers (units) per lot.  Mobile homes and recreational vehicles located on parcels occupied by any use other than a one to four family home, permanent or temporary, shall be approved by the Commission.  Mobile Homes and Recreational Vehicles including Boats and Aircraft shall be measured from the forward most portion of the vehicle to the rear most portion of the vehicle not to include a trailer hitch or portion of the frame that make up the hitch.  A combination of a recreational vehicle and a trailer shall be measured from the forward most vertical member to the rear most member. A recreational vehicle overhanging the front or rear of a trailer shall cause the over hang to be added to the overall length of the trailer. 

2. 	
Mobile homes or recreational vehicles (including boats or aircraft) may be placed on a parcel of land occupied by a one, two, three or four family home provided they are owned and registered to the occupant of said property with the State of Connecticut Department of Motor Vehicles, taxes paid to the Town of Farmington, and must be operational and fit for its intended use. 

3. 	
A mobile home and/or recreational vehicle shall not be occupied for living and/or used for business on a parcel of land occupied by a one, two, three or four family home without a special permit issued by the Town Plan and Zoning Commission and shall be limited in use and duration as deemed by the Commission.  Except that the owner of land a recreational vehicle or mobile home is situated upon may permit its occupancy for living purposes by a guest for a period not exceeding two weeks.  The location of such mobile home or vehicle shall conform with paragraph B.1. 

4. 	
A mobile home or recreational vehicle may be placed (occupied or unoccupied) on a 

vacant parcel of land zoned residential for more that a two-week period only after receipt of a special permit.  The mobile home and/or recreational vehicle must have the ability to contain all waste materials for disposal at an approved location and shall not create a hazard to this property or neighboring properties.  See Article IV. Section 12. for application procedures, hearing and notice requirements and site plan information.  The location of such mobile home or vehicle shall conform with paragraph B.1. 

5. 	
Exceptions: The Commission may issue a special permit for exceptions to one or more of the conditions governing the storage of mobile homes and/or recreational vehicles that cannot be located or stored in compliance with the above standards and/or exceed the size or quantity limitations subject to the following: 


a. 	
The Commission may require screening and/or landscaping to soften the effect and/or impact of the mobile home and/or recreational vehicle on neighboring properties. 

b. 	
The special permit shall be issued to the applicant and specific vehicle and is nontransferable to a new property owner or for a different vehicle. 

c. 	
The Commission may impose additional conditions as deemed necessary to minimize the impact to the property and/or neighboring properties. 


See Article IV. Section 12 for application procedures, hearing and notice 
Requirements, and site plan information. 

Section 10. HORSES AND STABLES 
Parcels of 80,000 square feet in all zones not meeting the definition of farm as found in Article I. Section 9. are permitted one horse or pony and stable. Each animal above the minimum requires an additional 80,000 square feet. 
Stables shall not be located within any required yard as defined in these regulations and shall be at least 100 feet from any water supply, and the manure and refuse shall be disposed of according to the State of Connecticut Public Health Code. 
Section 11. EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN 
No person shall undertake any grading, stripping, excavating or filling of land, where the cumulative disturbed area exceeds one-half acre, before submitting and receiving approval of an erosion and sediment control plan. The plan must be certified prior to commencing any of the above activities.  Certification shall mean a signed written approval by a designee of the Commission or the Zoning Enforcement Officer. Plans shall be submitted to the Commission for approval when such activity is proposed in conjunction with an application for a special permit, subdivision or site plan approval or regulated activity within an inland wetlands or watercourse. In all other cases such erosion and sediment plan shall be submitted to and approved by the Zoning Enforcement Officer. 
Grading, stripping, excavating or filling activities which do not require the submission and approval of an erosion and sediment plan must nonetheless be conducted in strict accordance with the following performance standards: 
1. 	
No activity shall interfere with any drainage way or watercourse. 

2. 	
No activity shall result in the deposition of debris or sediment off site or into any drainage way, watercourse or inland wetland. 

3. 	
No activity shall result in permanent instability of the terrain or for an extended period of time. 


In order to be eligible for certification, a soil erosion and sedimentation control plan shall contain provisions to adequately control erosion and sedimentation using best management practices. Such practices shall be consistent with the Connecticut 2002 Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control. 
Each erosion and sedimentation control plan shall be prepared by a registered professional engineer and shall contain a narrative description and site plan with a minimum of the following information: 
1. 	
The type and purpose of the development or construction. 

2. 	
The schedule for grading and construction activities including: Estimated start and completion dates, which address seasonal concerns; Sequence of grading and construction activities; Sequence of installation and /or application of soil erosion and sediment control measures; Sequence for any temporary removal and re-installation of the soil and sediment control measures; Sequence for final stabilization of the site. 

3. 	
The design criteria for proposed soil erosion and sediment control measures and storm water management facilities. 

4. 	
The construction details for proposed soil erosion and sediment control measures and storm water management facilities. 

5. 	
The operations and maintenance program for proposed soil erosion and sediment control measures and storm water management facilities. 

6. 	
A plan drawn at a scale between 1”=10’ and 1”=50” showing the following: The boundaries of the property; The existing and proposed topography using one or two foot contours; The location of any area of wetlands and watercourses; The location of soil types and K factor; The proposed area to be altered including grading, clearing, excavation, filling, construction of structures, roads, drainage facilities and other utilities; The location of and design details for all proposed soil erosion and sediment control measures and storm water management facilities; Phase lines (if necessary) showing the sequence of grading and construction activities. The names of person(s) to be responsible for the installation and maintenance of 


all control measures with an emergency phone number. 
The soil erosion and sediment control plan shall contain any other information deemed necessary and appropriate by the applicant or by the Commission or its designated agent. 
Any plan submitted may be referred to the North Central Conservation District Inc. for review and comment. 
The Commission may require the posting of a bond to ensure compliance with the certified plan. The estimated costs of measures required to control soil erosion and sedimentation, as specified in the certified plan shall be supplied by the applicant subject to the review and approval of the Town Engineer. 
It is the developer’s/builder’s responsibility to correct erosion and sedimentation problems that occur during construction and take appropriate measures to address such problems.  In the event that the erosion and sediment control measures as shown on the certified plan are not functioning properly to prevent erosion and sedimentation either through inadequate design, lack of maintenance, emergency conditions or unforeseen field conditions, the Zoning Enforcement Officer shall direct the developer/builder to have the project engineer revise the plan to correct and/or eliminate any deficiencies in the plan, and to install and maintain new erosion control measures. 
The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall have the authority to order and/or approve changes to the certified plan in the event of unforeseen field conditions, which require immediate remedial measures to improve the effectiveness of the plan.  Changes proposed by the developer/builder to the plan shall be reviewed and approved by the Zoning Enforcement Officer at his sole discretion. 
In the event that the developer/builder fails to perform the work within the time limits specified in the certified plan or fails to install and maintain the controls specified in the certified plan or properly control the release of sediment offsite or into any wetland or watercourse, the Zoning Enforcement Officer shall advise the developer/builder in writing of this fact and direct that any necessary work be completed within a specified time.  If the developer/builder does not comply with the directions of the Zoning Enforcement Officer, the Commission may arrange for said work to be done by the Town, or by a private contractor hired by the Town.  The cost of this work shall be paid for with bond funds that were deposited by the developer and held by the Town.  The Town may also utilize such funds to reimburse the costs incurred by the Town for action taken in the case of an emergency where there is an immediate threat to the public health and safety as a result of the failure of erosion and sedimentation control measures.  Should the developer’s bond funds be insufficient to cover the cost of work performed by the Town or a private contractor employed by the Town, the developer/builder shall still be obligated to reimburse the Town for the expenses.  In such cases the Town may withhold the issuance of a final or partial Certificate of Occupancy until such time the Town is reimbursed for its costs. 
The Commission or its designated agent may require the developer/builder to submit progress reports and inspection forms by the project engineer to verify that the soil erosion and sediment control measures have been installed properly and that they are being operated and maintained in accordance with the certified plan. 
Prior to the commencement of construction, the developer/builder shall enter into a signed agreement with the Town which acknowledges the applicant’s responsibility to install and maintain the erosion and sediment control measures, install additional controls if deemed necessary and comply with all conditions of approval of the certified plan subject to enforcement action taken by the Town including the imposition of a fine.  This agreement shall also include the name of the person responsible for the installation and maintenance of such controls and the name of the person responsible for the design of the approved plan and any modifications, which may be needed.  The document shall also indicate permission for the Town or its agents, employees or contractors to enter the property to make inspections, emergency repairs, corrections or installations. 
Section 12. SPECIAL PERMITS, SITE PLANS, INTENT AND APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS 
A. INTENT 
These Zoning Regulations are based upon the division of the Town into districts, within each of which the use of land and structures and the size and location of structures in relation to the land are substantially uniform. However, it is recognized that there are certain other uses and features that would be appropriate in such districts if controlled as to number, area, location or relation to the neighborhood so as to promote the public health, safety and welfare. Change of zone and special permit uses shall be subject to the satisfaction of the requirements and standards set forth herein. Zone changes and special permit uses are declared to possess such particular characteristics that each shall be considered as an individual case. 
B. STANDARDS FOR GRANTING OF A CHANGE OF ZONE OR SPECIAL PERMIT 
In considering applications the Commission shall require compliance with the following: 
1. 	
That the existing and future character of the neighborhood in which the zone and/or use is to be located will be protected; 

2. 	
That adequate safeguards have been taken to protect adjacent property and the neighborhood in general from detriment; 

3. 	
That traffic circulation within the site and the amount, location and access to parking is adequate, and adequate sight distance is provided for all proposed and existing driveways; 

4. 	
That the road network, to include intersections, impacted by the proposed development will be capable of satisfactorily handling the increase traffic generated by such use; 

5. 	
That the i) basic design of the proposed use(s) or buildings; ii) relationship between the buildings and the land; and iii) overall physical appearance of the proposed use(s) or buildings will be in general harmony with the character of the surrounding neighborhood and will not serve to blight or detract from abutting residences or other property; 

6. 	
That in the case where an application proposes increased building density over that permitted under the existing zone, the topography and other natural features of the property are capable of accommodating such increased development without detrimental impact; and that adequate safeguards have been taken to protect the natural environment; 

7. 	
That all required public services will be reasonably available to serve the proposed development. 


The Commission may attach conditions to an approval of a special permit or site plan in conjunction with a special permit or zone change to ensure compliance with the above standards. 
C. PROCEDURES 
1. Every application for change of zone and special permit shall require a public hearing. Notice of the public hearing by certified mail shall be mailed by the applicant no later than ten (10) days before such hearing to all owners of property, as recorded in the office of the Town Assessor on the date the application is filed, located within 200 feet of the property which is the subject of the application. In the case where any property within 200 feet of the property which is the subject of the application has been submitted to common interest ownership, such as a condominium, the required notice need only be sent to the homeowners’ association and to those owners of buildings or dwelling units located within such 200 feet. In addition to the above, if the project entails the demolition or partial demolition (>50%) of an existing structure in excess of seventy five 
(75) years old the applicant shall provide notice by certified mail, no later than ten (10) days before such hearing, to the Farmington Historical Society, the Town Historian, the President of the Unionville Museum and the Chairman of the Farmington and Unionville Historic District Commissions. Evidence of such mailing shall be presented to the Planning Department at or before the public hearing. In addition, the applicant shall post a notification sign provided by the Planning Department on the property at least seven (7) days prior to the date of the public hearing. 
2. 	
All applications for a zone change or special permit shall be accompanied by an application for site plan approval unless otherwise waived by the Commission. In addition, an application for site plan approval shall be submitted to the Commission for the development of any varied use and for any site or building modifications to any existing special permit use. Applications for site plan approval shall be accompanied by 8 sets of plans, 24” x 36” in size, at a scale of no less than 1” = 100’, and contain all information as listed on the Application Checklist which is included as part of these regulations as Appendix B. The Commission may waive any and all of the information required on a site plan provided enough information is submitted to the Commission to sufficiently determine compliance with these regulations. 

3. 	
From time to time requests are received for revisions of or additions to approved site plans and/or special permits, zone changes or stated uses. Such revisions or additions may have minor or major consequences. Such requests will be first screened by the Zoning Enforcement Officer and if he determines such a request to be of minor 

consequence, he will conditionally approve the request and advise the Commission of his action. Unless the Commission acts to modify his conditional approval, the conditional approval shall become final approval. If the Zoning Enforcement Officer determines such request to have a significant consequence, the request shall be submitted to the Commission for its consideration and action. Following a finding by the Commission that the request has a significant consequence the Commission shall conduct a public hearing prior to its action. 

4. 	
Changes in special permit uses shall require Commission approval. (Changes in tenancy for approved uses shall not require an application to the Commission, nor shall changes within any one of the individual categories of special permit uses listed for each zone.) 

5. 	
Applications under Section 7. for sign approval shall not require public hearings. 


Section 13. LANDSCAPE REGULATIONS 
A. PURPOSE 
These landscaping regulations are adopted for the purpose of protecting property values by: preserving existing vegetation and planting of new materials; providing privacy from visual intrusion; screening undesirable light, pollutants and noise; preventing the erosion of soil; providing water recharge areas; and improving the environmental quality and aesthetics of the Town of Farmington. 
B. LANDSCAPE REQUIREMENTS 
1. 	Front Yards. The required front yard or side yard along a street of all lots shall be landscaped and surfaced either with lawn, evergreen ground cover or suitable substitute. 
This required yard area, with the exception of one family homes, shall contain one tree meeting the requirements of Paragraph 4. below for every 25 feet of frontage. 
One or more driveways may run perpendicular -approximations expected -to the required landscaped yard setback, except that the Commission may approve the location of a connecting driveway between separate parcels within this yard. In the case of a single family home a turnaround area, circular driveway or area immediately adjacent to the driveway for no more than three cars may be placed in this required front yard setback. No motor vehicles shall be parked or stored on landscaped surfaces within such yard. No motor vehicles shall be parked or stored in the required front yard on a second driveway of a single-family home. 
2. 	
Side and Rear Yards. Any lot developed for business or industrial use shall provide a landscaped area along side and rear lot lines. In the C1, CR, BR, PR and for nonresidential special permit uses in residential zones, and elsewhere when required by the Commission, a landscaped area shall be provided along the side and rear lot lines at least 20 feet in width with two trees meeting the requirements found in Paragraph 4. below for each 50 feet or part thereof of such lines. In the B1 Zone a landscaped area shall be provided along side and rear lot lines at least 15 feet wide with one tree meeting 

the requirements found in Paragraph 4. for each 50 feet or part thereof of such lines. The Commission may also approve the location of a shared or connecting driveway between separate parcels within these yard areas. 

3. 	
Parking Lot Landscaped Area Requirements. Any lot which contains parking facilities for more than ten cars shall also provide landscaped areas within the parking lot equal to at least 10 percent of the gross parking area. Gross parking area shall include the area of parking stalls, aisle ways and associated landscaping. This landscaped area shall require landscaped end islands and landscaped center islands within the parking area. Intermediate landscaped islands measuring 9 feet wide by 20 feet in length shall be provided in parking rows for every 16 spaces. This island shall measure 8 feet wide by 16 feet in length in a row of compact spaces. One deciduous or evergreen tree, meeting the requirements found in Paragraph 4., shall be planted within the landscaped area for each 10 parking spaces. A deciduous or evergreen tree shall be planted upon each island as required by the Commission. 

4. 	
Landscaped Buffer Requirements. Landscaped buffers shall be provided where required by this section and shall conform to the standards in the Bufferyards illustrated on Page 


165. Seventy-five percent (75%) of all trees in such buffer areas shall be of the evergreen species. Trees and shrubs shall conform to the following standards: i) Deciduous trees shall be planted at 3 inches in caliper with a mature height of at least 35 feet; ii) Fruit trees shall be planted at 2 inches in caliper with a mature height of at least 12 feet; iii) Evergreen trees shall be coniferous species planted at 6 feet in height; and iv) Shrubs shall be either deciduous species planted at 2-1/2 feet in height with a mature height of at least 6 feet or evergreen species planted at 2-1/2 feet in spread. 
a. 	
Front Yard Buffer: A front yard landscaped buffer may be required by the Commission in business or industrial zones and for special permit uses in residential zones except for two, three and four family homes where necessary to preserve and protect the residential character of nearby development. Such buffers shall meet or exceed the requirement of an “A” Bufferyard. 

b. 	
Side and Rear Yard Buffer: A landscaped buffer shall be provided along side and rear yards where business or industrial zones abut residential zones. However a landscaped buffer within a yard along a street shall be provided only at the request of the Commission. This buffer shall meet or exceed the requirements for a “B” Bufferyard along the boundary between a business zone and a residential zone, and meet or exceed the requirements for a “C” Bufferyard along the boundary between an industrial zone and a residential zone. A landscaped side yard and/or rear yard buffer may be required by the Commission between a special permit use in a residential zone, except two, three and four family homes, and adjacent residential zones. Such buffer shall meet or exceed the requirement of a “B” Bufferyard. 


5. 	
Existing Vegetation. Existing plant material meeting the requirements of Paragraph 4. of this section may be used to meet all or part of these landscape regulations. 

6. 	
Variations to Landscape Requirements. Additional Landscaping: The Commission may require additional landscaping or more mature plantings when unusual conditions require 


more extensive screening. 
Reduced Landscaping: The Commission may reduce up to 25 percent of the landscape requirements including width and number of plant materials and eliminate the installation of any berm or berm wall by a five-sixths vote for excellence in building and parking design. The Commission shall consider, among other features, physical site characteristics, existing vegetation and natural resources, compatibility of proposed structures with surrounding architectural types, quality of building materials and the size and quality of proposed landscape materials. 
The Commission may waive all or a portion of the landscaped buffer requirements when it has been determined that a proposed use of land is adjacent to a residential zone which contains a non-access highway or non-residential use which is permanent in nature. 
7. 	
Landscape Plan Requirements shall conform to the requirement contained in Section 12. Paragraph C.3. 

8. 	
Bonding of Landscape Improvements. The Commission may require a bond in an amount to cover the cost of 100 percent of all landscape improvements. These improvements shall include the cost of all plant materials, seed, mulch, topsoil, construction of berms and all labor necessary to implement the landscape plan. 

9. 	
Completion of Landscaping. All landscaping shown on the approved plan shall be completed before issuance of a Certificate of Zoning Compliance, or a bond in a form and amount satisfactory to the Zoning Enforcement Officer assuring completion within a specific time (not to exceed one year) shall be filed with the Town. Such bond shall be forfeited if the work shall not have been completed within such time limit. 

10. 
It is the responsibility of the property owner to replace any vegetation required by this regulation, which dies or is lost by theft. 

11. 
The Commission may, by way of special permit in accordance with Article IV, Section 12 of these Regulations, modify all or a portion of the Requirements of this Section 13 where such is necessary to implement an off-street parking plan approved by the Commission pursuant to Article IV, Section 8 of these regulations. 

12. 
Maintenance of Landscaping 


All landscaping elements portrayed on the approved landscaping plan, including buffer treatments, shall be maintained in a manner sufficient to ensure its continuing performance and the survival of plantings, including, but not limited to weeding, mulching and replacement of dead material.  Where a maintenance problem arises, upon the order of the Zoning Enforcement Officer, said landscaping shall be restored to a satisfactory condition consistent with the approved landscaping plan.  

Section 14. LIGHTING 
Any interior or exterior lighting, including signs, shall not be of such intensity, or located or directed in such a way, as to produce glare or discomfort on public streets or neighboring property. 
All lighting fixtures for commercial or industrial uses, which are at a height of ten or more feet from the adjacent ground and mounted on either poles or buildings shall be down lighting only. Pole height shall not exceed 14 feet as measured from the adjacent ground elevation to the top of the pole or fixture whichever is greatest. However, the Commission may approve the use of a pole up to 24 feet in industrial zones and in cases where such poles are installed in parking areas containing 75 or more spaces. The above standards shall not apply to the illumination of sports fields or courts or to lighting required to identify tall structures such as communication towers or antennae. 
Section 15. FIRE PROTECTION 
A. SPRINKLER SYSTEMS 
1. 	
With the exception of those buildings listed in Section B. of this regulation all buildings and additions to existing buildings both approved by the Commission and built subsequent to the effective date of this regulation (May 24, 1991) shall be equipped with an automatic sprinkler system. Automatic sprinkler systems shall also be provided in existing buildings when their use is changed from an exempted use to a nonexempted use. 

2. 	
Automatic sprinkler systems as required by this regulation shall be installed, inspected and maintained in accordance with the requirements of the National Fire Protection Association Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems 13, 13A, 13R and 13D as amended and as referenced in the Connecticut Fire Safety Code or any succeeding statute as amended and as may be in effect at the time the building is constructed. Their design and installation shall also be approved by the Farmington Fire Marshal and the Farmington Building Official. 


B. EXEMPT BUILDINGS AND BUILDING ADDITIONS 
The following classes of buildings and building additions shall be exempt from the requirement of providing automatic sprinkler systems except as otherwise required by the Connecticut Fire Safety Code or the Connecticut State Building Code: 
1. 	
Single family and two-family dwellings. 

2. 	
Conversion of an existing building to a three-family dwelling. 

3. 	
Buildings included as part of a multiple family development which contain less than three dwelling units. 

4. 	
Public or private garages, portable or temporary buildings except where the principal use of such garage or building is the repair or service of automobiles. Buildings which are not enclosed on one or more sides. 

5. 	
Nonresidential buildings containing less than four thousand (4,000) square feet in area excluding basement and attic areas. For purposes of this regulation the term basement shall be defined as an area of a building located partially or wholly below grade level and use for a purpose other than the intended principal use of the building. 

6. 	
One or more additions to an existing non-sprinklered building not otherwise exempted by this section, provided the area of the addition or cumulative area of such additions is less than 4,000 square feet excluding the area of basements and attics. The required installation of an automatic sprinkler system shall be limited to the area of the nonexempt building addition. 

7. 	
Buildings or additions to a non-sprinklered building which require the extension of a water line capable of delivering an adequate volume of water to supply an automatic sprinkler system which is extended exclusively for this purpose a distance beyond 30 feet for each 1,000 square feet of proposed building area excluding basement and attic space. For purposes of calculating the distance set forth in this paragraph such distance shall be measured from the terminus of the existing adequate supply along a route which requires no acquisition of private easements to the location of the proposed building or to the building for which the addition is proposed. 


C. OTHER REQUIREMENTS 
1. 	All buildings, with the exception of single-family dwellings, which are exempt from the automatic sprinkler requirements shall comply with the required fire flows as established by the ISO Fire Suppression Rating Schedule-Latest Edition or provide an alternate fire protection system as approved by the Farmington Fire Marshal. 
Section 15A. 	REASONABLE CONSIDERATION FOR THE PROTECTION OF HISTORIC FACTORS 
The Commission shall require a special permit / site plan review for the demolition of any building listed in the survey entitled -The History and Architecture of Farmington, Connecticut 1985-1986: An Architectural and Historical Survey, conducted by the Greater Middletown Preservation Trust, as amended. A complete copy of the Survey is available in the Planning Office and the Town of Farmington Libraries web site. 
A. PURPOSE -The Town Plan and Zoning Commission (TPZ) finds that within the Town of Farmington there exist many older structures that have or had historic, cultural, architectural and economic significance and which have contributed and will continue to contribute towards a healthy and thriving future for the Town of Farmington. The TPZ further finds that the Town of Farmington derives much of its charm and unique appearance from its architecture and from its history. The TPZ further finds that historic preservation is a means of promoting the general welfare of the Town of Farmington and its residents. 
The TPZ further finds that the Town of Farmington's ability to protect, preserve and effectively utilize its historical heritage and character for aesthetic, educational and economic prosperity will be enhanced by a regulation which establishes a mechanism to discuss the proposed demolition of these unique and significant structures and possible alternatives to demolition. 
B. AUTHORIZATION -In furtherance thereof and pursuant to the Charter of the Town of Farmington and under the enabling legislation found in Chapter 124 Title 8 Section 8-2 of the Connecticut General Statutes, its Plan of Conservation and Development and the purposes of Zoning as articulated in Article 1 Section 1 of the Zoning Regulation the TPZ has enacted this regulation. 
The purpose of the special permit / site plan review process is to ensure that the proposed activity complies with all Zoning Regulations, determine the need for an Inland Wetland and Watercourse permit and to insure all feasible and prudent alternatives to the demolition have been considered. 
Considerations -The commission shall consider: 
1.) The impact of historic preservation recommendations on the overall project; 
2.) The availability of other architecturally appropriate alternatives which preserves the 

building; 3.) The ability to allow higher densities and modifications to the regulations to allow the greatest number of alternatives and to compensate for the preservation; and 4.) The impact of the demolition on the property, surrounding properties and the overall historic character of the area. 
C. MODIFICATION -In an effort to avoid the contemplated demolition and allow for the most feasible and prudent alternatives without regulatory obstacles, an applicant may seek during the hearing process a modification of certain regulatory requirements as provided by this subsection. 
Modifications to the regulations may be authorized for properties that preserve and reuse historic structures and provide permanent protective easements to accomplish the preservation. The applicant must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Commission that such modification adds to and complements the character of the area, does not adversely impact upon adjacent property or properties and substantially satisfies the standards as provided in this subsection. 
This is not a variance procedure as permitted by C.G.S. 8-6 if not expressly provided for herein no modification of any other requirement may be granted by the Commission nor may the Commission grant a modification or change in use not specifically allowed in the current zone. 
The modification procedure is limited to the following regulatory requirements: 
1.
 Lot coverage; 

2.
 Minimum lot size; 

3.
 Minimum lot frontage; 

4.
 Front, side and rear yard setbacks; 

5.
 Parking requirements. 


The Commission may not grant any modification in excess of 50% of the regulatory requirements sought to be modified in effect at the time of the request. No showing of a hardship shall be necessary for the commission to grant any modification pursuant to this section nor shall any regulation herein prohibit any applicant from seeking a variance in addition to any modification which may be granted hereby. If the Commission determines in its discretion that the applicant has substantially satisfied the requirements for a modification, the Commission may, by a majority vote of the commission, vote to approve the modification application request. This modification approval shall be specifically noted on the approved plans. 
Section 16. TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT REGULATION 
A. All	 applications submitted to the Commission subsequent to the effective date of this regulation (May 24, 1991) and proposing at one time or cumulatively the following minimum floor area or number of parking spaces on a parcel of land shall be accompanied by a Traffic Management Plan which complies with the minimum requirements set forth in the section: 
Retail Use (including personal services and banking institutions) -100,000 square feet. 
Office Use (including general, business, professional or medical offices and research and development facilities) -30,000 square feet. 
Industrial Use (including manufacturing, warehousing and assembly) -100 parking spaces. 
Where more than one of the above uses are proposed on a single site the following minimum floor area of number of parking spaces shall be used: 
Office Use with Industrial Use -100 parking spaces. 
Retail Use with Office Use -100 parking spaces as determined by the following formula: 
Proposed retail Proposed office 
area (sq. ft.) + area (sq. ft.) = Number of 
1000 280 parking spaces 

B. The Traffic Management Plan shall provide a description of the programs proposed by the applicant to reduce the number of employees who commute to work in an automobile alone. The Traffic Management Plan shall at a minimum contain the following elements: 
1. 	
Operation of a rideshare program. Explicitly, the preparation and maintenance of a list containing the addresses of all employees working on site. This list shall be made available to any employee wishing to establish a car or vanpool. 

2. 	
The posting and dissemination of carpooling, vanpooling and transit information to all employees. 

3. 	
Provisions in the site plan design for the establishment of and/or access to bus stops (where service is available) and the designation of specific areas for parking for vanpools. 


C. MONITORING The applicant shall submit to the Commission prior to January 31 of each year a report documenting compliance with the approved Traffic Management Plan. 
Section 17. SIDEWALKS 
In conjunction with an application for special permit or site plan approval the Commission may require the installation of a sidewalk along a public or private road or within a site. 
Section 18. OUTDOOR DISPLAY, SALES OR STORAGE OF GOODS OR MATERIALS 
A permanent or temporary outdoor display or sales area may only be established by a retail or wholesale business with the approval of the Commission. A manufacturer may only establish a temporary outdoor display or sales area with the approval of the Commission. Permanent outdoor display or sales area shall only be approved where the Commission finds that it is customary to the specific use. In approving outdoor display or sales area the Commission may regulate its particular location on the site, the number and type of items displayed. No outdoor display or sales area, permanent or temporary, shall be approved by the Commission where it finds that a traffic or pedestrian hazard on or off site will result or where such display or sales area will have a blighting effect on neighboring properties. The Commission may specify certain hours of the day for the establishment or operation of any outdoor display or sales area. 
Outdoor storage of materials or supplies (including construction equipment) on a parcel of land occupied by a nonresidential use may only be permitted with the approval of the Commission. Unless otherwise approved such storage area shall be enclosed by a fence and located to the rear of any existing or proposed building(s). These areas shall also comply with any yard requirements applicable to a building as specified by these regulations for the particular zone the storage area is situated in. 
Except as located on land occupied by a church or charitable institution, it is prohibited to locate, store or display any cabinet for the purpose of collecting donated used items including clothing, shoes, etc. Such church or charitable institution must approve the placement of such cabinet and shall be responsible for its maintenance. These units shall be situated in locations on the property as approved by the Commission. 
Section 19. ROOFTOP UTILITIES 
The placement of rooftop utilities, mechanical equipment and satellite dishes on nonresidential or multiple family buildings is only permitted with the approval of the Commission. Such approval may only be granted upon a finding that the above facilities could not reasonably be placed in the building or elsewhere on site. The Commission may require that such facilities be fully screened from a roadway, parking area or adjoining property. 
Section 20. HELIPORTS/LANDING AND TAKE OFF OF AIRCRAFT 
A. The Commission by special permit or in conjunction with an application submitted for a special permit for property located within any commercial or industrial zone may permit the establishment of a heliport and/or the take off and landing of aircraft. Such operation shall be limited to nonrevenue passenger service and shall not include facilities for maintenance or 
repair. 
B. The take off and landing of aircraft in residential zones may only be permitted by special permit subject to the following restrictions and limitations: 
1. 	
The property upon which such aircraft is to take off and land must contain an area of 2.5 or more contiguous acres. 

2. 	
All take off and landing operations must be located at least 100 feet inside the boundaries of the parcel of land. 

3. 	
Any fuel storage facilities shall comply with the design requirements found in Article II. Section 18.E. of these regulations. 

4. 	
Such activity shall be limited to personal, noncommercial use. 


C. In approving a heliport or the take off and landing of aircraft the Commission may regulate the frequency and hours of operation of such facility or activity as well as the type of aircraft used. 
1. 	See Article IV. Section 12. for application procedures, hearing and notice requirements, and site plan information. 
D. Exceptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the following: 
1. 	
Emergency landings of aircraft. 

2. 	
The landing and take off of balloons provided that takeoffs from a particular parcel of land shall be limited to no more than two days within a calendar year. 

3. 	
Air medical helicopter landings and takeoffs for the purpose of emergency patient care and training as requested by emergency medical services, police or fire officials. 


Section 21. ACCESSORY APARTMENTS 
A. DEFINITION 
ACCESSORY APARTMENT means a second dwelling unit located within a detached single-family dwelling situated on an individual lot. Such dwelling unit shall be subordinate to the principal dwelling in terms of size, location and appearance. 
B. One accessory apartment as herein defined may be established within a new or existing single family dwelling in accordance with the following standards: 
1. 	An accessory apartment shall not have more than one bedroom and living area not to exceed 650 square feet. However the living area of an accessory apartment shall not exceed 30 percent of the living area of the principal dwelling as measured exclusive of the area to be incorporated into the accessory apartment. The living area of the principal dwelling, exclusive of the area to be incorporated into the accessory apartment, shall not be less than that specified for the zone the dwelling is located in as established in Article 
III. Section 2. of these regulations. The Commission may approve by special permit an accessory apartment with a maximum living area of 900 square feet and/or having two bedrooms. See Article IV. Section 12. for application procedures, hearing and notice requirements, and site plan information. 
2. 	
At least one of the dwelling units shall be occupied by one owner of record of the property who possesses an estate for life or a minimum 50 percent fee simple ownership interest. Occupancy shall be defined as physically living in the dwelling unit for at least six (6) months of the calendar year. The occupant(s) of the unit not inhabited by the owner of the property as herein defined shall be related to an owner of the property by blood, marriage or adoption or shall be employed by the owner for domestic services. 

3. 	
The principal dwelling and accessory apartment shall remain under common ownership. 

4. 	
An accessory apartment may only be established within a single-family dwelling located on a lot having an area of at least 5,000 square feet. No accessory apartment having more than one bedroom or more than 650 square feet of living area shall be established within a single family dwelling located on a lot less than 12,000 square feet in area. 

5. 	
Original construction or modifications made to a dwelling in conjunction with the establishment of an accessory apartment shall be designed and undertaken in such a manner as to maintain the appearance of a single-family residence. The outside entrance to an accessory apartment shall be provided along a building wall which does not face a road unless otherwise approved by the Commission. Plans for building additions or external stairways proposed in conjunction with the development of an accessory apartment must be reviewed and approved by the Commission to ensure conformance with the above standard. The Commission may require the provision of fencing or landscaping to minimize the visual impact of exterior stairs or other external changes. 

6. 	
The design of the accessory apartment shall be such that conversion back to a single-family dwelling may be readily accomplished. The residence shall be converted back to a single family dwelling within six (6) months such accessory unit is no longer occupied. This time period may be extended by the Commission. 

7. 	
An area adequate to park two additional cars shall be provided on site in conjunction with an accessory apartment having two bedrooms. No additional driveway shall be established for an accessory apartment unless otherwise approved by the Commission. 

8. 	
Accessory apartments shall comply with all building code requirements as well as the Farmington Housing Code. 

9. 	
An application to establish an accessory apartment must be submitted to the health authority for the Town of Farmington for review and approval when the premises is sewered by an on site sewerage disposal system or a private water system. 

10. 
Accessory apartments may only be permitted in a single family home concurrent with a 

home business or the leasing of rooms by the grant of a special permit. 

11. 
No accessory apartment may be established until a Zoning Permit and Certificate of Zoning Compliance is issued by the Zoning Enforcement Officer. Such Certificate of Zoning Compliance must be renewed every two years from the date of issuance. The property owner shall submit information to indicate compliance with the provisions of this regulation on forms provided by the Zoning Enforcement Officer. 


Section 22. AFFORDABLE HOUSING 
An application for affordable housing submitted to the Commission pursuant to the provisions of Section 8-30g. of the Connecticut General Statutes, and not submitted under Article II. Section 
25. of these regulations, shall conform with subsections F.1. through F.4. and F.8. of Article II. Section 25. of these regulations with the following exceptions: 
A. An affordable housing unit shall be defined as in Section 8-39a. of the Connecticut General Statutes for persons and families whose income is less than or equal to eighty percent of the area median income. 
B. Restrictions or covenants requiring that dwelling units be sold or rented at or below prices which will preserve the units as affordable housing shall only apply for a period of twenty years from the initial occupation of such dwelling units. 
In addition the approval of such an application for affordable housing as defined above shall not legally take effect until the housing developer has entered into a contract with the Town of Farmington as specified in Article II. Section 25.D. of these regulations. 
Section 23. COMMERCIAL WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION SITES 
A. DEFINITIONS. 	For the purpose of applying the provisions of this section the terms below shall be defined as follows: 
ANTENNA means a device used to receive or transmit electromagnetic waves. Examples include, but are not limited to whip antennas, panel antennas and dish antennas. 
CAMOUFLAGED means a commercial wireless telecommunication site that may be disguised, hidden, part of an existing or proposed structure or placed within an existing or proposed structure. 
CARRIER means a company that provides wireless telecommunication services. 
CO-LOCATION means locating wireless communication facilities from more than one provider on a single structure or tower.  Co-location can also refer to the provision of more than one service on a single structure or tower by one or more carriers. 
COMMERCIAL WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION SERVICES means licensed commercial wireless telecommunication services including cellular, personal communication services (PCS), specialized mobilized radio (SMR), enhanced specialized mobilized radio (ESMR), paging and similar services that are marketed to the general public. 
COMMERCIAL WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION SITE means a facility operated by a licensed commercial wireless telecommunication service provider which consists of the equipment and structures involved in receiving or transmitting electromagnetic waves associated with wireless telecommunication services. 
HEIGHT OF TOWER means a distance from the ground elevation of such tower to the topmost point of the tower including any antenna or other appurtenances.  The total elevation of the tower is the height of the tower plus the ground elevation expressed as above mean sea level. 
RADIOFREQUENCY (RF) ENGINEER means an engineer specializing in electrical or microwave engineering, especially the study of radio frequencies. 
TOWER means a structure that is intended to support equipment used to receive and/or transmit electromagnetic waves. Design examples of towers include a) self supporting lattice, b) guyed and c) monopole. 
B. LOCATION PREFERENCES.	  The locations for siting commercial wireless telecommunication sites are listed in lines 1 through 10 below, in order of preference. 
1. 	
Camouflaged within an existing building, flagpole, tower or similar structure. 

2. 	
Mounted and camouflaged on an existing building or structure. 

3. 	
Mounted on existing buildings and structures in commercial and industrial zones. 

4. 	
Mounted on an existing or previously approved tower without increasing the height of the tower. 

5. 	
Mounted on existing buildings and structures in residential zones. 

6. 	
Mounted on an existing or previously approved tower resulting in an increase in tower height. 

7. 	
Mounted on new towers at or less than 75 feet in height located in commercial or industrial zones. 

8. 	
Mounted on new towers more than 75 feet in height located in commercial or industrial zones. 

9. 	
Mounted on new towers at or less than 75 feet in height located in residential zones. 

10. 
Mounted on new towers more than 75 feet in height located in residential zones. 


C. PERMITTED USES. 	The following uses which generally pose minimum adverse visual effects subject to the standards in Subsection G. 
1. 	
Commercial wireless telecommunication sites which are camouflaged and located inside nonresidential buildings or structures.  No changes shall be made to the exterior of such structure. 

2. 	
Commercial wireless telecommunications sites where the antenna is mounted to existing towers, utility poles, water towers, light standards, bridges or other similar structures which are not classified as buildings provided the following standards are met: 


a. 	
No changes are made to the height of the structure.  However the antenna may extend up to 15 feet above the original height of the structure. 

b. 	
No panel antenna shall exceed 60 inches in height and 24 inches in width. 

c. 	
No dish antenna shall exceed 3 feet in diameter. 

d. 	
All related equipment buildings and boxes shall be screened and fenced as required by the Zoning Enforcement Officer. 

e. 	
Such towers, poles, light standards, bridges or similar structures shall be located within non-residential zones. 

D. 
USES ALLOWED ONLY BY SPECIAL PERMIT. 	In addition to specific requirements listed in Subsections G. and H., the Commission must find that the application complies with the standards found in Article IV. Section 12.  See Article IV. Section 12. also for application procedures, hearing and notice requirements. A licensed carrier shall be either the applicant or co-applicant. 


1. 	In all zoning districts, commercial wireless telecommunication sites not otherwise permitted in Subsection C. 
E. SITE PLAN	 REQUIREMENTS. All proposals to develop a commercial wireless communication site as a permitted use or special permit use shall be subject to the site plan requirements listed in Article IV. Section 12. of these regulations.  In addition the following information shall be submitted in accordance with each particular application where applicable. 
1. 	Permitted Use: 
a. 	
A plan showing where and how the proposed antenna will be affixed to a particular building or structure. 

b. 	
Details of all proposed antenna and mounting equipment including size and color. 

c. 	
Elevations of all proposed shielding and details of materials including color. 

d. 	
An elevation of all proposed equipment buildings or boxes.  Details of all proposed fencing including color. 

e. 	
A report from a licensed RF engineer indicating that the proposed wireless 


telecommunication site will comply with the emission standards found in Subsection 
G. of this regulation.  The report shall include ambient RFR measurements and the maximum estimate of RFR from the proposed wireless telecommunication site(s) plus the existing RFR environment.  Such report shall also certify that the installation of such site will not interfere with public safety. 
2. 	Special Permit Use: 
a. 	
A map depicting the extent of the carrier’s current and planned coverage within the Town of Farmington and the service area of the proposed wireless telecommunication site.  A map indicating the search radius for the proposed wireless telecommunication site. 

b. 	
A design drawing including cross section and elevation of all proposed towers. A description of the tower’s capacity including the number and type of antennas it can accommodate as well as the proposed location of all mounting positions for co-located antennas and the minimum separation distances between antennas. 

c. 	
Upon request of the Commission, the applicant shall provide complete and accurate propagation plots in relation to scaled elevation drawings addressing all facilities to be installed on the tower. 

d. 	
Upon request of the Commission, the applicant shall arrange for a balloon or crane test at the proposed site to illustrate the height of a ground mounted tower.  This demonstration shall remain in place for a minimum of 36 hours. 

e. 	
Upon request of the Commission, the applicant shall provide a sight line study indicating how the facility would appear from various directions and distances prescribed by the Commission.  This could include photographs depicting sight lines before and after installation. 

f. 	
All of the plans and information required for Permitted Uses in the previous section. 

F. 	
HEIGHT AND AREA REQUIREMENTS. 


1. 	
Lot Size.  Commercial wireless telecommunication sites containing a freestanding tower shall not be located on any lot less than 20,000 square feet in area.  Where it is proposed that such a wireless telecommunication site occupy a lot as a principal use, the minimum lot size shall be equal to that required for the underlying zone or 20,000 square feet, whichever is greater. 

2. 	
Height.  The maximum height of a tower proposed under this regulation shall be 200 feet including the antenna and all other appurtenances.  The height of a tower mounted on a building shall be measured from the average level of the ground along all walls of the building to the tallest point on the tower including the antenna and all other appurtenances. The maximum height of any roof top mounted wireless telecommunication site shall be 15 feet unless otherwise approved by the Commission. 

3. 	
Yards.  


a. 	All towers shall comply with the following minimum property line setbacks and fall zone requirements: (For purposes of applying the provisions of this paragraph the height of a tower mounted on a building shall be measured from the elevation of the roof at the base of the tower to the tallest point on the tower including the antenna and all appurtenances) Fall Zone – The base of a tower shall be located a minimum distance from a property line equal to the height of the tower.  This fall zone area shall not contain any buildings unrelated to the commercial wireless telecommunication site unless otherwise approved by the Commission after the applicant has shown that based upon substantial evidence submitted that the tower is so designed and located as to collapse in a manner which would not result in a threat to buildings or other structures intended for occupancy by persons. 
Front Yard or Side Yard Along a Street -A minimum distance equal to the height of the tower or the setback required for the underlying zone, whichever is greater. 
Side or Rear Yards. -In residential zones, a minimum distance of 75 feet for towers equal to or less than 75 feet in height and for towers in excess of 75 feet a minimum distance equal to ¾ the height of the tower. 
In non-residential zones, a minimum distance equal to ½ the height of the tower or the setback required for the underlying zone, whichever is greater. 
However where a side or rear lot line is contiguous to a residential zone the setback for that particular yard shall be as required for such a tower in a residential zone. 
b. 	All equipment buildings/boxes and or equipment areas which are 50 square feet or greater in area shall comply with the minimum property line setbacks for a principal building in the underlying zone. 
All equipment buildings/boxes and or equipment areas which are less than 50 square feet in area shall comply with the following minimum property line setbacks: 
Front Yard of Side Yard Along a Street -Same as for a principal building in the underlying zone. 
Rear and Side Yards -20 feet. 
c. 	
Applications proposed for the Flood Protection Zone shall comply with the lot and yard requirements of the R40 zone. 

G. 
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS. 


1. 	
No commercial wireless telecommunication site shall be located within 500 feet of a parcel containing a playground or school which is primarily attended by persons under 18 years of age.  The Commission may, in its discretion and by a vote of 5 of 6 of its members, waive this requirement for an area designated as the playground, when the limits of the playground area within the parcel are located more than 500 feet from the commercial wireless telecommunications site. When considering such waiver requests, 

the Commission may consider future playground development proposals for any portion of the parcel if a formal development plan is on file with or pending before, or was previously approved by the Commission or the Director of Parks and Recreation. 

2. 	
No commercial wireless telecommunication site shall be located within 200 feet of a residential dwelling. 

3. 	
No tower shall be located within 1,000 feet of the boundary of a local historic district. 

4. 	
No lights shall be mounted on proposed towers unless otherwise required by the FAA. All strobe lighting shall be avoided if possible. 

5. 	
Towers not requiring special FAA painting or markings shall be painted a non-contrasting blue, gray or other neutral color as determined by the Commission. 

6. 	
No tower shall be located on municipally owned land designated as open space or for recreation use unless approved by the Farmington Conservation Commission. 

7. 	
All towers shall be either a monopole or lattice design at the discretion of the Commission.  A monopole tower shall be designed to collapse upon itself. 

8. 	
The Commission may require that monopoles be of such design and treated with an architectural material so that it is made to resemble a man-made or natural object such as but not limited to a flagpole or tree. 

9. 	
The Commission may require that any proposed tower be designed in all respects to accommodate both the applicant’s antennas and comparable antennas for at least two additional users if the tower is 100 feet or greater in height or for at least one additional comparable antenna if the tower is between 50 and 99.9 feet in height.  The Commission may require the tower to be of such height and structural design as to allow for future rearrangement of antennas upon the tower and to accommodate antennas mounted at varying heights.   

10. 
Each tower site must be served by a driveway with parking for at least one vehicle. 	All provisions of these regulations concerning the design and location of driveways shall apply. 

11. 
Antennas	 or unshielded equipment buildings/boxes mounted to or on buildings or structures shall to the greatest degree possible blend with the color and design of such building.  The Commission may require that building mounted facilities be camouflaged or shielded. 

12. 
All dish antennas	 shall be of mesh construction unless otherwise approved by the Commission.  

13. 
Dish antennas shall not exceed 6 feet in diameter.	  Panel antennas shall not exceed 5 feet in height. 

14. 
No proposed commercial wireless telecommunication site shall be designed, located or 

operated as to interfere with existing or proposed public safety communications. 

15. 
All applications	 for commercial wireless telecommunication sites within the Flood Protection Zone shall comply with the standards found in Article II Section 16 of these regulations. 

16. 
The design of all commercial wireless telecommunication sites shall comply with the standards promulgated by the FCC for non-ionizing electromagnetic emissions.  When there is more than one existing or proposed source of electromagnetic emissions at a site or adjacent thereto the design shall consider the cumulative emissions from all sources. 

17. 
All utilities proposed to serve a commercial wireless telecommunication site shall be installed underground unless otherwise approved by the Commission. 

18. 
All generators installed in conjunction with any commercial wireless telecommunication site shall comply with all state and local noise ordinances.  In addition the Commission may require that generators be screened including the use of panels lined with sound deadening material. 

19. 
All applications for commercial wireless telecommunication towers 50 feet or greater in height shall be accompanied by a letter of intent committing the tower owner and its successors to allow the shared use of the tower if an additional user agrees to meet reasonable terms and conditions for shared use. 

20. 
The Commission under Chapter 98 of the Town of Farmington Code may engage outside consultation to assist in the review of engineering plans and specifications relating to commercial wireless telecommunication sites. 


H. FACTORS UPON WHICH SPECIAL PERMIT DECISIONS OF THE COMMISSION SHALL BE BASED. In passing upon applications for commercial wireless telecommunication sites, the Commission, in addition to the standards found in Article IV. Section 12., shall also find: 
1. 	
In the case where a commercial wireless telecommunication site is proposed to be located on a property designated on the State or National Historic Register or within an approved historic district, that such proposal will preserve the historic and/or architectural character of the landscape or any structure.    

2. 	
In the case where an application for the proposed location of a commercial wireless telecommunication site is not a preference 1 through 6 location, the applicant has adequately described the efforts and measures taken to pursue those preferences and why a higher preference location was not feasible. In the case where the higher preference location is not technologically feasible, the applicant shall supply documentation of the following factors: 


a. 	The planned equipment would cause unacceptable interference with the operation of other existing or planned equipment on an existing or approved structure as documented by a qualified licensed engineer and that the interference cannot be prevented or eliminated with reasonable means. 
b. 	
The planned equipment cannot be accommodated on existing or approved towers due to structural deficiencies as documented by a qualified licensed engineer and that such deficiencies cannot be eliminated with reasonable means. 

c. 	
The planned equipment cannot be accommodated on an existing building or structure due to the inability to adequately receive or transmit the desired signal and that such deficiencies cannot be eliminated with reasonable means. 

d. 	
The existing or planned equipment on an existing or approved structure would cause unacceptable interference with the equipment proposed by the applicant as documented by a qualified licensed engineer and that the interference cannot be prevented or eliminated with reasonable means. 

e. 	
Any restriction or limitation imposed by the FCC. 

f. 	
In the case where an application is filed for a preference 9 or 10 location, the applicant, in addition to conforming with paragraph 2. of this section, has adequately described the efforts and measures taken to pursue preference 7 and 8 locations and why such locations were not technologically or legally feasible. 

I. 	
MONITORING. Subsequent to the initial operation of a commercial wireless telecommunication site, the owner of such facility shall conduct an actual measurement of the electromagnetic emissions and submit a report prepared by a licensed RF engineer to the Commission.  This report shall be submitted between three months and six months after initial operation has commenced.  In the case where a commercial wireless telecommunication site is located in or within 1000 feet of a residential zone the Commission may require that such report be prepared and submitted on a frequent basis not to exceed one per each calendar year. When there is more than one source of electromagnetic emissions at a site the above mentioned report should measure the cumulative emissions from all sources. 

J. 	
ABANDONMENT. A commercial wireless telecommunication site not in use for 12 consecutive months shall be removed by the service facility owner.  This removal shall occur within 90 days of the end of such 12-month period.  Upon removal, the site shall be restored to its previous appearance and where appropriate revegetated to blend with the surrounding area.  The Commission may require a performance bond to ensure the removal of a site and restoration of the subject area. 

K. 
EXPIRATION OF PERMIT. 	The approval of an application for special permit shall be void and of no effect unless construction of the project commences within one year from the date of the approval granted by the Commission.  For purposes of this regulation the term construction shall be defined as the installation of a permanent foundation.  The Commission may grant up to two six-month extensions of this period upon written request by the applicant.  The Commission shall withhold approval of any or all extensions unless the development plan is brought into conformance with any relevant zoning regulations which have been amended subsequent to the original approval and if the applicant fails to provide adequate evidence that construction is able to begin within the extended time period sought. 


This evidence shall include, but not be limited to, the acquisition of any or all required government approvals and project financing.  Any appeals of such special permit, site plan, inland wetlands or subdivision approval shall extend the aforementioned one-year period the length of such appeal.  In reviewing a request for an extension of the special permit the Commission may give due consideration to the use of alternative technologies.        
Section 24. ADULT-ORIENTED ESTABLISHMENTS 
A. Declaration of article policy; findings; purpose and intent. 
The Planning and Zoning Commission of the Town of Farmington finds as follows: 
(1) 
The operation of sexually oriented businesses in the town requires special regulation by the town to protect, preserve and promote the health, safety and welfare of the potential patrons of such businesses, as well as the health, safety and welfare of the town’s residents. Further, protecting order and morality, preserving the character and preventing the deterioration of the town's neighborhoods, promoting retail trade, maintaining property values, and ensuring sanitary and safe public places are desirable objectives of the community and its leaders. 

(2) 
The Planning and Zoning Commission has reviewed the following materials and information regarding sexually oriented business: 

a. 	
Virginia Adult Use Study dated March 1996, published by the Newport News 
Department of Planning and Development in the Newport News, Virginia; 


b. 	
A study called the “Adult Entertainment Businesses in Indianapolis” dated February 1984 which was conducted by the Department of Metropolitan Development, Division of Planning; 

c.  	
A study called the “Adult Entertainment Businesses in Oklahoma City: A survey of Real Estate Appraisers” dated March 3, 1986 which was conducted by the City of Oklahoma City Community Development Department; 

d. 
City of Renton v. Playtime Theatres, Inc, et.al., 475 US 41, 106 S.Ct. 925 (1986); 

e.	
  Police Records from the Orange Police Department relating to calls to the VIP store  in Orange, Connecticut in 2003 and 2006; 

f.  	
Police records from the Hartford Police Department relating to calls to the VIP store in Hartford, Connecticut in 2003, 2004, 2005, 2006 and 2007; 

g.	
  Expert Opinion Testimony as set forth in the Expert Witness Disclosures in the case of Ten’s Cabaret, Ltd. V. City of New York, et. al., Index No. 121197/02, Supreme Court of the State of New York, County of New York, dated March, 2008. 

h.
 “Men’s Behavior Toward women After Viewing Sexually-Explicit Films: 
Degradation Makes a Difference,” Mulac, Jansma and Linz; Communication 
Monographs,Vol. 69, No. 4, December 2002, pp.311-328; 


i.	
  “Crime Risk in the Vicinity of a Sexually Oriented Business: A Report to the Centralia City Attorney’s Office” by Richard McCleary, P.h.D.  dated February 28, 2004; 

j.  	
“Do ‘Off Site’ Adult Businesses Have Secondary Effects? Legal Doctrine, Social Theory, and Empirical Evidence,” McCleary and Weinstein, November 14, 2007; 

k. 
“Men’s Interaction with Woman After Viewing Sexually Explicit Films: Does 


Degradation Make a Difference?” Jansma, Linz, Mulac and Imrich, Communication Monographs, Volume 64, March 1997; 
l.	  City of Milford Adult Use Ordinance. 
(3) 
Statistics and studies performed by a substantial number of cities and towns in the United States indicate that: 

a.  	
Large numbers of persons, primarily male, frequent such sexually oriented businesses, especially those which provide closed booths, cubicles, studios and rooms for the private viewing of so-called "adult" motion pictures, videotapes or live entertainment. 

b. 
Such closed booths, cubicles, studios and rooms have been used by patrons, clients or customers of such sexually oriented businesses for the purpose of engaging in specified sexual activities. 

c. 	
Male and female prostitutes have been known to frequent such businesses in order to provide sex for hire to the patrons, clients or customers of such businesses within such booths, cubicles, studios and rooms. 

d. 
Doors, curtains, blinds and other closures installed in or on the entrances and exits of such booths, cubicles, studios and rooms which are closed while such booths, cubicles, studios and rooms are in use encourage patrons using such booths, cubicles, studios and rooms to engage in specified sexual activities therein with prostitutes, other persons or by themselves, thereby promoting and encouraging prostitution and the commission of specified sexual activities which cause blood, semen, urine or other bodily secretion to be deposited on the floors and walls of such booths, cubicles, studios and rooms, which deposits could prove detrimental to the health and safety of other persons who may come into contact with such deposits. 

e. 	
Booths, cubicles, studios and rooms that are closed while they are in use often contain holes that have been cut or smashed out of the walls or other partitioning material. These holes permit the inhabitant of one booth, cubicle, studio or room to engage in specified sexual activities with the inhabitant of the adjoining booth, cubicle studio or room. These holes promote and encourage specified sexual acts to occur between persons anonymously. Anonymous sexual contact poses a higher risk of spread of communicable diseases, including the AIDS virus, Hepatitis B and other sexually transmitted diseases. Further, the existence of such holes in booths, cubicles, studios and rooms at sexually oriented businesses provides an increased risk that blood, semen, urine or other bodily secretion will be deposited on the floors and walls of such booths, cubicles, studios and rooms, which deposits could prove detrimental to the health and safety of other persons who may come into contact with such deposits. 

f. 
Specified sexual activities often occur at unregulated sexually oriented businesses that provide live adult entertainment. Specified sexual activities include sexual physical contact between employees and patrons of sexually oriented businesses and specifically include "lap dancing" or manual or oral touching or fondling of specified anatomical areas, whether clothed or unclothed. Such casual sexual physical contact between strangers may result in the transmission of communicable diseases, which would be detrimental to the health of the patrons and employees of such sexually oriented businesses. 

g.
 The	 unregulated operation of sexually oriented businesses, including off-site adult businesses like adult bookstores, adult video stores and adult novelty stores,  is associated with an increase in the incidence of sex-related crimes and other crimes and also has a disruptive effect on the surrounding neighborhood by causing excessive noise, 


parking problems, the presence of discarded sexually oriented material on residential lawns, and the performance of sexual acts in public places, as well as causing a deleterious effect on surrounding businesses and decrease in the value of surrounding property. 
h. 	
Sexually oriented businesses that operate in close proximity to each other further contribute to an increase in crime, lower property values, blight and the downgrading of the quality of life and  value of property in the adjacent area, and sexually oriented businesses that operate within a short distance of schools, churches, parks, libraries and other public facilities negatively impact such places and have an adverse effect upon persons, particularly children, walking to and from such places. 

i. 	
The reasonable regulation and supervision of such sexually oriented businesses tends to discourage prostitution, other sex-related crimes, anonymous and high-risk sexual contact and unsanitary sexual activity, excessive noise and property devaluement, thereby decreasing the incidences of communicable diseases and sex-related crimes, all thereby promoting and protecting the health, safety and welfare of the employees and the members of the public who patronize such businesses and protecting the health, safety and property interests of a town and its residents.  


(4) 	
The unregulated operation of such sexually oriented businesses is and would be detrimental to the health, safety and general welfare of the residents of the town. 

(5) 	
The constitution and laws of the state grant to the town powers, especially the police power, to enact reasonable legislation and measures to regulate sexually oriented businesses in order to protect the public health, safety and welfare. 

(6) 	
It is the purpose and intent of the  Planning and Zoning Commission, in enacting this article, to regulate sexually oriented businesses to promote the health, safety and general welfare of the residents of the town and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations of such businesses in order to reduce or eliminate the adverse secondary effects of such sexually oriented businesses, protect residents from increased crime, preserve the quality of life, preserve the property values and the character of surrounding neighborhoods and businesses, deter the spread of blight, and protect against the threat to public health from the spread of communicable and social diseases. 

(7) 	
It is not the intent of the Planning and Zoning Commission, in enacting this article, to deny to any person rights to speech protected by the United States or state constitutions, nor is it the intent of the commission to impose any additional limitations or restrictions on the content of any communicative materials including sexually oriented films, videotapes, books or other materials. Further, by enacting this article, the council does not intend to deny or restrict the constitutionally protected rights of any adult to obtain or view any sexually oriented materials under the United States or state constitutions, nor does it intend to restrict or deny any constitutionally protected rights that distributors or exhibitors of such sexually oriented materials may have to sell, distribute or exhibit such materials. 

B. 
Definitions. 	For the purpose of applying the provisions of this section the terms below shall be defined as follows: 


The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Adult Oriented Establishment -An adult-oriented establishment is any business or operation that conforms to one or more of the following descriptions: 
Adult arcade means any establishment where one or more still or motion picture projectors, slide projectors, computers or similar machines, or other image producing machines, for viewing by five or fewer persons each, are regularly used to show films, motion pictures, videocassettes, live webcasts, slides or other live or photographic reproductions that are characterized by the depiction or description of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities. 
Adult cabaret means any nightclub, bar, restaurant or similar commercial establishment, whether or not alcoholic beverages are served, which regularly features: 
(1)
  Persons who appear nude or seminude; 

(2) 
Live performances that are characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas; or 

(3) 
Films, motion pictures, videocassettes, web casts, material over the internet, slides or other photographic reproductions that are characterized by the depiction or description of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities. 


Adult Books means any books, magazines, periodicals, pamphlets, or other printed materials that depict, display or describe specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities. 
Adult entertainment means: 
(1) 	
Any exhibition of any adult-oriented motion picture, live performance, display or dance of any type that has as a significant or substantial portion of such performance any performance of specified sexual activities or exhibition and viewing of specified anatomical areas, removal of articles of clothing or appearing unclothed, pantomime, modeling, or any other personal services offered customers, when such adult entertainment is held, conducted, operated or maintained for profit, direct or indirect; and 

(2) 	
Any amusement machine or computer that is regularly used for presenting material that is characterized by the depiction or description of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities, for observation by patrons thereof. 


Adult mini-motion picture theater means any enclosed building with a capacity of 50 or less persons regularly used for showing films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, internet sites, webcasts or other photographic reproductions or live videos that are characterized by the depiction or description of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities, for observation by patrons therein. 
Adult Model Studio -any place where, for any form of consideration or gratuity, figure models who display specified anatomical areas are provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by persons paying such consideration or gratuity. Excluded from this definition are any licensed educational institutions where the exposure of specified areas is associated with a curriculum or program. 
Adult Motel -a commercial establishment which offers public accommodations, for any form of consideration or gratuity, and provides patrons with closed circuit television transmissions, images transmitted by computer, films, video cassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by an emphasis of depicting or describing specified sexual activity or specified anatomical areas and which advertises the availability of this type of material by means of a sign(s) visible from a public right of way or by means of off premises advertising in newspapers, magazines, leaflets, radio or television; offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time less than ten hours or allows a tenant or occupant to sub-rent a sleeping room for a time period less than ten hours; or defines itself as such by advertising as an adult oriented business to the general public. 
Adult motion picture theater means any enclosed building with a capacity of more than 50 persons regularly used for showing films, motion pictures, videocassettes, webcasts, internet based material, slides or other live or photographic reproductions that are characterized by the depiction or description of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities, for observation by patrons therein. 
Adult Novelties means: (a) instruments, devices, toys or paraphernalia that are designed for or marketed primarily for stimulating human genital organs, sexual arousal or sadomasochistic use; 
(b) 
instruments, devices, gag gifts, toys or paraphernalia that depict, display or are shaped in the form of specified anatomical areas; and (c) oils, lotions, gels or creams that are designed for or marketed primarily for use upon specified anatomical areas and intended for stimulating human genital organs, sexual arousal or as an aid to enhance or promote specified sexual activities. 

Adult Oriented Store means any establishment having: 

(1) 
greater than five (5%)	  of its gross floor is devoted to the display of Adult Books, Adult Paraphernalia, Adult Videos or Adult Novelties or any combination thereof; 

(2) 
any portion of its stock in trade in Adult Books, Adult Videos or Adult Novelties and in conjunction therewith has rooms, designated areas or facilities for the presentation, observation or use by patrons of any item sold or rented in such establishment. 


Adult Paraphernalia -devices or equipment or materials characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing specified sexual activity or used in connection with specified sexual activity; or defines itself as such by advertising as an adult oriented business to the general public. 
Adult theater means any theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar commercial establishment that regularly features persons who appear nude or seminude or who appear in performances, whether live or via the internet, that are characterized by the depiction or description of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities, for observation by patrons therein. 
Adult Videos means films, motion pictures, videocassettes, webcasts, internet sites, DVDs, software, slides or other photographic reproductions or live video that depict, display or describe specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities. 
Church means any church, synagogue, mosque, temple or building that is used primarily for religious worship and related religious activities. 
Employee means any and all persons, including independent contractors, who work in or at or render any services directly related to the operation of a sexually oriented business. 
Entertainer means any person who provides adult entertainment, whether live or via the internet, within a sexually oriented business, whether or not a fee is charged or accepted for such entertainment and whether or not such entertainment is provided as an employee or independent contractor. 
Escort means any person who, for any form of consideration, agrees or offers to act as a social companion, guide or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another person. 
Escort agency means any person or business that furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business purposes for a fee, tip, or other consideration. 
Live adult entertainment means any live performance by a person who appears, or appears live via the internet, nude or seminude or any live performance that is characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas. 
Massage parlor means any establishment having a fixed business where any person engages in or carries on, or permits to be engaged in or carried on, any method of pressure on, or friction against, or stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating or stimulating of the external soft parts of the body with the hands or with the aid of any mechanical or electric apparatus or appliance with or without any supplementary aids such as rubbing alcohol, liniments, antiseptics, oils, powders, creams, lotions, ointments, or other similar preparations commonly used in this practice. The definition of massage parlor shall not include the practice of massage: 
(1) 	
In any state-licensed hospital, nursing home, clinic, medical office or rehabilitation facility; 

(2) 	
By a state-licensed physician, surgeon, chiropractor, osteopath, physical therapist, or massage therapist; 

(3) 	
By any registered nurse, licensed practical nurse or technician working under the supervision of a state-licensed physician, surgeon, chiropractor, osteopath, physical therapist, or certified massage therapist who shall be present on the licensed premises during the time the service is rendered; 

(4) 	
By trainers for any amateur or professional athlete or athletic team or school athletic program; or 

(5) 	
By any state-licensed barber or beautician with regard to the massaging of the neck, face, scalp and hair for cosmetic or beautifying purposes. 


Masseur means any person who, for any form of consideration, performs massage activities as described in the previous definition of this section. 
Minor means any person under the age of 18 years. 
Nude model studio means any place where a person, for any form of consideration, regularly appears nude or seminude or displays specified anatomical areas to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons. A nude model studio shall not include a modeling class operated by an accredited public or private school or college. 
Nudity means: 
(1) 	
The appearance of human bare buttocks, anus, genitals, pubic region or the areola or nipple of the female breast; or 

(2) 	
A state of dress that fails to opaquely and fully cover human buttocks, anus, genitals, pubic region or areola or nipple of the female breast. 


Operator means any person operating, owning, managing, conducting or maintaining a sexually oriented business. 
Public building means any building owned, leased or otherwise held by the United States, the state, the town, any other town or town, any fire district, any school district, or any other agency or political subdivision of the United States or the state, which building is used for governmental purposes. 
Public park and recreation area means public land that has been designated for park or recreational activities including, but not limited to, a park, playground, nature trails, swimming pool, reservoir, athletic field, golf course, basketball or tennis courts, pedestrian or bicycle paths, open space, wilderness areas, or similar public land within the town that is under the control, operation, or management of the town, any other town or town, or the state. 
School means any public, private or parochial educational facility including, but not limited to, child day care facilities, nursery schools, preschools, kindergartens, elementary schools, middle schools, junior high schools, high schools, vocational schools, secondary schools, continuation schools, special education schools, alternative schools, junior colleges, colleges and universities. School includes the school grounds, but does not include any facility used primarily for another purpose and only incidentally as a school. 
Seminude means a state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the genitals, pubic region and areola of the female breast, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices. 
Sexual activities is not intended to include any medical publications or films or bona fide educational publication or films, nor does it include any art or photography publications that devote at least 25 percent of the lineage of each issue to articles and advertisements dealing with subjects of art or photography. Nor does this definition apply to any news periodical that reports or describes current events and which, from time to time, publishes photographs of nude or seminude persons in connection with the dissemination of the news. Nor does this definition apply to publications or films that describe and report different cultures and which, from time to time, publish or show photographs or depictions of nude or seminude persons when describing cultures in which nudity or semi nudity is indigenous to the population. 
Sexual encounter establishment means a business or commercial establishment that, for any form of consideration, offers a place where two or more persons may congregate, associate or consort for the purpose of specified sexual activities or the exposure of specified anatomical areas. A sexual encounter establishment shall not include an establishment where a state-licensed medical practitioner, psychologist, psychiatrist, or similar professional person engages in medically approved and recognized sexual therapy. 
Sexually oriented business means: 
(1) 	
An adult arcade, adult oriented store, adult cabaret, adult mini-motion picture theater, adult motion picture theatre, adult theatre, escort agency, massage parlor, nude model studio or sexual encounter establishment; 

(2) 	
Any premises to which the public, patrons, or members are invited or admitted and wherein an entertainer provides adult entertainment, or which premises are so physically arranged as to provide booths, cubicles, studios, rooms, compartments or stalls separate from the common areas of the premises for the purpose of viewing adult-oriented motion pictures or wherein an entertainer provides adult entertainment, when such adult entertainment is held, conducted, operated or maintained for profit, direct or indirect; or 

(3) 	
Any adult entertainment studio or any premises that are physically arranged and used as such, whether advertised or represented as an adult entertainment studio, rap studio, exotic dance studio, encounter studio, sensitivity studio, modeling studio or any other term of like import. 


Specified anatomical areas means: 
(1) 	
Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus or female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or 

(2) 	
Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely opaquely covered. 


Specified sexual activities means: 
(1) 	
Showing of human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal; 

(2) 	
Acts of masturbation, sexual intercourse, sodomy, bestiality, necrophilia, sadomasochistic abuse, fellatio or cunnilingus; 

(3) 	
Fondling or touching of another person's genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breasts; 

(4) 	
Lap dancing; or 

(5) 	
Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of such activities. 

C. 
Establishment of an Adult Oriented Establishment 


Adult Oriented-Establishments are permitted within the C1 and CR Zones upon the approval of the Commission of an application for special permit as submitted by the owners of the land such use is to be situated. In addition to the specific requirements listed in this section, the Commission must find that the application complies with the standards found in Article IV. Section 12. See Article IV. Section 12. also for application procedures, hearing and notice requirements. 
No building or use of land for the establishment of an adult-oriented establishment shall be approved in the Town of Farmington unless the following requirements are met: 
a.
 No adult-oriented establishment shall be established on a lot if any portion of such lot is situated within 1,000 ft. radius of any lot used or approved to be used for a public or private school primarily attended by persons 18 years of age and younger, playground, church or library. 

b.
 No adult-oriented establishment shall be established on a lot if any portion of such lot is situated within 1,000 ft. radius of any lot used or approved to be used for an adult-oriented establishment. 

c.
 No adult-oriented establishment shall be established on the same lot that is used or approved to be used for an adult-oriented establishment. 

d.
 No adult-oriented establishment shall be established on a lot if any portion of such lot is situated within a 250 ft. radius of any lot located in a residential zoning district. 

e. 
No sexually oriented business shall be permitted within the same building, structure or portion thereof that is used for residential purposes. 

f. 
All distances contained in this section shall be measured by taking the nearest straight line between the respective lot boundaries of each site. 

g.
 No alcoholic beverages shall be sold or consumed within adult-oriented establishments. 

h.
 Adult-oriented establishments shall be so designed as to not permit the view of any sexual aids or paraphernalia; films, books, tapes, periodicals, CDs, drawings or advertisements depicting specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activity from a sidewalk, street, driveway or parking area. 

i.
 Any signs located inside or outside an adult-oriented establishment visible from a sidewalk, street, driveway or parking area shall not visually depict, describe or name any specified anatomical area or specified sexual activity. 

D. 	
HOURS OF OPERATION. At the time of the public hearing the Commission may require the submission of projected hours of operation. The Commission shall review the impact of such schedule of hours on the immediate neighborhood as well as current and projected traffic circulation patterns. As part of the special permit, reasonable limitations on hours of operation may be imposed. 

E. 
The approval of a special permit application for adult-oriented establishments shall be void and of no effect unless construction and or operation commences within one year from the date the approval is granted by the Commission. 


Section 25. STORMWATER SYSTEMS 
A. Stormwater systems designed and installed in conjunction with the development of land must receive the approval of the Commission in consultation with the Town Engineer. 
B. Stormwater systems shall be designed for the following objectives: 
1. 	
Prevent flooding of onsite or offsite property. 

2. 	
Feed and recharge inland wetlands, surface and subsurface waters. 

3. 	
Minimize pollutant loads in stormwater runoff into inland wetlands, surface and subsurface waters. 

4. 	
Maintain the hydrology of existing sub watersheds including wetlands and watercourses. 


C. The Commission may withhold the approval of a storm water system design if it fails to meet the above objectives. 
D. The maintenance of a private storm water system is the responsibility of the property owner. The Commission may require that a maintenance program be developed and submitted to them for approval. The Commission may require that a bond be posted and/or that periodic reports be filed with the Town to ensure that the required maintenance has been performed. 
Section 26. CONSERVATION EASEMENTS 
When a conservation easement is offered or required in conjunction with any approval granted by the Commission, such easement area shall be located on the property by affixing a marker provided by the Town to a tree or a 4” x 4” cedar or pressure treated post, a maximum of 48” high. Such markers shall be spaces at each change of direction of the easement line or a maximum of 50 feet apart. The actual layout of posts and markers shall be approved by the Planning Department staff and must be installed prior to any construction activity unless otherwise approved. 
Section 27. REGULATION OF INTENSIVE CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES 
A. PURPOSE. 	Vibration, noise and dewatering associated with various construction activities which are deemed intensive including but not limited to pile driving, blasting, mass excavation or compaction and rock crushing may have physical and psychological impact upon neighboring structures and occupants.  These impacts could include damage to real property, a reduction of quantity or quality of water from drinking water wells and a diminution in quality of life from various deleterious effects.  The following set of regulations has been developed to prevent or diminish such effects. 
B. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS. 	Construction activities such as blasting, pile driving, mass excavation or compaction and rock crushing shall be undertaken in a manner, which avoids or minimizes impacts on surrounding properties and persons.  This shall include but not be limited to the following provisions: 
1. 	
Activity such as blasting, pile driving, rock crushing, mass excavation or compaction shall be limited to weekdays only and solely between the hours of 8 a.m. to 2 p.m. unless otherwise directed or approved by the Commission or its designated agent.  The Commission may limit the number of events on a daily or weekly basis. 

2. 	
Contractors and owners shall utilize appropriate safeguards as directed by recognized industry codes and standards, the Commission or Farmington Town Officials relating to such items as blasting mats to reduce impacts. 

3. 	
Utilizing devices, which measure noise and vibration to monitor activities and ensure that they do not exceed the performance criteria established by this and other regulations. 


This regulation is not intended to abrogate or interfere with any state or federal law or regulation which addresses any matter covered by this regulation. 
C. PROCEDURE. 	Construction activities such as blasting, pile driving, mass excavation or compaction and rock crushing shall not occur within the Town of Farmington unless a special permit his been issued by the Town Plan and Zoning Commission.  In addition to ensuring that an application complies with the relevant standards found in Article IV Section 12 of these regulations the Commission shall also consider the following: 
1. 	
Whether there is a feasible and prudent alternative to the activity applied for. 

2. 	
The proximity of residences to the location of such activity.  In particular the number of residences located within 1,000 feet of the activity. 

3. 	
The presence and proximity of water supply wells to such activity. 

4. 	
The likelihood of physical damage to the properties. 

5. 	
The presence and proximity of any material waste product or gaseous byproducts which 


(a) poses a present or potential hazard to human health or the environment; or (b) is highly flammable or which may react to cause fires or explosion or (c) create or augment a fire or explosion hazard.  
At the request of the Commission the application shall be accompanied by a report prepared by a professional having experience in this field such as a geologist or licensed engineer which shall include a subsurface investigatory analysis including test pits and/or borings in quantity sufficient to determine the impact of intensive activities.  Such report shall provide information on the earth material present on the property, the activity to be undertaken, impacts of such activity on real property and wells and a list of recommended measures to be implemented which will ameliorate or eliminate such impacts including blasting charge design.  The report shall also state that the proposed activities will not cause results to exceed those of the performance standards in section D. 
The Commission may engage, at a cost to the applicant, a third party review of the above­mentioned reports and submitted evidence. 
The Commission may attach conditions to their approval, which would accomplish the objectives of this regulation. 
D. PERFORMANCE STANDARDS: 	The following standards and safeguards have been developed with the goal of preventing or minimizing impacts to or upon persons or property within proximity of the subject activity.  Adherence to these standards is no guarantee against damage to property or claims of nuisance by persons in the area.  Nor does compliance with these standards insulate any contractor, operator, owner or developer from any such claims.   
1. 	
Air Overpressure – No activity shall produce at the location closest to a habitable building which is most immediately situated to the activity more than 105 db as measured at the C-weighted scale. 

2. 	
Ground Motion (vibration) – No activity shall produce at the location closest to a habitable building which is most immediately situated to the activity a particle velocity in excess of 1.5 inches/second at 40 Hz. or more, 1.0 inches/second between 30 and 39 Hz. and 0.5 inches/second at less than 30 Hz. 

3. 	
Flyrock – Blasting activities shall not produce flyrock beyond the property lines of the subject site. 


E. MONITORING AND REPORTING: 
1. 	
Compliance with the standards found in Section D of this regulation shall be confirmed by a comprehensive and continuous seismic monitoring program, which shall be undertaken by the applicant subject to the oversight of the Fire Marshall. 

2. 	
All seismographs used to demonstrate compliance with this regulation shall be calibrated to the following minimum specifications: a) Seismic Frequency Range:  2 to 200 Hz. (+3 Hz.) b) Acoustic Frequency Range:  2 to 200 Hz. (+1 db) c) Velocity Range:  0.02 to 4.0 inches/second d) Sound Range:  110 to 140 db linear 

e) Transducers:  three mutually perpendicular axes 
f) Recording: provide time history of wave form 


3. 	
All seismographs shall be calibrated as often as necessary but at least once every 12 months and in accordance with the manufacturer’s recommendations. 

4. 	
The placement of all measuring instruments and components shall conform to industry 

standards. 

5. 	
Ground vibration shall be measured as particle velocity.  Particle velocity shall be recorded in three mutually perpendicular directions. 

6. 	
Seismograph records are to be supported by written records containing the following 
information: 
a) Name of operator. 
b) Location, date and time of the activity. 
c) Identification of nearest habitable building, direction and distance to the activity.  
Location of monitoring instruments. 
d) Weather conditions. 
e) Type of earth material encountered. 


f) 	Record of any explosives used.  Sketches of blast pattern including number of holes, burden, spacing decks and delay patterns. 

7. 	
All information collected by seismic monitoring shall be placed on file with the Fire 
Marshall’s office. 


8. 	
The Fire Marshall may require that a representative of his or her office be present for any operation or activity covered by this regulation.  The applicant shall pay the cost for any person representing the Fire Marshall. 

9. 	
The Town of Farmington may require an independent third party analysis to be paid for by the applicant.  This analysis may include an examination of the seismic recordings, recording procedures, and instrument operation.  


F. 	NOTIFICATION/REAL PROPERTY AND WELL SURVEYS. Prior to the commencement of any activity approved pursuant to this regulation the applicant shall: 
1. 	
Post signs, a minimum of 20 square feet in area, announcing any blasting and posted in all locations as directed by the Fire Marshall. 

2. 	
In the case of blasting, send a notice at least 15 days prior to the activity to all owners 
of property located within 500 feet of the subject property. 


3. 	
Conduct a survey of all structures which are located a minimum of 250 feet from such activity or a distance expressed as D = 65 x 



W , whichever is greater, where D equals the distance from the activity and W equals the maximum charge weight per 8 ms delay.  This radius may be extended by the Town Plan and Zoning Commission.  
Surveys shall contain the following information: 
a) Name of property owner, location of property, date and time of survey 
b) Name of person making the survey and the operator 
c) 	Condition of the structure, documentation of any pre-existing defects and relation of any photographic or tape records to the body of the report 
d) Identification numbers for all photographs 
e) 	Identification of particularly historic or fragile buildings or valuable or fragile contents, which may be particularly vulnerable to blast vibrations. 
4. 	Conduct a survey of all drinking water wells located within a minimum of 250 feet from such activity or a distance expressed as D = 65 x 

W , whichever is greater, where D equals distance from the activity and W equals the maximum charge weight per 8 ms delay.  The Town Plan and Zoning Commission may extend this radius. The survey shall include a test of water quality and quantity.  
5. 	A copy of the surveys required under this section shall be submitted to the Commission and the property owner.  If the property owner disagrees with the content of the survey, a detailed description of the areas of disagreement shall be filed with the Commission. When access to the property for a survey is denied by the property owner such information shall be transmitted to the Commission including the date such request was denied with a notation as to whether such denial was verbal or in writing. 
Section 28. STANDARDS FOR ACCESSIBLE AND UNIVERSAL DESIGN 
A. PURPOSE 
The Town of Farmington recognizes the need of its disabled and elderly citizens to have the greatest access possible to buildings and facilities, which are available to the public and thereby promoting the independence, safety and dignity of this sizable population.  The Town Plan and Zoning Commission has found that current state and federal codes fail to attain best practices in accessible and universal design.  The standards and guidelines found in this section, while exceeding in some instances current code requirements, have been developed to promote optimum accessibility and shall apply to all new construction, expansion, redevelopment and reuse of property as specified in this regulation. 
B. SITE PLAN ELEMENTS. 
All site plans submitted to the Commission for new construction, additions or substantial redevelopment for commercial, industrial or institutional uses under Section Article IV Section 12 of these regulations shall be subject to the following standards. 
1. 
Sidewalks providing access to or on a site for the public shall have a minimum width of 

six feet.  Such walks shall be widened to as much as eight feet as directed by the Commission where such walk serves a development (retail, personal service, office or institutional use) in excess of 20,000 square feet or is located within the UC zone. 

2. 	
Parking areas containing 75 or more spaces shall contain a sidewalk system and be connected by a raised walkway and crosswalk to all buildings located on the premises. 

3. 	
Objects protruding into or over the footprint of the walk shall be cane detectable at 24 inches. 

4. 	
Sidewalks constructed of pavers, brick or other non-uniform surface material shall have a well-compacted sub-surface to ensure the most even surface as practicable.  Loose or uneven pavers, bricks etc. shall be immediately adjusted. 

5. 	
Trees, light posts, street furniture or other structures located within a sidewalk shall be positioned in such a manner as to maintain a straight, unimpeded path of travel for pedestrians including those in wheelchairs. 

6. 	
Railings used along sidewalks shall contain thin vertical posts between 30 and 48 inches high.  Such posts should be spaced as far apart as possible consistent with the State Building Code. 

7. 	
Curb cuts and curb ramps shall be painted caution yellow to provide a visual warning. 

8. 	
Handicapped accessible parking spaces shall be located wherever possible adjacent to the building so to avoid crossing lanes of traffic.  Unless otherwise approved by the Commission, no accessible parking space shall be located more than 100 feet from an exterior entrance to the building it is intended to serve and shall be connected to such building with a walk containing a slope of 1:20 or less. 

9. 	
Handicapped parking spaces shall be distributed and located in such a manner where they are not likely to be used for stockpiling of snow. 

10. 
Vehicles shall be deterred from parking within the access aisles attached to handicapped accessible spaces.  This may include the use of signage. 

11. 
Developments containing multiple buildings shall provide benches or other seating areas to function as rest areas as directed by the Commission.  Benches shall have seat heights 17 to 18 inches; graspable armrests and an ergonomic shape for lumbar support and seat contour.  Maneuver space shall be provided to enable chair and scooter riders to transfer to the bench. 

12. 
Directional and informational signs shall be installed at the request of the Commission. Such signs shall light colored letters against dark background. 


C. BUILDING ACCESS 
For all new commercial, industrial and institutional building construction, additions, installation of handicapped ramps and as directed by this subsection for commercial, industrial and institutional uses, the following standards shall apply. 
1. 	
Building entrances shall be designed so that approaches to level areas at entry doors located within 200 feet of any handicapped parking space are sloped at 1:20 or less. 

2. 	
Ramps and stair handrails shall be round or oval in shape and constructed of a material that offers a gripping surface that is non-slip and easy to grasp securely. 

3. 	
Ramp handrails should be constructed with a clear space of 42 inches from handrail to handrail. 

4. 	
Handrails shall be installed on both sides of stairs or ramps with runs continuous over the 

full length of the stairway or ramp and shall terminate with a horizontal extension on level landings at top and bottom. 

5. 	
In the case of new construction, additions and for buildings undergoing redevelopment the Commission shall require the installation of automatic door openers on all exterior entrances located within 200 feet of any handicapped parking space and for any door (exterior or interior) providing the main entrance to an individual business.  Such doors shall also have 34-inch wide clear openings.  

6. 	
Kick plates from the bottom edge to a height of 16 inches shall be provided and installed on the push side of all exterior doors located within 200 feet of any handicapped parking space and for any door (exterior or interior) providing the main entrance to an individual business.  This shall not apply to power doors containing a sensor for automatic operation.  In the case of doors to be opened by hand, loop or staple type hardware shall be installed. 


D. BUILDING FACILITIES AND DESIGN 
For all new commercial, industrial and institutional building construction, additions and elsewhere as directed by this subsection for commercial, industrial and institutional uses the following standards shall apply. 
1. 	
For businesses such as retail uses, restaurants and banks that have a counter where business is conducted, such counter shall have a 36-inch wide section where the height is not greater than 34 inches.  If customers use such counter for writing, clear knee space below the 36-inch wide section at a minimum height of 27 inches and a minimum depth of 18 inches shall be provided.  In cases where providing this clear knee space is not feasible, the Commission may approve the provision of a pullout or fold down writing shelf.  

2. 	
The Commission may require that up to 10% of all dining tables within a restaurant be accessible to patrons using wheelchairs.  This percentage may be increased to 20% within restaurants located in the UC zone. This shall include the design of tables which do not contain pedestals which impede foot pedals, foot chair or scooter wheels.  One half of all accessible tables shall contain more than one accessible space for diners. 

3. 	
Handicapped accessible restrooms shall be provided as required by state and federal regulation.  In addition, for new building construction, additions and substantial reconstruction and in cases where a new restroom is added, the following shall apply. 


a. 	
Single sex restrooms shall have an accessible stall with minimum dimensions of 5 feet by 6 feet. 

b. 	
In bathrooms containing more than one toilet stall, in addition to a fully accessible stall, at least one other stall shall be 3 foot wide with 42 inch grab bars mounted on both sides. 

c. 	
In addition to single sex restrooms, the Commission may require the provision of a companion restroom for those requiring assistance. 

d. 	
Locks and latches used in restrooms shall be operational without pinch, grasp or twist of the wrist. 

e. 	
Restroom doors shall contain hinge mounted door closers unless equipped with automatic closers. 

f. 	
Toilets shall have elongated bowls with seat heights of 17 to 18 inches.  Flush controls shall be positioned on the open side of the toilet.   

g. 	
Fold down grab bars shall be secured in a vertical position by a holder with an easy release mechanism. 

h. 	
Toilet paper dispensers must be easily usable by persons with limited manual dexterity and be installed in a location, which does not intrude on knee space between the toilet edge and sidewall. 

i. 	
All items within the restroom such as trash receptacles, benches etc. shall be located as to not intrude into maneuver space. 

E. 
ACCESS WITHIN MULTIPLE STORY BUILDINGS 


For all new commercial, industrial and institutional buildings containing multiple stories, an elevator or lift shall be constructed to provide handicapped access to all floors above grade. The Commission may require the provision of an elevator or lift for a multiple story addition constructed onto such commercial, industrial or institutional building. 
Where an application for change of use is submitted to the Commission for building space located on a floor above grade of an existing commercial, industrial or institutional building, the Commission may withhold the approval of such application upon a finding that such space is not handicapped accessible.  In making such a decision the Commission shall take into consideration the nature of such use and the need for accessibility by customers or employees as well as other arrangements, which maybe proposed to provide handicapped access to such use or portion thereof in another portion of the building.   
As amended effective May 2, 2008. 
Section 29. NON-COMMERCIAL WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEMS 
A. PURPOSE. 	The Town of Farmington recognizes that non-commercial wind energy systems may be beneficial to its residents and businesses by providing an alternative source of clean energy.  However the unregulated design and placement of these systems may result in incompatible land uses, a threat to property values and the health, safety and welfare of Town residents. 
B. DEFINITIONS. 	For the purpose of applying the provisions of this section the terms below shall be defined as follows: 
METEOROLOGICAL TOWER – a facility consisting of a tower and related wind measuring devices, which is used solely to measure winds preliminary to construction of a non-commercial wind energy conversion system. 
NON-COMMERCIAL WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM – a facility consisting of some or all of the following:  a tower, wind turbine generator with blades, guy wires and anchors, and associated control conversion electronic equipment to convert wind movement into electricity, and that is incidental and subordinate to another use on the same parcel.  A facility shall be considered a non-commercial wind energy conversion system only if it supplies electrical power solely for on-site use.  However, when a parcel on which a non­commercial wind energy conversion system is installed also receives electrical power supplied by a utility company, any excess electrical power generated by the non-commercial wind energy conversion system, and not then needed for on-site use, may be used by the utility company in exchange for a reduction in the cost of electrical power supplied by that company to the parcel for on-site use.  No net revenue to the owners shall be produced by such excess electrical power generation. 
C. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS AND STANDARDS. 	All non-commercial wind energy conversion systems shall conform to the following design and locational standards and may be installed in any zoning district following receipt of a special permit.  In addition to the specific requirements listed in this section, the Commission must find that the application complies with the standards found in Article IV Section 12.  See Article IV Section 12 also for application procedures, hearing and notice requirements.  
1. 	
Properties located in a residential zone may be permitted only one non-commercial wind energy conversion system. 

2. 	
No horizontal axis wind energy conversion system shall be permitted on a lot containing less than 40,000 square feet of land area. Vertical axis wind energy conversion systems may be located on a lot containing a minimum of 15,000 square feet of land area. 

3. 	
Horizontal axis wind energy conversion systems may not be mounted on a building. These systems shall be mounted on a monopole tower.  However by a 5/6 vote of the full Commission, horizontal axis wind energy conversion systems may be mounted on a lattice or guyed tower providing that the lot contains at least 80,000 square feet of land area. 

4. 	
The maximum height of a tower containing any type of wind energy conversion system shall be 65 feet, where such lot is located in a residential zone and contains less than three acres.  The maximum height of a tower located in either a non-residential zone or within a residential zone on a lot containing three acres or more in land area shall be 100 feet.  The height of the tower shall be defined as the vertical distance from the average finished grade along the base of the tower to the highest point excluding any rotor blade or lightning rod but including the turbine. 

5. 	
Towers must be set back from all property lines, overhead utility lines, dwellings or other habitable structures a minimum of ten feet plus the height of the tower including the top of the rotor blade.  In the case of a guyed tower, no guy wires shall be permitted within 20 feet of any property line.  By a 5/6 vote of the full Commission, towers may be located closer to a property line where the tower owner has entered into an agreement to establish a fall zone easement on the adjoining property.  Such easement shall be large enough to contain that portion of the tower height, including all rotor blades, beyond the distance of the tower base to the property line. This easement shall be kept free of all buildings and structures as long as it remains in effect. 

6. 	
Towers located in residential zones shall be located behind the longest rear wall of the principal building or in the rear half of a lot containing frontage on one street.  In the rear yard as measured from the longest rear wall of the principal building but not beyond the middle third of a through lot as measured from the street the principal use is closest to.  In the case of a corner lot, to the rear of the home as measured from the longest wall with 

respect to both streets or in the rear half of a lot as measured from both streets or a combination thereof.  To the rear of the home as measured from the longest wall with respect to two streets or I the rear half of the lot as measured from two streets or combination thereof where a lot is bounded by three or more streets.  No tower located in any zoning district shall be situated in a required building setback line unless otherwise approved by the Commission. 

7. 	
Non-commercial wind energy conversion systems shall conform to the provisions of the Town of Farmington noise ordinance. 

8. 	
Non-commercial wind energy conversion systems shall not be illuminated or contain any lighting fixtures, antennas or other signal transmission device. 

9. 	
The construction and operation of non-commercial wind energy conversion systems shall comply with all applicable local, state and federal requirements including but not limited to, all applicable safety, construction, environmental, electrical and aviation requirements. 

10. 
The operation of a non-commercial wind energy conversion system shall not cause interference with any electronic signal such as radio or television reception, telephone or microwave transmissions. 

11. 
No rotor blade from a horizontal axis wind energy conversion system shall extend closer than fifteen (15) feet to the ground surface. 

12. 
All wiring of any non-commercial wind energy conversion system shall be installed by an electrician licensed in the State of Connecticut. 

13. 
All horizontal 	axis wind energy conversion systems shall be equipped with manual (electronic or mechanical) and automatic over speed controls to limit the blade rotation speed to within the design limits of the system as set by the manufacturer. 

14. 
Tower climbing apparatus shall be located no closer than twelve (12) feet from the ground.  The Commission may require that a tower be enclosed by a locked protective fence at least six feet in height. 

15. 
No signs may be affixed to or displayed in conjunction with a non-commercial wind energy conversion system except for a safety sign warning of electrical shock or high voltage and/or a sign displaying the name and location of the system’s manufacturer. Such signs shall be limited to two square feet each unless otherwise prescribed by law. 

16. 
If a non-commercial wind energy conversion system is not maintained in operational condition or fails to be operated for a period of twelve (12) consecutive months, the system shall be deemed to be abandoned and shall be removed in accordance with subsection G. 

17. 
All power transmission lines connecting a freestanding non-commercial wind energy conversion system to any building or other structure shall be located underground unless otherwise waived by the Commission. 

18. 
Non-commercial wind energy conversion systems shall be sited on the property in a manner that does not result in significant shadowing or flicker impacts upon or affecting neighboring properties. 

19. 
Non-commercial wind energy conversion system components such as transformers shall have their visual impact minimized by use of alternative locations or landscaping. All components of the system including the tower shall be a plain non-reflective muted color without graphics or other decoration. 


D. FACTORS UPON WHICH SPECIAL PERMIT DECISIONS OF THE COMMISSION SHALL BE BASED In passing upon applications for non-commercial wind energy conversion systems, the Commission, in addition to the standards found in Article IV Section 12, shall consider the following: 
1. 	
The height of the proposed facility and its proportionality to and compatibility with existing surrounding structures and tree line.  The distance of the facility to such structures shall be factored in as part of this consideration. 

2. 	
The availability and suitability of alternate sites, which are available to the applicant as well as efforts to mitigate any negative visual impact from the system. 

3. 	
The appearance of the system within cultural, scenic or historic view sheds. 

4. 	
The impact of the facility on historic districts, historic structures and ridgelines. 


E. APPLICATION SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS. 	An application for special permit shall be accompanied by the following information and documents. 
1. 	
An A-2 survey of the lot the facility is proposed to be established upon.  This requirement may be waived by the Commission in the case where a vertical axis non-commercial wind energy conversion system is proposed to be mounted on an existing building or where the Commission finds that the use of a different map will be adequate to present all the information required by this regulation.  Any proposed tower structure shall be accurately depicted upon the survey map.  This shall also include any land clearing, grading and landscaping. 

2. 	
An elevation drawing depicting any proposed tower structure. 

3. 	
A plan showing the location of any structures and property lines within two hundred and fifty (250) feet of the proposed facility. 

4. 	
In the case where it is proposed to connect the facility to the electrical grid, a copy of a letter to the appropriate utility company notifying them of this proposal. 

5. 	
A document listing all safety equipment and maintenance plan for the proposed facility. 

6. 	
If required by the Commission, the applicant shall arrange for a balloon or crane test to illustrate the height and location of a proposed tower.  The test shall be conducted for at least two days; one of which is a Saturday or Sunday.  The applicant at the request of the Commission, shall provide photographs showing the tower imposed on the photographs. The photographs shall represent up to four view prospective as chosen by the Commission.  Each photograph shall include a description of the technical procedures followed (distances, angles, camera lens, etc.). 


F. OPERATION, MONITORING AND MAINTENANCE. 	The applicant/owner shall maintain the non-commercial wind energy conversion system in a good and safe condition. Maintenance shall include, but not be limited to, painting, structural repairs, and the integrity of safety and security measures.  Access to the site shall be maintained to the satisfaction of Town emergency personnel. 
G. ABANDONMENT. 	Any non-commercial wind energy conversion system that has reached the end of its useful life, or has been abandoned, shall be removed.  When the facility is scheduled to be decommissioned, the applicant shall notify the Town by certified mail, including the proposed date of discontinued operations and the plans for removal.  The applicant/owner shall physically remove the facility no more than 150 days after the date the facility is discontinued or abandoned.  The decommissioning of the facility shall consist of the removal off the premises of all wind turbines, structures, equipment, security barriers and transmission lines. In addition the site shall be stabilized so not to result in erosion.  Solid and hazardous wastes shall be disposed of in accordance with local and state waste disposal regulations. 
H. METEOROLOGICAL TOWER. 	The owner of a parcel of land who is contemplating the installation of a non-commercial wind energy conversion system may obtain a zoning and building permit to erect a meteorological tower.  The tower shall meet the locational requirements found in subsection C.6 of this regulation and be set back from all property lines a minimum distance equal to the height of the tower.  The maximum height of a meteorological tower shall be 100 feet.  No tower shall be located on a site for more than six months.  The application for a zoning permit shall be made on a form prescribed by the Zoning Enforcement Officer.  
I.  	FINANCIAL SURETY. The Commission may require the applicant for a non-commercial wind energy conversion system to provide a form of surety to cover the cost of removal of the facility. The applicant shall submit a fully inclusive estimate of the costs associated with removal.  The Commission may add a factor for inflation to the cost estimate. 
J.   	CONDITIONS ATTACHED TO SPECIAL PERMIT. In conjunction with the approval of a special permit for a non-commercial wind energy conversion system, the Commission may impose the following conditions: 
1. 	
Limit the permit to a particular owner or operator of the facility. 

2. 	
Limit the amount of time the permit shall be in effect. 

3. 	
Require particular grading or landscaping to shield various components of the facility. 

4. 	
Limit the height of any vertical axis wind energy conversion system as it is affixed to any building or structure. 

5. 	
Impose any other condition directly related to the criteria and standards for the 
establishment of a non-commercial wind energy conversion system.  



K. EXPIRATION OF PERMIT. The approval of an application for special permit shall be void and of no effect unless construction of the project commences within one year from the date the approval is granted by the Commission.  For purposes of this regulation the term construction shall be defined as any work conducted as authorized by a building permit.  The Commission may grant up to two six-month extensions of this period upon written request by the applicant.  The Commission shall withhold approval of any or all extensions unless the development plan is brought into conformance with any relevant zoning regulations, which have been amended subsequent to the original approval and if the applicant fails to provide adequate evidence that construction is able to begin within the extended time period sought. This evidence shall include, but not be limited to, the acquisition of any or all required government approvals and project financing.  Any appeals of such special permit, site plan, inlands wetlands or subdivision approval shall extend the aforementioned one-year period the length of such appeal. 
Effective date of Section 29. is December 13, 2008. 
Section 30. NEW OR EXPANDED HOMES WITHIN EXISTING NEIGHBORHOODS 
A. PURPOSE 
The construction of new or expanded homes as well as accessory buildings inclusive of garages within Farmington’s existing neighborhoods may have a negative impact on the character of such residential areas. Oversized homes may dwarf older smaller houses which may have been constructed decades ago.  Conventional looks like building setback regulations do not satisfactorily ensure compatibility between new and older construction.  Left uncontrolled, the development of larger out of scale houses and accessory buildings in these areas will seriously affect or destroy the sense of place of an established neighborhood.  This regulation seeks to control the size, spacing and height of principle and accessory structures in residential zones within existing zoning building lines so as to preserve some level of uniformity and architectural compatibility.  
B. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS AND APPLICABILITY OF THIS REGULATION 
This regulation shall apply within all single family zoning districts within the Town of Farmington with the exception of the R-80 zone unless a lot within the R-80 zone contains less than 60,000 square feet in area.  In addition, this regulation shall apply to any lot approved for single family use in the RDM and AH zones.  However, this regulation shall not apply to vacant lots referenced in Connecticut General Statutes 8-26a.(b)(2)(A) nor to lots located within any subdivision approved after the effective date of this regulation (May 4, 2013) containing more than five lots on a new street. 
Following the effective date of this regulation (May 4, 2013) the area of a single family home or accessory building existing as of such date shall not be expanded, cumulatively, by more than thirty percent of the area of the principle residential building without a special permit issued by the Commission unless the area of the home plus accessory building(s) including the addition is less than the area specified below for new construction.  In addition, no new accessory building shall be constructed which has an area greater than thirty percent of the area of the principle residential building without a special permit.  For the purpose of applying this regulation the area of a home shall exclude basement space or unfinished attic space but include any attached garage or other attached unfinished space and shall be measured from exterior walls.  Following the effective date of this regulation (May 4, 2013) no new single family home shall be constructed on a lot regulated by this section, with the following exceptions, unless a special permit has been issued by the Commission. 
1. 	
A home containing no more than 1,600 square feet of finished living area and no more than 2,200 square feet of total area and having a height of 24 feet as measured per Article 1 Section 9 of these regulations and located in either the R9, R12 and AH zones. 

2. 	
A home containing no more than 2,400 square feet of finished living area and no more than 3,200 square feet of total area and having a height of 24 feet as measured per Article I, Section 9 of these regulations and located in either the R20, R30 or R40 cluster zones.  

3. 	
A home containing no more than 4,000 square feet of finished living area and no more than 5,000 square feet of total area and located within the R40 and on lots containing less than 60,000 square feet in the R80 zones. 


Additions to homes or accessory buildings for which a special permit has already been approved under this section must be approved by the Commission. The Commission shall decide whether such addition is significant or not.  Significant additions shall require a public hearing. 
C. APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS 
An application for special permit shall be accompanied by plans including elevations drawn to a scale of one quarter inch equals a foot as well as a plot plan accurately showing the footprint of the home (and any addition) as proposed and its relationship of the house to the property lines. The Commission may also ask the applicant to submit information confirming the distance between the home and structures on adjoining properties, a grading plan as well as photographs of the subject site and structures located within 1,000 feet of the property for which approval is sought. 
D. STANDARDS FOR GRANTING A SPECIAL PERMIT PERTAINING TO THIS SECTION ONLY 
In lieu of the standards found in Article IV Section 12 the Commission shall require that an application filed under this section satisfy the following criteria: 
1. 	That the proposed home, accessory building or home or accessory building with addition is of a size and height that is in keeping with the scale including but not limited to relative footprint, mass and distance from grade to peak of roof of residences in the general vicinity, which shall be defined as within 1,000 feet of the subject property.  Homes or accessory buildings that are significantly larger than those within 1,000 feet of the property may be approved where the Commission finds that such building is located on a lot significantly larger than the minimum required by the zoning regulations and that the location of the building on such lot will not be visible from the street or neighboring properties.  
1. 	That notwithstanding the standard setback requirements found in these regulations for a particular zoning district, the proposed building or building with addition results in a massing on the property and offsets from the property line as well as neighboring structures on adjoining sites that are consistent with residences in the general vicinity as defined above.  
Effective May 4, 2013. 
Section 31. MORATORIUM ON MEDICAL MARIJUANA PRODUCTION AND DISPENSARY 
Palliative marijuana production and/or dispensary facilities shall not be permitted in any zone until the Town Plan and Zoning Commission adopts regulations governing such facilities or for six months following the effective date of this moratorium, whichever is sooner. 
A. DEFINITIONS 
DISPENSARY FACILITY: As defined in Section 21a-408 of the State of Connecticut Regulation of the Department of Consumer Protection Concerning Palliative Use of Marijuana. 
PRODUCTION FACILITY: As defined in Section 21a-408 of the State of Connecticut Regulation of the Department of Consumer Protection Concerning Palliative Use of Marijuana. 
Effective October 31, 2013. 
ARTICLE V.  ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
Section 1. INTERPRETATION 
In their interpretation and application these regulations shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, convenience and general welfare. Where these regulations impose a greater restriction on the use of land, buildings or require larger yards, or other open spaces or impose other higher standards than are imposed by the provisions of any law, ordinance, regulations or private agreement, these regulations shall control. When greater restrictions are imposed by any law, ordinance, regulation or private agreement than are required by these regulations, such greater restrictions shall not be affected by these regulations. 
Section 2. ZONING PERMITS AND CERTIFICATES OF ZONING COMPLIANCE 
A. 	No land shall be used or activity conducted thereupon and no building or structure shall be used, erected, moved, enlarged or structurally altered and no Building Permit shall be issued until the Zoning Enforcement Officer either issues a Zoning Permit for such use or work or certifies in writing that such use or work is in conformity with the Zoning Regulations. A Zoning Permit is a document issued and certified by the Zoning Enforcement Officer that the proposed use and constructions is in conformance with the Zoning Regulations. A Zoning Permit is not required for repairs or alterations to existing buildings or structures, provided that such work does not alter the facade of such building, change the floor area or height of such building or structure and does not change the use thereof. A Zoning Permit shall also be required for signs (See Article IV. Section 7.). 
An application for a permit shall be filed with the Zoning Enforcement Officer on a form to be provided by the Planning Department. For new buildings or structures, proposed demolition of principal / non-accessory structures or changes increasing the floor area of an existing building or structure, an applicant shall present a site plan which is adequate to demonstrate compliance with the Zoning Regulations. The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall refer site plans for the construction of all new commercial and industrial buildings and the demolition of all principal / non-accessory buildings to the Commission for a determination of zoning compliance. The Town Planner is authorized to approve demolition permits for structures which are hazardous and have been ordered to be demolished by the Building Inspector or Fire Marshall. 
B. 	From time to time requests are received for revisions of or additions to approved site plans and/or special permits, zone changes or stated uses. Such revisions or additions may have minor or major consequences. Such requests will be first screened by the Zoning Enforcement Officer and if he determines such a request to be of minor consequence, he will conditionally approve the request and advise the Commission of his action. Unless the Commission acts to modify his conditional approval, the conditional approval shall become final approval. If the Zoning Enforcement Officer determines such request to have a significant consequence, the request shall be submitted to the Commission for its consideration and action. Following a finding by the Commission that the request has a significant consequence the Commission shall conduct a public hearing prior to its action. 
Small additions to nonresidential structures or buildings not previously approved by the Commission and changes in use shall be brought to the attention of the Zoning Enforcement Officer. When determined by the Zoning Enforcement Officer that such proposal does not require a special permit or site plan approval, a Zoning Permit may be issued. 
C. 	After a building or structure is completed, and prior to the occupancy of such building or structure, an applicant shall apply for a Certificate of Zoning Compliance from the Zoning Enforcement Officer. This certificate shall state that such building, use or structure is in conformance with all zoning regulations or is a valid nonconforming use under such regulations. The Zoning Enforcement Officer may require that an applicant prepare and submit an as built site plan in order to determine compliance with the Zoning Regulations. 
Section 3. ENFORCEMENT 
These regulations shall be enforced by the Planning Director or his agent acting as the Zoning Enforcement Officer who is hereby authorized to cause any building, place, premises or use to be inspected, and to order in writing the remedying of any condition found to exist in violation of these regulations. 
The Commission, the Zoning Enforcement Officer or any official having jurisdiction, in addition to other remedies, may institute an action or proceeding to prevent the unlawful erection, alteration, reconstruction, maintenance or use of any building or to correct or abate any unlawful act or to prevent the illegal occupation of buildings or land or to prevent any illegal act in or about such premises. 
The penalties for such illegal acts shall be as provided in the General Statutes and the Town Code of Ordinances. 
Section 4. ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS 
A. POWERS AND DUTIES 
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall be empowered to act on the following types of 
applications: 

1. 	
Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged that there is error in any order or decision made by the Zoning Enforcement Officer. 

2. 	
Decide requests for special exceptions in the following cases: 


a. 	
Where a zone boundary line divides a lot in one ownership, a permit may be issued for a use allowed on either side of the boundary line, but such specially allowed use shall not extend more than 30 feet into the zone in which it is not permitted by these regulations. 

b. 
Extension of a nonconforming use or building. 


3. 	Authorize upon appeal in specific cases variances from the terms of these regulations where by reason of exceptional shape, size or topography of the lot, or other exceptional situation or condition of the building or land, practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship would result to the owners of said property from a strict enforcement of the regulations. Before any variance is granted, the Board must make a written finding in its minutes as part of the record in the case, 
a. 	
That special circumstances, described in detail, attach to the property which do not generally apply to other property in the neighborhood and constitute the hardship. 

b. 	
That relief can be granted without detriment to the public welfare or impairment to the integrity of these regulations. 


Pursuant to the authority under CGS § 8-6, these Regulations do not permit the ZBA to grant use variances as specified below: 
i. 	The use of any residentially zoned premised for uses other than for residential purposes; 
ii. 	The use of a premises within the UC/UV, FC/FV and AP zone for any purpose not specifically permitted by the Zoning Regulations governing said districts; and 
iii. 	
The use of premises within single-family residential districts for other than single family residential purposes. 

B. 
PROCEDURE 


1. 	
The Board shall hold public hearings on all applications and appeals, and shall publish a notice of said hearing in a newspaper of substantial circulation within the Town in accordance with the General Statutes. In applications for all variances the applicant shall mail notice of the public hearing by certified mail no later than 10 days before such hearing to all owners of property within 200 feet from any boundary of the property which is the subject of the application. In addition, the applicant shall post a notification sign provided by the Planning Department on the property at least seven (7) days prior to the date of the public hearing.  Evidence of such mailing shall be presented to the Planning Department at or before the public hearing. The names and addresses used shall be those as recorded in the office of the Town Assessor on the date the application is filed. In the case where a property requiring notice has been submitted to common interest ownership, such as a condominium, the required notice need only be sent to the homeowners’ association and in the case of a use variance to all owners of buildings or dwellings located within 200 feet of the boundaries of the parcel which is the subject of such application. 

2. 	
Every application for variance from the Use Regulations, as distinguished from the Height and Area Regulations, shall be immediately transmitted to the Town Plan and Zoning Commission, and on or before the public hearing held by the Board on such application for variance, the Commission shall make a report with recommendations thereon. 

3. 	
All determinations of the Board shall be made in accordance with the comprehensive plan set forth in these regulations and in harmony with the purpose and intent expressed 


in Article I. Section l. thereof. In addition to this general rule of guidance, and to particular requirements hereinbefore specified in these regulations (see Article IV. Section 12.), no permit for special exception shall be issued by the Board unless it finds in each case that the proposed building or structure or the proposed use of land, 
a. 	
Will not aggravate a traffic hazard, fire hazard or panic hazard. 

b. 	
Will not block or hamper the Town pattern of highway circulation. 

c. 	
Will not affect adversely the Town’s income from taxation by removing considerable real property from the grand list. 

d. 	
Will not tend to depreciate the value of property in the neighborhood, or be otherwise detrimental to the neighborhood or its residents, or alter the neighborhood’s essential characteristics. 


4. 	All appeals to the Zoning Board of Appeals from the orders or decisions of the Zoning Enforcement Officer shall be made within ten days from the date on which the order, decision or requirement was rendered. 
ARTICLE VI.  AMENDMENTS, VALIDITY 

Section l. These regulations may be amended, changed or repealed as provided in the zoning law of the State. 
Section 2. The invalidity of any section or provision of these regulations shall not invalidate any other section or provision thereof. 
TOWN OF FARMINGTON 

REGULATIONS 
FOR  
SUBDIVISION 

(Amended to October 5, 2018) 


FARMINGTON TOWN HALL 

One Monteith Drive 
Farmington, Connecticut 06032-1053 

SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 
I 
GENERAL PROVISIONS 
1.1 AUTHORITY -The Town Plan and Zoning Commission of the Town of Farmington, Connecticut, in exercise of its power as authorized by the Connecticut General Statutes, hereby adopts these Regulations which shall hereafter be known, cited and referred to as the Subdivision Regulations of the Town of Farmington. 
These Regulations supersede Regulations previously in effect. 
1.2 DEFINITIONS -For the purpose of these Regulations, certain numbers, abbreviations, terms and words used herein shall be used, interpreted and defined as set forth in this section. 
Unless the context clearly indicates to the contrary, words used in the present tense include the future tense; words used in the plural number include the singular; the word “herein” means “in these Regulations;” the word “Regulations” means “these Regulations.” A “person” includes a corporation, a partnership and an incorporated association of persons such as a club; “shall” is always mandatory; “may” is permissive; a “building” includes a “structure;” a “building or structure” includes any part thereof; “used” or “occupied” as applied to any land or building shall be construed to include the words “intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied.” 
Words and Terms shall be defined as follows: 
1.2.1 Administration Specifications -Details as to the form and content of maps, plans, designs, legal instruments, reports, calculations and other data required to ensure compliance with these Regulations. 
1.2.2 Applicant -The owner of the land proposed to be subdivided, or his representative. Consent shall be required from the legal owner of the premises when the Applicant is other than the owner. 
1.2.3 Bond -Any form of security including a cash deposit, surety bond, collateral, property or instrument of credit in an amount and form satisfactory to the Town Manager. 
1.2.4 Base Flood -A flood having a frequency of occurring once every 100 years. 
1.2.5 Commission -The Town Plan and Zoning Commission of the Town of Farmington. 
1.2.6 Construction Plans -The maps or drawings showing the specific location and design of improvements to be installed in the subdivision in accordance with the requirements of the Commission. 

1.2.7 Developer -The owner of land proposed to be subdivided, or his representative. Consent shall be required from the legal owner of the premises when the developer is other than the owner. 
1.2.8 Easement -Authorization by a property owner for the use by another, and for a specified purpose, of any designated part of his property. 
1.2.9 Inland Wetland Soils -Land which is inundated by water on a seasonal or more frequent basis; land consisting of the soil types designated as poorly drained, very poorly drained, alluvial and flood plain by the National Cooperative Soils Survey as it may be amended from time to time of the National Resources Conservation Service of the U.S. Department of Agriculture. 
1.2.10 Lot, Plot, Parcel -A plot or parcel of land occupied or capable of being occupied by one principal building determining the land use form and the accessory buildings, structures or uses customarily incident to it, including such open spaces as are required by the Zoning Regulations. A piece of land saleable as a unit. 
1.2.11 Open Space -Open Space includes but shall not be limited to land left in its natural, undisturbed state; land used for agricultural purposes or containing important farmland soils as defined in a report entitled “Important Farmlands -Hartford County Connecticut, United States Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service;” land areas and facilities for passive or active recreation; land areas for wildlife habitat, groundwater recharge, scenic preservation and the like. 
1.2.12 Reserve Strip -A privately owned strip of land which controls access to land dedicated, or to be dedicated, to public use or to a parcel of land otherwise landlocked. 
1.2.13 Re-subdivision -A change in a map of an approved or recorded subdivision or re-subdivision if such change (a) affects any street layout shown on such map; (b) affects any area reserved thereon for public use; or (c) diminishes the size of any lot shown thereon and creates an additional building lot, if any of the lots shown thereon have been conveyed after the approval or recording of such map. 
1.2.14  Streets ­ 
i.  Collector Street -A street intended to move traffic from local streets to secondary arterials. A collector street serves a neighborhood or large subdivision and should be designed so that a minimum of residential properties face onto it.  
ii.  Dead End Street (Permanent) -A street having only one intersection with another street, and having a turnaround entirely surrounded on its frontage with separate lots.  
iii.  Dead End Street (Temporary) -A street having one intersection with another street and designed to be extended into adjoining undeveloped land, with a temporary turnaround.  


iv. 	
Local Street -A street intended to provide access to other roads from individual residential properties. 

v. 	
Limited Local Street -A permanent dead end street not exceeding 1,200 feet in length, serving no more than 20 lots. 


vi. 	Primary Arterial Street -A street intended to move traffic to and from such major attractors as central business districts, regional shopping centers, major industrial areas and similar traffic generators and/or as a route for traffic between communities or large areas. 
vii. 	Secondary Arterial Street -A street intended to collect and distribute traffic in a manner similar to primary arterials, except that these streets service minor traffic-generating areas such as community-commercial areas, primary and secondary education plants, major recreational areas, churches and offices and/or designed to carry traffic from collector streets to the system of primary arterials. 
viii. 	Major Street -Any collector, primary or secondary arterial street as defined by these Regulations. 
ix. 	Private Residential Street -A dedicated travel way owned in fee or in common which is not a portion of any building lot and which is restricted from public use. Private streets shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the specifications found in these Regulations. 
1.2.15 Subdivision -The division of a tract or parcel of land into three or more parts or lots made subsequent to June 1, 1950, for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale or building development expressly excluding development for municipal, conservation or agricultural purposes, and including re-subdivision. 
1.3 	PURPOSES -These Regulations are adopted for the following purposes: 
i. 	To protect and provide for the public health, safety and general welfare of the Town of Farmington; 
ii. 	To guide the future growth and development of the Town of Farmington in accordance with the Plan of Development; 
iii. 	To provide for adequate light, air and privacy; to secure safety from fire, flood and other danger; and to prevent overcrowding of the land and undue congestion of population; 
iv. 	
To protect the character and the social and economic stability of all parts of the Town and to encourage the orderly and beneficial development of all parts of the Town; 

v. 	
To guide public and private policy and action in order to provide adequate and efficient transportation, water, sanitary facilities, schools, parks and other public requirements and facilities; 



vi. 	To provide the most beneficial relationship between the uses of land and buildings and the circulation of traffic throughout the community, so that proposed streets shall be in harmony with existing or proposed streets, especially in regard to safe intersections and be so arranged and of such width as to provide an adequate and convenient system for present and prospective traffic needs; 
vii. 	To establish reasonable standards of design and procedures for subdivisions and re-subdivisions in order to further the orderly layout and use of land; and to ensure proper legal descriptions and monumenting of subdivided land; 
viii. 	To ensure that public facilities are available and will have a sufficient capacity to serve the proposed subdivision; 
ix. 	
To prevent the pollution of air, streams and ponds; to assure the adequacy of drainage facilities; to safeguard the water table; and to encourage the wise use and management of natural resources throughout the community in order to preserve the integrity, stability and beauty of the community and the value of the land; 

x. 	
To preserve the natural beauty and topography of the Town and to ensure appropriate development with regard to these natural features. 


1.4 JURISDICTION -These Regulations shall apply to the subdivision and re-subdivision of land, as herein defined, located within the corporate limits of the Town of Farmington. No subdivision or re-subdivision of land shall be made by any person, firm or corporation until an application for such subdivision or re-subdivision has been submitted to and approved by the Town Plan and Zoning Commission, and a map thereof has been endorsed by the Commission and filed by the applicant in the Office of the Farmington Town Clerk. 
1.5 	INTERPRETATION, CONFLICT and SEPARABILITY­
1.5.1 Interpretation -In their interpretation and application, the provisions of these Regulations shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety and general welfare. 
1.5.2 Conflict -These Regulations are not intended to interfere with, abrogate or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulations, statute or provision of law. Where any provision of these Regulations imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other provisions of these Regulations or any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher standards shall control. 
1.5.3 Separability -If any part or provision of these Regulations or application thereof to any person or circumstances is adjudged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect or impair the validity of the remainder of these Regulations or the application thereof to other persons or circumstances. 

1.6 AMENDMENTS -For the purpose of providing for the public health, safety and general welfare, the Commission may from time to time amend these Regulations in accordance with provisions of the Connecticut General Statutes. 
1.7 CONDITIONS -Regulation of the subdivision of land and the attachment of reasonable conditions to land subdivision is a valid exercise of police power delegated by the State to this municipality. The developer has the duty to comply with reasonable conditions imposed by the Commission to protect the public health, safety and welfare. 
1.8 PENALTIES -Any person, firm or corporation making any subdivision or re-subdivision of land without the approval of the Commission shall be subject to penalties in accordance with the General Statutes of the State of Connecticut. 
1.9 SELF-IMPOSED RESTRICTIONS -If the owner places restrictions on any of the land contained in the subdivision greater than those required by the Zoning Regulations, or these Regulations, such restrictions or reference thereto shall be indicated on the subdivision map. 
1.10 PLATS STRADDLING MUNICIPAL BOUNDARIES -Whenever access to the subdivision is required across land located in another municipality, the Commission may request assurance that the access is legally established, and that the access road is adequately improved, or that a performance bond has been duly executed and is sufficient in amount to assure the construction of the access road. In general, lot lines should be laid out so as not to cross municipal boundary lines. 
Where a subdivision is to be served by a roadway within another municipality, the Commission may withhold the approval of such subdivision upon the determination that the situation would not allow for the adequate provision of Town services to such subdivision. 
1.11 CHARACTER OF THE LAND -Land which the Commission finds to be unsuitable for subdivision or development, due to flooding, improper drainage, steep slopes, rock formations, adverse earth formations or topography, utility easements or other features which will reasonably be harmful to the safety, health and general welfare of the present or future inhabitants of the subdivision and/or its surrounding areas, shall not be subdivided or developed unless adequate methods are formulated by the developer and approved by the Commission to solve the problems created by the unsuitable land conditions. When appropriate, such land shall be set aside for uses as shall not involve such a danger. 
1.12 WAIVER -The requirements of these Regulations may be waived by five-sixths vote of the full Commission when it is demonstrated that strict compliance with such regulations will cause an exceptional difficulty or unusual hardship. The Commission shall not grant a waiver unless it finds the following conditions are met: 
i. 	The property for which the waiver is sought is uniquely affected by these Regulations; 
ii. 	Physical features of the property or its location cause exceptional difficulty or unusual hardship in meeting the requirements of these Regulations; 

iii.  The granting of a waiver will not have a significantly adverse effect upon adjacent property or the public health and safety;  
iv.  The granting of the waiver will not be in conflict with the Plan of Development;  
v.  Where it is proposed to vary any engineering standard contained in these Regulations, a favorable report from the Town Engineer has been received.  
1.12.1  Waiver Request -A request for waiver shall when practicable be submitted in  

writing by the applicant at the time application for subdivision approval is made. The request shall detail the extent of the waiver requested and contain sufficient data for the Commission to make the findings required above. The Commission may require a public hearing be held in conjunction with a request for a waiver. 
1.13 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT -The Office of the Town Planner shall be responsible for the administration of these Regulations; and the Office of the Town Engineer shall be responsible for enforcing these Regulations. If terms of the subdivision approval or the subdivision plan have been violated, the Commission may instruct the Town Planner to issue no further Zoning Permits until the violation has been corrected and may file a notice of violation on the Farmington Land Records. 
1.14 EFFECTIVE DATE -The effective date of these Regulations shall be May 21, 1982. 

II 

2.1.1.   APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS AND PROCEDURE 
2.1 INFORMAL CONSIDERATION -Prior to submission of a formal application for approval of a subdivision or re-subdivision, the applicant may prepare an informal plan of the subdivision or re-subdivision for informal review by the Commission. If the plan is presented in preliminary rather than final form, any alterations or changes recommended by the Commission may be made more readily and economically by the applicant. Neither the informal plan nor the informal review by the Commission, however, shall be deemed to constitute any portion of the official and formal procedure of applying for and approving subdivisions or re-subdivisions under the provisions of Chapter 126 of the General Statutes of Connecticut. 
2.1.1 Informal Plan -The informal plan should show sufficient information to allow the Commission to make a general planning review under the standards of these Regulations. It is recommended that the informal plan meet the standards for a Site Development Plan. 
2.1.2 Review -When an informal plan is submitted, the Commission may hold a discussion with the applicant and may recommend any changes or improvements in the plan in order to guide the applicant in preparing maps and plans for formal application. 
2.2 PUBLIC HEARINGS -Public hearings shall be held on all subdivision and re-subdivision applications. Where a subdivision is proposed for land zoned or proposed to be zoned in any of the industrial, commercial or business zones, the public hearing may be waived providing an application has been submitted for site plan approval. 
2.3 SUBMISSION -All applications, maps, plans, documents and data required by these Regulations shall be submitted to the Planning Office. The date of receipt of such application shall be determined in accordance with the General Statutes of Connecticut. 
2.4 APPLICATIONS REQUIREMENTS -In order to make formal application for approval of a subdivision or re-subdivision, the applicant shall submit the following: 
2.4.1 Application -Application for approval of a subdivision or re-subdivision shall be made in writing on forms prescribed by the Commission. (Applications blanks are available at the Planning Office.) The application shall be signed by the applicant or his lawful agent; and, if the subdivision or re-subdivision is proposed by a person, firm or corporation other than the owner of the land to be subdivided or re-subdivided, the application shall also be signed by the owner of the land of his lawful agent. Fees shall be as prescribed by TownOrdinance. 
2.4.2 Record Subdivision Map -A record subdivision or re-subdivision map shall be submitted with the application and shall conform to all of the appropriate requirements of the administrative specifications appended to and made part of these Regulations. 
2.4.3 Sanitation Report -Every application for approval of a subdivision must include satisfactory evidence that the site has suitable physical characteristics to adequately 

satisfy all the requirements of both the Farmington Valley Health District and the Connecticut State Department of Health for subsurface sewage disposal, or that the proposed lots can be connected to an operational public sanitary sewer. The sanitary report for on-site systems shall be prepared by a professional engineer and meet the requirements of the administrative specifications. When it is proposed to connect to public sanitary sewers, a sewer feasibility study, as required by the Town Engineer, shall accompany the subdivision application. 
2.4.4 Additional Data -The following data shall be provided as appropriate, and when, in the judgment of the Commission, the scale, scope of work and complexity of the subdivision warrant: 
2.4.4.1 Construction Plans -Plan and profile drawings and typical cross sections, including the design of sanitary sewers, catch basins, manholes, ditches, watercourses, headwalls, sidewalks, gutters, curbs, bridges, culverts and other structures and improvements required by these Regulations. 
2.4.4.2 Site Development Plan -A site development plan shall conform to all of the requirements of the administrative specifications. 
2.4.4.3 Grading Plan -A grading plan showing existing and proposed grades and other data as required by the administrativespecifications. 
2.4.4.4 Hydrological Report -Design of the storm drainage system to include special structures, shall be supported by a hydro-logical report prepared by a civil engineer licensed as a 
P.E. in the State of Connecticut. This report shall, at the minimum, include a copy of the base map used to determine watershed and drainage patterns, and the methodology used to compute runoff and pipe sizes. 
2.4.4.5 Easements and Deeds -Copies of all easements and deeds necessary to carry the subdivision plan into effect, including instruments proposed to be executed or delivered after approval of the application. 
2.4.4.6 Cost Estimate -An engineer’s estimate of the cost of construction of public improvements. Estimates shall be made on forms provided by the Town Engineer’s Office. 
2.4.4.7 Permits and Agreements -Copies of State and federal permits, if issued, and copies of proposed agreements with utility companies. 
2.4.4.8 Supplemental Data -Other data and information may be required from the applicant in order to establish that the proposed subdivision complies with the requirements of these Regulations. 
2.4.5 No application for subdivision or re-subdivision which involves a regulated activity as defined in the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations for the Town of Farmington shall be submitted prior to its submission to the Farmington Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Agency. 

2.4.6 Upon the request of either the Commission or the Town Planner the applicant shall stake out lot boundaries and/or the center line or edge of any proposedstreet. 
2.5 CONSIDERATION OF PROPOSED SUBDIVISIONS -After the above application requirements have been met to the satisfaction of the Commission, the Commission shall consider the application in accordance with the following procedures: 
2.5.1 Hearing -Public hearings shall be held as required by Section 2.2 of these Regulations. Notice of any public hearing shall be given as required by law. The applicant shall mail notice of the public hearing by certified mail no later than 10 days before such hearing to all owners of property within 200 feet from any boundary of the property which is the subject of the application. In addition, the applicant shall post a notification sign provided by the Planning Department on the property at least seven (7) days prior to the date of the public hearing. Evidence of such mailing shall be presented to the Planning Department at or before the public hearing. The name and addresses used shall be those as recorded in the office of the Town Assessor on the date the application is filed. In the case where a property requiring notice has been submitted to common interest ownership, such as a condominium, the required notice need only be sent to the homeowners’ association. 
2.5.2 Decision -The Commission shall approve, approve with modifications, or disapprove, any subdivision application or maps and plans submitted therewith within sixty-five 
(65) days after the date of completion of the public hearing thereon, or, if no public hearing is held, within sixty-five (65) days after the submission thereof. 
An extension of time not to exceed a further period of sixty-five (65) days may be had with the consent of the applicant. 
Where a subdivision plan contains an inland wetlands soil or watercourse for which a permit for regulated activity is required, the Commission shall not render a decision on such application until a decision has been rendered by the Farmington Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Agency. 
If an application for subdivision has been submitted both to the Commission and the Farmington Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Agency and the time period for rendering a decision by the Commission expires prior to the thirty-fifth day after an action has been taken by said Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Agency, the Commission shall have an additional thirty-five days to render a decision on such subdivision from the date of decision of the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Agency. 
2.5.3 Approval -The Commission shall give approval to the subdivision if it finds that the subdivision map and plans and accompanying certificates, documents and data conform to the requirements and are consistent with the purposes of theseRegulations. 
In granting approval, the Commission may attach such conditions that it deems necessary to modify the subdivision map, plans or documents, and to preserve the purpose and intent of these Regulations. 
2.6 FILING and RECORDING -The applicant shall deliver to the Commission within fourteen (14) days after the time for taking an appeal from the action of the Commission has 

elapsed or in the case of any appeal, from the date of termination of such appeal by dismissal, withdrawal or judgment, a copy of the record subdivision map incorporating all of the conditions of approval as set by the Commission on mylar material suitable for filing on the land records in the office of the Town Clerk. This plan shall also be accompanied by all documents required by the Commission including all deeds and easements relating to open spaces or utilities owned or to be owned by the Town of Farmington located outside of any public road right-of-way as well as the submission of an AutoCAD.DXF file of the subdivision plan. The failure to submit this map and documents within the abovementioned time shall render the approved subdivision plan null and void. The Commission may extend the above mentioned time period not more than forty-five (45) days. 
The record subdivision map shall then be endorsed by the Chairman or Secretary of the Commission and made available to the applicant for filing. Any subdivision or re-subdivision plan filed without the signature of the Chairman or Secretary of the Commission shall be void. 
Every approved subdivision plan shall be filed or recorded in the office of the Town  Clerk within ninety (90) days of the expiration of the appeal period or in the case of any appeal, ninety 
(90) days of the termination of such appeal by dismissal, withdrawal or judgment in favor of the applicant, and any plan not so filed or recorded within the prescribed time shall become null and void, except that the Commission may extend the time for such filing for two additional periods of ninety (90) days upon the written request of the applicant and the plan shall remain valid until the expiration of such extended time. 
2.6.1 Certificate/Bonding -Prior to filing and recording the map in accordance with the above Section (Section 2.06) a Certificate of Completion for all required subdivision improvements shall be submitted, together with a statement from the Town Engineer reflecting that the public improvements called for in the subdivision plan have been completed. In lieu of completion of such work and installation previous to the filing of the subdivision map, the Town Manager may, on behalf of the Commission, accept a bond in accordance with the provisions of Section 3.01. 
2.6.2 Conditional Approval -In lieu of either the completion of the work or the furnishing of a bond as provided for in Section 2.06.01, the Commission may authorize the filing of a plan with a conditional approval endorsed thereon. Such approval shall be conditioned on 
(1) the actual construction, maintenance and installation of any improvements or utilities prescribed by the Commission; or (2) the provision of a bond as provided in Section 2.06.01. Upon the occurrence of either such events, the Commission shall cause a final approval to be endorsed thereon in a manner provided for by these Regulations. Any such conditional approval shall lapse on the date specified by the Commission, which period shall not exceed three (3) years from the date such approval is granted. The Commission may grant one extension of time, such additional period not to exceed two (2) years. Any person, firm or corporation who, prior to such final approval, sells or offers for sale any lot subdivided pursuant to a conditional approval shall be fined in accordance with the provisions of State Statute. 
2.6.3 Final Approval -Any person, firm or corporation making any subdivision of land containing less than four hundred (400) dwelling units shall complete all work in connection with such subdivision within five (5) years after the approval of the plan for such subdivision. Failure to complete all work within such five (5) year period shall result in automatic expiration of the approval of such plan and no additional lots in the subdivision shall be conveyed by the subdivider or his successor in interest as such subdivider except with approval by the Commission of a new application for subdivision of the subject land. 

Any person, firm or corporation making any subdivision of land containing more than four hundred (400) dwelling units shall complete all work in connection with such subdivision within ten (10) years after the approval of the plan for such subdivision. Failure to complete all work within such ten (10) year period shall result in automatic expiration of the approval of such plan and no additional lots in the subdivision shall be conveyed by the subdivider or  his successor in interest as such subdivider except with approval by the Commission of a new application for subdivision of the subject land. 
“Work” for the purposes of this section means all physical improvements required by the approved plan, other than the staking out of lots, and includes but is not limited to the construction of roads, storm drainage facilities, water and sewer lines, the setting aside of open space and recreation areas, installation of telephone and electric services, planting of trees or other landscaping and installation of retaining walls or other structures. 
2.7 DEVELOPMENT OF BUILDING LOTS -No Zoning Permit and Building Permit shall be issued for the development of any lot in a subdivision unless all of the utilities (including power, sanitary sewer and water) have been extended to the lot, and are energized or approved for use. This shall include the performance of an air test for the sanitary sewer, a pressure and flow test for any water line and a pressure test for any natural gas line. This provision shall not however prevent the construction of up to three model homes with the permission of the Commission. In addition to the preceding, where a building lot has access to a proposed road, such road shall be completed with the exception of the first and second courses of pavement prior to issuance of a Zoning Permit or Building Permit. 
No Zoning Certificate of Compliance or Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued for any building constructed upon a subdivision lot having access to a proposed road unless said road has been completed with the exception of a second course of pavement and curbing; a paved driveway apron has been installed; all street lights have been erected and are operational; and a sidewalk if required has been constructed to the lot. 
A copy of these restrictions shall be placed on the land records by the applicant or owner of the subdivision at the time the subdivision plan is recorded in the office of the Town Clerk. In addition these restrictions shall be incorporated into the deed of any subdivision lot sold. 
2.8 ALTERATIONS AND REVISIONS TO APPROVED SUBDIVISION AND RESUBDIVISION PLANS -From time to time requests are received for revisions of or alterations to approved subdivision or re-subdivision plans. Such revisions or alterations may have minor or major consequences. Such requests will be first screened by the Planning Director and if he determines such request to be of minor consequences, he will conditionally approve the request and advise the Commission of his action. Unless the Commission acts to modify his conditional approval, the conditional approval shall become final approval. If the Planning Director determines such request to have a significant consequence, the request shall be submitted to the Commission for its consideration and action following a public hearing. 

III 

ASSURANCE FOR COMPLETION AND MAINTENANCE OF IMPROVEMENTS 
3.1 BONDS -In lieu of requiring the completion of public improvements including all required landscaping, previous to the final approval of a subdivision plan, the applicant may post a bond with the Town in an amount and with surety or other security and conditions satisfactory to the Town Manager. In addition the applicant shall deliver to the Town Manager signed contracts between the applicant and private utility companies for the installation of utility lines in such subdivision. Bonds shall secure to the Town the actual construction and installation of such improvements. The sum of such bond shall be determined by the Town Engineer in his sole and absolute discretion. The Town Engineer shall review the amount of the bond at a minimum of every two years from the date the bond is filed and may require an increase in the amount of such bond as adjusted for inflation. 
3.1.1 Definition -For the purposes of this section, a bond shall mean one of the following: 
(1) A surety bond; (2) A bond secured by a passbook savings account; (3) A bond secured by an irrevocable letter of credit; or (4) Any other form of security satisfactory to the Town Manager. All such bonds shall be subject to the approval of the Town Manager. 
3.1.2 Form -Bonds shall be duly executed on forms provided or approved by the Town, with proper reference to all maps and plans showing the streets, drainage and other improvements covered by the bond. Forms and other data shall be provided as follows: 
3.1.2.1 Surety Bonds shall be accepted only from those companies licensed to do business in the State of Connecticut. They shall be accompanied by the power of attorney of the person executing the bond for the company. 
3.1.2.2 Bonds Secured by a Passbook Savings Account shall be accompaniedby: 
i. The savings account passbook; 
ii. 	A withdrawal slip in the amount of the bond, properly endorsed and made payable to the Town; and 
iii. 	A letter from the bank acknowledging that the account has been assigned to the Town for the period established for the construction or installation of public improvements, plus three months. 
3.1.2.3 Bonds Secured by Irrevocable Letters of Credit shall be provided by a bank or other similar reputable institution or individual, subject to the approval of the Town Manager. The letter of credit shall be in such form and accompanied by such documents as may be prescribed by the Town Manager. 
3.01.03 Cash Bond -In the case of conditional or final approval a cash bond in the amount of $10,000 or five percent of the cost of improvements excluding utilities not intended to be conveyed to the town, whichever is the greater amount, shall be posted with the Town Manager. Such bond shall be accompanied by an agreement under which the Town Manager 

may draw on such funds, after adequate notice, to effect snow plowing or other maintenance necessary for the public health, safety and convenience. Such monies may also be used to pay any electrical charges necessary for street lighting. The extent of such payments to the Town shall be specified in the agreement with the Town Manager. 
3.2 FAILURE TO COMPLETE IMPROVEMENTS -Where a bond has been posted and required improvements have not been installed within the terms of such bond, the Town may thereupon declare the bond to be in default and require that all the improvements be installed regardless of the extent of the building development at the time the bond is declared to be in default. 
3.3 PARTIAL RELEASE -Upon written request by the applicant the Town Engineer may recommend the release of a portion of the surety in accordance with the following schedule. In no case however shall the balance of the surety be less than sufficient to guarantee completion of the bonded improvements. Such partial releases may be authorized by the Town Manager’s Office. 

BOND REDUCTION SCHEDULE 
An applicant’s bond may be reduced if the following items are completed (installed) and found acceptable by the Town Engineer. 
First Release  Clearing Sanitary Sewer Storm Drainage Utilities Subgrade Base Material  BOND REDUCTION 30%  
Second Release  Binder Course Curbing Sidewalk Erosion and Sedimentation Control (Site Stabilization)  BOND REDUCTION 30%  
Final Release  Turf Establishment Street Trees Top Course As Built Drawings Surveyor’s Certification Removal of All Unauthorized Objects from Rights-of-Way Deeds Street Signage  BOND REDUCTION 25%  

3.4 FINAL RELEASE -Bonds will not be released until the following conditions have been met: 
i. 	The Town Engineer has submitted a certificate stating that all required improvements have been satisfactorily completed; 
ii. 	The applicant’s engineer or surveyor has certified to the Town Engineer, through submission of detailed “as built plans” that the layout of the line and grade of all public improvements are in accordance with construction plans for the subdivision; 
iii. 	All public improvements called for in the final plan have been accepted by the Town. A maintenance bond, as described in Paragraph 3.05, shall be filed with the Town; 
iv. 	All documents required by the “Acquisition Agreement for a Public Right-of-Way” have been presented and all conditions and requirements of the Commission’s approval of the subdivision application have been satisfied. 

3.5 MAINTENANCE OF IMPROVEMENTS -The applicant shall be required to maintain all improvements until acceptance of said improvements by the Town. Snow removal on streets shall be provided by the Town following the installation of the first course of pavement. This service shall be provided at no charge for the first winter season. Thereafter the applicant shall be responsible for such cost and shall make payment to the Town in a sum to be determined by the Town in its sole and absolute discretion. The applicant shall prepare the roadway for plowing, including the shimming of all catch basins and manholes prior to each November 15th. The Town Manager, after adequate notice, may draw on the cash or maintenance bond for the cost of snow removal or road preparation. 
3.5.1 Maintenance Bond -Fifteen percent of the bond specified in Section 3.01 shall be designated as the maintenance bond. In the case where no such bond is posted, the applicant, prior to final approval shall file a maintenance bond equal to 15% of the actual construction and installation costs of such improvements referred to in Section 3.01. This bond shall also include a cash portion equal to the cost of the first year’s electric bill for street lighting as determined by the Town Engineer. In order to assure the satisfactory condition of the bonded improvements the Town Manager may draw on such bond for a period of one year after the date of its acceptance by the Town with the following exception. In the case where an accepted road contains completed buildings on less than 50% of the total lots along such road or within the total subdivision that the particular road serves, the Town may continue to hold a portion or all of such maintenance bond past the one-year period until such threshold is exceeded. 

IV 

DESIGN STANDARDS 

4.1 GENERAL IMPROVEMENTS -Subdivisions and re-subdivisions, including related streets, drainage and other improvements required by these Regulations, shall be planned, designed and constructed in accordance with the standards hereinafter specified. 
4.1.1 Plan of Development -Subdivisions shall be planned and designed in general conformity with the Plan of Development, adopted by the Commission for the Town under Chapter 126 of the Connecticut General Statutes, particularly with regard to: 
i. 	Location and classification of streets. 
ii. 	Sanitary sewer, water supply and drainage system service area. 
iii. 	Reservation of land for parks, recreation and open space. 
4.1.2 Subdivision Name -The proposed name of the subdivision shall not duplicate, or too closely approximate phonetically, the name of any other subdivision in the Town. The principal road in the subdivision shall bear the same name as the subdivision. 
4.1.3 Open Spaces -For any subdivision application made under these Regulations, the Commission may require of the subdivider the disposition and official dedication of appropriately located and sized open space areas. In determining the appropriateness of an open space disposition the Commission shall consider the recommendations and locations designated in the Plan of Conservation and Development and the subject site’s characteristics with respect to the following objectives: The conservation and protection of wildlife and natural or scenic resources including lakes, ponds, rivers, streams, streambelts, inland wetlands, aquifers, hillsides, significant woodlands, groves of scenic trees or trees of one species, particular trees of special size or unusual type, ridges, ravines, stone walls, ledge outcroppings and other unusual physical features; the protection of historic or archaeological sites, established marked trails, farming operations including pasture land, farmland soils; the protection of flood prone areas; the expansion of existing open space; the meeting of neighborhood and/or community wide recreational needs. In establishing the location of open space, the Commission may consider potential for combination with existing or proposed open space on adjoining properties. In deter­mining the total land to be reserved as open space, the Commission may consider not only the tract or tracts of land to be immediately subdivided, but also any other adjacent tracts owned, controlled or under agreement to buy or option to buy by the subdivider. A maximum of fifteen (15%) of the total tract proposed for subdivision may be required as open space in the R80, R40 and R30 zones, while the Commission may require the set-aside of between fifteen percent (15%) and twenty percent (20%) in the R20, R12 and R9 zones. At the discretion of the Commission open space areas shall be owned and managed in one or more of the following ways: 
i. 	Deeded to the Town of Farmington, State of Connecticut or other government unit or entity established by Federal, State or local government; 

ii.  Deeded to the Farmington Land Trust or other nonprofit land conservation trust as found acceptable to the Commission and where required subject to a conservation easement in favor of the Town of Farmington;  
iii.  Deeded to the lot owners of the subdivision such that each lot owner possesses an undivided interest in the designated open space area and is jointly and severally responsible for the payment of taxes on and maintenance of the designated open space area and subject to a conservation easement in favor of the Town of Farmington or an acceptable nonprofit land conservation trust as required;  
iv.  Held in ownership by individual lot owners as part of their lot and subject to a conservation easement in favor of the Town of Farmington or an acceptable nonprofit land conservation trust as required.  

The applicant may designate in its application which of the foregoing entities is proposed to own the open space, but, as part of the approval of such application the Commission may modify such designation. Furthermore, the Commission may modify any application so as to designate open space in locations other than that proposed. In determining the appropriate entity to own the proposed open space or whether to require open space in locations different from those proposed, the Commission shall consider the following factors: The location or ownership of any existing open space on adjacent properties, or the proximity to non-adjacent open space which might reasonably interconnect with the proposed open space in the future; the location on adjacent properties of natural, scenic or historic resources as previously mentioned in  this section; the proposed use of the open space for active or passive uses and the extent of maintenance, supervision or management required; the potential benefits which the open space might provide to residents of the Town or the State if it were accessible to them; the size, shape, topography and character of the open space; the recommendations of the Plan of Development; and the reports or recommendations of any Federal, State, Regional or Town agencies or commissions. 
4.01.03.1 In lieu of providing such open space land as may be required by Section 
4.1.3 of these Regulations, an applicant, with the approval of the Commission, may provide a cash payment or combination of cash payment and land reserved for open space. Lands offered for open space may be located off the subject property. All cash payments shall be submitted to the Town of Farmington, while land reserved for open space shall be owned and managed at the discretion of the Commission in one or more of the ways specified in Section 4.01.03. Such cash payment or combination of payment and the fair market value of land offered (as calculated prior to the approval of the subdivision) shall be equal to 10% of the fair market value of the land to be subdivided prior to the approval of the subdivision, however the sum of such payment (cash or cash and land) shall not exceed a figure equal to 10% of the fair market value of the new building lots approved (subsequent to the approval of the subdivision). The fair market value shall be determined by an appraiser jointly selected by the Commission and the applicant. The appraisal shall be completed prior to the filing of the approved subdivision map in the office of the Town Clerk. The cost of such appraisal shall be equally shared between the applicant and the Town of Farmington. The Town’s share of the appraisal cost shall be subtracted from the cash payment paid by the applicant. 

A fraction of such payment, the numerator of which is one and the denominator of which is the number of approved building lots in the subdivision, shall be made no later than at the time of sale of each approved building lot in the subdivision. Fees collected under this section shall be deposited in a municipal fund, which shall be used for the purpose of preserving open space or acquiring additional land for open space or for recreational or agricultural purposes. 
4.1.3.2 The provisions of Sections 4.01.03 and 4.01.03.1 shall not apply where all land in a subdivision containing less than five parcels is transferred to a parent, child, brother, sister, grand-parent, grandchild, aunt, uncle or first cousin for no consideration; or if the subdivision is to contain affordable housing, as defined in Section 8-39a of the Connecticut General Statutes, equal to 20% or more of the total housing units to be constructed in such subdivision. 
4.1.3.3 Any excavation, filling, regrading or other alteration of open space; any construction of any building, structure or other improvement thereon; or any paving or surfacing of open space subsequent to the date of approval of the subdivision, other than those activities required by the plans as approved shall require an amendment to the subdivision approval. 
In the event there is unauthorized disturbance of an area designated as open space the Commission may require the restoration of such area to the condition at the time of approval of the subdivision or restoration consistent with a landscape plan approved by the Commission. 
4.1.3.4 Where open space is proposed for active or passive use by members of the public the Commission may require that the applicant provide access paths or driveways graded and improved in a manner suitable for safe pedestrian and/or vehicular traffic. 
The Commission may require the landscaping of open space in a number of situations including but not limited to the following: Where such open space is located adjacent to a proposed or existing roadway or to a nonresidential use; where such open space contains inland wetlands or watercourses or slopes in excess of 15 percent grade; and where such open space contains active recreation areas. 
4.1.3.5 In the case where the ownership and maintenance of the open space is to be transferred to an association of property owners such transfer shall be in accordance with standards established by the Commission to include, but not be limited to, the following: 
i. Creation of the association or corporation prior to the sale of any lot; 
ii. 	Mandatory membership in the association of all original lot owners and any subsequent owners; non-amendable bylaws or other restrictions which require the association to maintain the land reserved for open space, park and playground purposes, with power to assess all members for all necessary costs; 
iii. 	The association or corporation shall have the power to assess and collect from each lot owner a specified share of, and where necessary, provide reserves for the costs associated with maintenance, repair, upkeep and insurance of the open space; 

iv. 	Association documents shall provide that if maintenance or preservation of the dedication no longer complies with the provisions of the approval, the Town may take all necessary action to assure compliance and assess against the association all costs incurred by the Town for such purposes. 
Open space covenants and restrictions and association documents shall be subject to the approval of the Commission and the Town Attorney in form and content. After approval the document shall be filed by the subdivider in the office of the Town Clerk. 
4.1.3.6 Properly executed legal documents, including warranty deeds for any title transfer, shall be prepared in accordance with the provisions of this Section and shall be submitted with the Record Subdivision Map to be endorsed and filed. 
4.1.3.7 In the event the applicant desires to convey to the Town land for other municipal purposes such as future schools, firehouses, etc., such conveyance shall comply with Section 4.01.03.6. The Commission may consider such a municipal dedication as a credit toward any open space disposition requirements, but may not require such dedication. 
4.1.3.8 To ensure proper provision of any required improvements the Commission may require the applicant to post a performance bond, letter of credit, passbook or other suitable security in an amount and with terms acceptable to the Commission. Unless otherwise approved by the Commission, all required improvements of open space land shall be completed prior to the acceptance of any public road, or in the case of a subdivision where no public road is involved, prior to the construction of homes on 50% of the lots. 
4.1.4 Monuments -Permanent reference monuments shall be placed within the subdivision as follows: 
i. 	Town road right-of-way merestones, perimeter boundary and lot corners shall conform to Class A-2 of Code of Recommended Practice for Standards of Accuracy of Maps, as amended. A land surveyor registered in the State of Connecticut shall certify as to the correctness of the placement of such monuments. 
ii. 	A minimum of two (2) vertical and horizontal control points will be set within the Town right-of-way at positions designated by the Town Engineer. Horizontal coordinates will be from the Connecticut State Coordinate System with tie-in requirements as above. Vertical control will be U.S.G.S. mean sea level datum. The markers used for horizontal and vertical control shall consist of a merestone with a brass cap. A land surveyor registered in the State of Connecticut will certify to the horizontal and vertical accuracy of the points set in accordance with Class A-2 of the Code of Recommended Practice for Standards of Accuracy of Maps prepared by the Connecticut Technical Council, Inc., January 1945. 
iii. 	Highway lines will be monumented by standard Town of Farmington merestones at all angle points, PC’s, PT’s and PRC’s. The maximum distance between highway merestones will be 500 feet on tangent or curved sections of the highway line.  Highway  merestones  will  be  set  to the  accuracy  of Class  A-2  of the Connecticut Technical Council, Inc. The proposed highway line will be tied into existing highway lines by distance and bearing. Additional highway merestones may be required at locations on the highway line as required by the Town Engineer. 

iv. 	All lot corners including open space parcels shall be permanently located by iron or steel stakes at least 3/4 inch in diameter and thirty (30) inches in length. 
4.1.5 Streets Trees -Shade trees of varieties acceptable to the Commission shall be provided along existing and proposed streets by planting new trees or preserving existing trees. Trees shall be provided at the rate of one per 50 feet on both sides of the right-of-way. Such trees shall be located between the building line and 10 feet inside the lot line. New trees shall be not less than 2 to 2-1/2 inches in caliper and shall be guaranteed for one season’s growth by the developer. Required street trees shall be planted on any particular lot prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Zoning Compliance for a building constructed on such lot. 
4.2 	LOT IMPROVEMENTS AND ACCESS 
4.2.1 Lot Arrangement -The lot arrangement shall be such that there will be no foreseeable difficulties, for reasons of topography or other conditions, in securing building permits to build on all lots in compliance with the Zoning Regulations and Health Codes and in providing driveway access to buildings on such lots from an approved street. 
4.2.1.1 Double Frontage -Double frontage and reversed frontage lots may be required where necessary to provide separation of residential development from traffic arterials or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation. 
4.2.1.2 Lot Access -Where driveway access from a major street may be necessary for several adjoining lots, the Commission may require that such lots be served by a combined access drive in order to limit possible traffic hazard on such street. Such access drive shall be constructed under the standards for private roads with regard to travel way width and construction specifications. The Commission shall establish front yard setbacks from these shared drives when they bisect a line of lots. 
4.2.1.3 Rear Lots -In general, rear lots shall be avoided. However, rear lots may be established in accordance with Article III. Section 4. of the Farmington Zoning Regulations. 
4.2.2 Lot Arrangements on Existing Streets -Lots proposed for existing streets shall, in addition to meeting other applicable standards of these Regulations, be arranged to conform with the following: 
i. 	Where no street lines have been established on an existing street, front property lines for subdivision lots shall not be closer than 25 feet from the center of the road or 50 feet from and parallel to an established street line on the opposite side of the street. The Commission may require that the title to all land between the center of the road and the front property lines of the subdivision lots be dedicated to the Town of Farmington in accordance with the legal requirements for such a procedure. 

ii.  Where a proposed subdivision abuts an existing street that does not comply with the right-of-way requirement found in these Regulations, the Commission may require the dedication of half of the right-of-way deficit along with all necessary rights to grade as determined by the Town Engineer for future road widening.  
iii.  Where the grade of the existing street will be materially higher or lower than the proposed lots fronting on it, the Commission may, for reason of providing adequate sight distance on driveways, alleviating excessive or hazardous slope, or excessive runoff, require any lot or any part of such lot to be regraded as  
necessary.  
iv.  Where the finished grading of a lot fronting on an existing street will cause drainage problems in that street, the developer shall, at his expense, install drains in the street or make such other provision as may be necessary to correct the  

condition. 
4.3 LOT DIMENSIONS -Lot dimensions shall comply with the minimum standards of the Zoning Regulations. In general, side lot lines shall be at right angles to street lines (or radial to curving street lines) unless a variation from this rule will give a better street or lot plan. 
4.3.1 Lots shall be laid out so as to provide drainage away from all buildings and individual lot drainage shall be coordinated with the general storm drainage pattern for the area. Drainage shall be designed so as to avoid concentration of storm drainage water from each lot to adjacent lots. 
4.3.2 Water Bodies and Watercourses -If a tract being subdivided contains a water body or watercourse, lot lines shall be drawn in such a manner that safe maintenance of the water body or watercourse is assured. In the case where a water body is divided among several lots the Commission may require the establishment of a homeowners’ association or similar body to ensure proper maintenance. Where a watercourse passes through a lot the lot owner shall be responsible for maintaining the continual flow of water. 
4.4 SOLAR ACCESS -The applicant shall demonstrate to the Commission that the subdivision planning process has considered site design techniques that promote solar energy use. The site design techniques shall include, but not be limited to, house orientation, street and lot layout, use of landscaping and natural vegetation, natural and man-made topographic features and protection of solar access within the development. 
4.4.1 Lots shall be arranged, where possible, to provide for orientation of buildings to the south in order to encourage solar energy use. 
4.4.2 Streets should have an east-west orientation to the greatest extent possible to permit orientation of buildings to the south and thereby encourage solar energy use. 
4.5 STREETS -GENERAL -No subdivision shall be approved unless the area to be subdivided shall have access from an existing public road which is suitably improved and paved; or a proposed street shown upon a map approved by the Commission and recorded in the office of the Town Clerk. Such proposed street must be suitably improved as required by the appropriate regulations and specifications, or be secured by a performance bond. 

No proposed lots or new street shall have access to a privately owned road unless otherwise approved by the Commission. 
4.5.1 Street Grading and Improvement -Streets shall be graded and improved and conform to Town of Farmington construction standards and specifications and shall be approved as to design and specifications by the Town Engineer. 
4.5.1.1 Streets shall be related appropriately to the topography. Residential streets shall generally be designed, in so far as practicable, with curvilinear alignment. Long tangent sections shall be avoided. All streets shall be arranged so as to obtain as many as possible of the building sites at, or above, the grades of the streets. Grades of streets shall conform as closely as possible to the original topography. A combination of steep grades and curves shall be avoided. 
4.5.1.2 The Commission may withhold approval of all or part of a subdivision where the volume of traffic expected to be generated from such subdivision will likely exceed the capacity of neighboring roads or adversely affect traffic safety, or where the proposed access to the subdivision or individual lots within the subdivision will adversely affect traffic safety. 
4.5.1.3 Where a proposed subdivision contains frontage on a street which has a width of pavement less than that required by these Regulations the Commission may require the applicant to widen said street where it is found that the development of such subdivision will result in reduced safety or traffic congestion, or where it is determined that the Town cannot adequately provide emergency or non-emergency services to the subdivision. 
4.5.2 Traffic Circulation Plan -All streets shall be properly integrated with the existing and proposed system of streets and dedicated rights-of-way as established in the Circulation Plan of the Plan of Conservation and Development. Additionally, all streets shall be properly related to specific traffic generators such as industries, business districts, schools, churches and shopping centers; to population densities; and to the pattern of existing and proposed land uses. In general, street patterns shall be proposed without dead ends. However, streets should be designed in a manner which does not encourage excessive vehicle speed or cut through traffic on local or limited local streets. The Commission may require road designs for local or limited local streets to incorporate traffic calming elements. 
4.5.3 Street Extensions -Where required by the Commission, rights-of-way shall be provided for extending streets to adjoining unsubdivided property. Land in such rights-of-way shall be deeded to the Town or other authority as deemed appropriate by the Commission. 
4.5.3.1 Where a proposed subdivision abuts an approved subdivision containing a future street right-of-way, the developer of the proposed subdivision shall construct the street and all required improvements from the proposed subdivision to the approved street in the existing subdivision. 
4.5.3.2 New streets shall be extended to the boundaries of the subdivision to provide access to adjoining property, and shall intersect with other streets where designated by the Commission or as shown in the Plan of Conservation and Development. A notation shall be added to the record subdivision map indicating that such new road may be extended to serve the adjoining property. 

4.5.3.3 Where a temporary turnaround is provided on a street that is to be extended in the future, the 50-foot street right-of-way to the subdivision boundary shall be deeded to the Town, and the segments of the turnaround outside of 50-foot street shall be deeded to the abutting lot owners subject to an easement to the Town for street purposes. When such street is extended beyond the turnaround, the subdivider constructing the extended street shall remove the road construction in the segments of the temporary turnaround, fill with earth and loam and seed in an appropriate manner. 
4.5.4 Street Names -All street names shall be shown on subdivision plans and shall be approved by the Commission. Proposed street names shall be substantially different from any present names, to avoid confusion in sound or spelling. Streets that become extensions of existing streets shall generally bear the same name. 
4.5.5 Street Lighting Facilities -The applicant shall be required to install one lighting pole at each intersection, together with any additional lighting poles as the Town Engineer may require to prevent hazard. The location of such poles shall be shown on the Construction Plans under Section 2. The cost of all lighting fixtures, poles and installation shall be the responsibility of the developer. The developer shall bond such lighting facilities with all other public improvements. 
4.5.6 Street Name Signs -The developer shall be responsible for the cost and installation of street name signs. Such signs shall be placed at each intersection with existing streets as well as at each intersection within the development. The developer shall bond such street name signs with all other public improvements. 
4.5.7 Traffic Control Devices -The developer shall be responsible for the cost and installation of any traffic control devices deemed necessary by the Traffic Authority or the Commission. The developer shall bond such traffic control devices with other public improvements. Necessary State permits for work related to State highways shall be the responsibility of the developer and shall be coordinated through the office of the local Traffic Authority. 
4.5.8 Reserve Strips -The creation of reserve strips shall not be permitted adjacent to a proposed street in such a manner as to deny access from adjacent property to such street. 
4.6 CUL-DE-SAC OR DEAD END -A temporary turnaround shall be provided on all temporary cul-de-sac streets, with the notation on the subdivision map that land outside the normal street right-of-way shall revert to abutters whenever the street is continued. 
4.06.01 Permanent Cul-de-sacs -Permanent cul-de-sacs may be permitted providing such a design will not (i) impede the circulation requirements of the Plan of Development; (ii) cause undue concentrations of traffic; or (iii) be prejudicial to the needs of public health and safety by unduly delaying or inhibiting access to lots. 

4.7 DESIGN STANDARDS -In order to provide for streets of suitable location, width and improvement to accommodate prospective traffic and afford satisfactory access to police, fire fighting, snow removal, sanitation and road maintenance equipment, and to coordinate streets so as to compose a convenient system and avoid undue hardships to adjoining properties, the following design standards for streets shall be adhered to. 
4.7.1 Table I 
Street R-O-W Pavement Maximum Minimum Design Cross 
Class Width Width Grade Grade Speed Slope 

Collector 60 ft. 32 ft. 8% 1% 35 MPH 3/8”/ft. Local 50 ft. 26 ft. 8% 1% 30 MPH 3/8”/ft. Limited 
Local 50 ft. 22 ft. 10% 1% 35 MPH 3/8”/ft. Industrial 60 ft. 32 ft. 8% 1% 35 MPH 3/8”/ft. 
4.7.1.1 Street classification may be indicated on the Plan of Development; otherwise it shall be determined by the Commission. Streets of a higher classification, i.e. primary and secondary arterial shall, at the minimum, meet collector street standards. 
4.7.1.2 The maximum grade shown in Table I may be increased to 10% for collector, 12% for local streets and 14% for limited local, upon recommendations of the Town Engineer. 
The right-of-way width and pavement width for an industrial road may be reduced to 50 and 26 feet respectively upon recommendation of the Town Engineer. 
4.7.1.3 The pavement width of a collector road may be reduced to 26 feet where on street parking is specifically prohibited or where the Commission foresees little or no need for on street parking. 
4.7.2 Curbs -Curbs shall be required for all new public streets unless eliminated by the Commission upon approval of the Town Engineer and shall conform to construction and design standards of the Town of Farmington except as otherwise approved by the Town Engineer. 
4.7.3 Guide Rails -Guide rails shall be provided where the side slope on fill is steeper than one vertical to four horizontal. Such rails shall conform to the standards and specifications adopted by the Town of Farmington. 
4.7.4 Street Pavement -All street pavement, shoulders, drainage improvements and structures, curbs, turnaround and sidewalks shall conform to all construction standards and specifications adopted by the Town of Farmington. 
4.7.5 Right-of-way -The full width of the street right-of-way shall be graded in accordance with the highway specifications of the Town of Farmington. This requirement may be modified where, in the opinion of the Commission and upon recommendation of the Town Engineer, the existing character of the land creates unusual difficulty or hardship or will require removal of desirable natural growth, and where the location and type of street appears not to require sidewalks in the future. 

4.7.6 The maximum grade within a permanent cul-de-sac shall be 4%. The transition to this grade should be gradual. Maximum grade within a temporary cul-de-sac may be increased to 6% upon recommendation of the Town Engineer. 
4.7.7 Private Residential Street -An applicant may propose to construct a private street to serve two or more lots. However the Commission shall not approve the establishment of a private street when such street is proposed to connect with two or more public streets or when the Commission requires such street to be extended off site either in the present or future and such adjoining land is not under the control of the applicant at the time of application. 
Where a private street system is proposed to serve five (5) lots or less, provisions for the maintenance of such street(s) may be provided by agreement between all homeowners or by the establishment of a homeowners’ association under the terms of the Connecticut Common Interest Ownership Act. The Commission shall approve the entity which owns such street(s). 
Where a private street system is proposed to serve more than five (5) lots, the ownership and maintenance of such street(s) shall be provided by the establishment of a homeowners’ association under the terms of the Connecticut Common Interest Ownership Act. 
4.07.07.1 Private Residential Street Design Standards -The following design standards have been specifically developed for private residential streets and are based upon the ultimate number of lots to be served by a particular street. For those standards not specifically listed under this subsection refer to Section 4.07. 
Table II 
Number of Lots  R-O-W Width  Pavement Width  Turnaround/ Cul-de-Sac  Sidewalks  
2-3  Width of travel way  18 ft.  None Required  None Required  
4-5  40 ft.*  20 ft.  None Required  None Required  
6-20  50 ft.  22 ft.  Yes  Yes  
21+  50 ft.  26 ft.  Yes  Yes  

Curbing and drainage shall be installed as required by the Town Engineer in order to ensure the safe management and disposal of storm water. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 4.07.04, private streets serving less than six (6) lots may be constructed with an 8-inch subbase and 2-1/2 inches of bituminous concrete. 
* The right-of-way width may be reduced to the width of the travel way where the private street is under the ownership and control of a homeowners’ association. 

4.8 INTERSECTIONS -Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at right angles. A proposed intersection of two (2) new streets at an angle of less than eighty (80) degrees or more than one hundred (100) degrees shall not be acceptable. An oblique street should be curved approaching an intersection and should be approximately at right angles for at least one hundred (100) feet therefrom. Not more than two (2) streets shall intersect at any one point unless specifically approved by the Commission. 
4.8.1 Proposed New Intersections -Proposed new intersections with existing or proposed streets shall, wherever practicable, coincide with any existing or proposed intersections on the opposite side of such street. Street intersections shall be spaced apart no less than 150 feet as measured from center line to center line. However the Commission may require distances between intersections of up to 600 feet when a proposed street intersects with a major street (collector class or higher). 
4.8.2 Curb Radius -Minimum curb radius at the intersection of two (2) local streets shall be at least twenty-five (25) feet unless otherwise increased by the Town Engineer; and minimum curb radius at an intersection involving a collector street shall be at least thirty (30) feet. 
4.8.3 Cross Section -At street intersections, the normal cross section of the main street shall be maintained. The centerline grade of the secondary street shall begin at the curb line of the main street and have a maximum grade of 2% for at least fifty (50) feet from said curb line. Maximum may be increased to 4% at the discretion of the Commission, when the proposed street is a permanent cul-de-sac less than 400 feet in length. 
4.8.4 Street Intersections -Where any street intersection will involve earth banks or existing vegetation inside any lot corner that would create a traffic hazard by limiting visibility, the developer shall cut such ground and/or vegetation (including trees) in connection with the grading of the public right-of-way to the extent required by the Commission to provide an adequate sight distance. A sight line easement shall be shown on the subdivision map limiting future plantings within this area to ensure the continuance of adequate sightlines. 
4.8.5 Sight Distance -A minimum unobstructed sight distance equal to three hundred 
(300) feet or ten (10) times the posted speed limit plus fifteen (15) miles per hour [10 x (posted speed limit + 15 mph)] of the intersected road, whichever is greater, shall be provided from each intersecting street. 
4.9 DRAINAGE AND STORM SEWERS 
4.9.1 General Requirements -The developer shall be fully responsible for constructing adequate facilities for the control, collection, conveyance and acceptable disposal of storm water, other surface water and subsurface water, whether originating within the subdivision area or in a tributary drainage area. All drainage facilities shall be designed by a professional engineer registered in the State of Connecticut and be subject to the approval and final acceptance of the Town Engineer. Storm water systems shall be designed for the following objectives: 

I. Prevent flooding of onsite or offsite property. 
II.  Feed and recharge inland wetlands, surface and subsurface waters.  
III.  Minimize pollutant loads in storm water runoff into inland wetlands, surface and  
subsurface waters.  
IV.  Maintain  the  hydrology  of  existing  sub  watersheds  including  wetlands  and  
watercourses.  

4.09.01.1 The storm water drainage system shall be separate and independent of any sanitary sewer system. Storm sewers, where required, shall be designed by methods as approved by the Town Engineer. 
4.9.2 Location of Storm Water Facilities -Drainage facilities shall be located in the street right-of-way where feasible, or in perpetual unobstructed easements, where necessary. Such easements shall be at least twenty (20) feet in width. 
4.9.2.1 When a proposed drainage system will carry water across private land outside the subdivision, appropriate drainage rights must be secured and indicated on the map. 
4.9.2.2 The applicant may be required to dedicate, either in fee or by drainage or conservation easement, land on both sides of existing watercourses to a distance to be determined by the Commission. 
4.9.2.3 Low lying lands along watercourses subject to flooding or overflowing during storm periods shall be preserved and retained in their natural state as drainage ways. 
4.09.03 Drainage Discharge -The discharge of all storm water from a subdivision shall be into suitable streams or wetlands or other acceptable and suitable storm water drainage facilities having adequate capacity to carry the additional water. When discharging into a wetlands, the applicant must demonstrate that the proposed discharge will not significantly alter the wetland’s existing hydrology and habitat. Where multiple watersheds exist within a proposed subdivision, drainage discharge must be designed so as to maintain a hydrologic balance between the multiple watersheds that is compatible with preconstruction conditions. Where the discharge will be into private property, proper easement and discharge rights shall be secured for the Town by the applicant from all affected property owners. Such easements must be acceptably executed before acceptance of drainage plan and recording of the subdivision map. 
4.09.03.1 Where a new street intercepts an existing street which has no underground drainage system or has a drainage system of insufficient capacity to carry the additional flow, appropriate facilities shall be installed by the developer to intercept and dispose of any drainage from the new street which would otherwise be discharged onto the surface of the existing street or into its drainage system. 
4.10 DRAINAGE DESIGN -All designs shall be based on the maximum ultimate development of the entire watershed as permitted by the Zoning Regulations. All bridges and culverts shall be designed such that the required head and backwater produced by the structure shall not cause flooding of abutting property. 

4.10.1 On watersheds one square mile or over, the designs of culverts, bridges and through watercourses shall be based upon not less than a 100-year storm. On watersheds of less than one square mile, the design for the through drainage system shall be for not less than a 50­year storm. 
4.10.2 The drainage system for roads, including catch basins, inlets, pipes, underdrains and gutters within or abutting the subdivision shall be designed for not less than a 10-year storm. 
4.10.3 Adequate underdrains shall be constructed whenever, in the opinion of the Town Engineer, drainage conditions require it. They may be required even though not shown on the approved construction plans. Design shall be as approved by the Town Engineer. 
4.10.4 Engineered swales may be utilized as directed by the Commission and approved by the Town Engineer. Leak-off culverts shall be extended to grade. 
4.10.5 Culverts under streets shall be extended at least to the edge of the right-of-way of the street. Headwalls, paving, flared ends and/or riprap, adequate to prevent erosion, shall be provided at the ends of all culverts. 
4.10.6 Detention or retention basins shall be generally avoided. However, when it is demonstrated that there are inadequate downstream facilities or that such pond will preserve the existing hydrology of the subwatershed or permit desirable infiltration, will not aggravate peak flow or other flooding hazards, and such basins can be properly maintained, then detention or retention structures may be permitted. Where practicable such basins should be located on private property and designed with side slopes no steeper than three feet horizontal for one foot vertical and in a manner such that they can be easily maintained as part of a lawn. The Commission may require the establishment of a homeowners’ association or similar organization to maintain a detention or retention basin. 
4.11 WATER -A potable, adequate and dependable water supply shall be provided for every lot or dwelling or unit. 
4.11.1 Public Water Supply -Public water supply (not including a community well) shall be required to serve all of the following: 
Any proposed subdivision where any portion of such property is located within the required distance of any existing water line as determined by the following formula: Ultimate number of lots times 200 feet equals distance of required extension. The number of lots as expressed in this formula shall include any lot, which may contain an existing dwelling or other structure.  The required distance shall be computed only using routes over public rights-of-way or over land in control of the applicant or the Town. 
4.11.2 Fire Hydrants -Where a public water main is extended, fire hydrants shall be installed at the expense of the developer. Fire hydrants shall be located no more than 500 feet apart. The location of hydrants shall be subject to the review and approval of the Fire Marshal. 
4.11.3 Private Wells -In a subdivision which is located where a public water service is not  required,  a  private well may  be permitted for each lot provided that (i) topographic and geological conditions are satisfactory; (ii) each well can be designed, located and constructed in accordance with the standards and requirements of the Conn. Department of Health; and (iii) each well shall have the approval of the Farmington Valley Health District. 

4.11.4 Water Quality Analysis -Where private wells are proposed the Commission, upon the advice of the Farmington Valley Health District, may require the provision of a water quality analysis report prepared by an acceptable testing laboratory. Analyses shall be performed on samples drawn from the aquifer serving the proposed wells. The number of samples and their location, as well as the extent and type of analyses, shall be subject to the approval of the Farmington Valley Health District. 
4.12 SEWAGE DISPOSAL FACILITIES -Every application for approval of a subdivision must include satisfactory evidence that the site has suitable physical characteristics to adequately satisfy the requirements of the State Health code for subsurface disposal or that the proposed lots can be connected to an operational public sanitary sewer. 
4.12.1 Sanitary Sewage Systems – Public sanitary sewage systems (not including community septic systems) shall be required to serve all of the following: 
Any proposed subdivision located outside the Town’s Sewer Avoidance Area and where any portion of such property is located within the required distance of any existing sanitary sewer line as determined by the following formula: Ultimate number of lots times 200 feet  equals distance of required extension. The number of lots as expressed in this formula shall include any lot which may contain an existing dwelling or other structure. The required distance shall be computed only using routes over public rights-of-way or over land in control of the applicant or the Town. 
4.12.1.1 Where public sanitary sewage systems are not reasonably accessible, but may become available within a reasonable time capped sewers may be required per Ordinance #70. Individual disposal systems may be used provided the applicant shall install sanitary sewer lines, laterals and mains from the street curb to a point in the subdivision boundary where a future connection with the public sewer main shall be made. Sewer lines shall be laid from the house to the street line, and a connection shall be available in the home to connect from the individual disposal system to the sewer system when the public sewers become available. 
4.12.1.2 Where sanitary sewers are not reasonably accessible, as determined by the formula found in Section 4.12.01.1, individual disposal systems may be utilized. However, any building lot proposed to be served by an individual on site subsurface sewage disposal system shall contain a minimum area of 40,000 square feet of continuous non-wetland soils. Non-wetland soils do not include soils classified as poorly drained or very poorly drained by the National Cooperative Soils Survey. 
4.12.1.3 Where it is proposed to pump waste water from a home to a public sewer line or subsurface sewage disposal system, a backup generator shall be provided for each dwelling, except in a case where such home is also proposed to be served by a private well. The type and design of the backup generator and system shall be approved by the Town Engineer. 

4.13 SIDEWALKS -Sidewalks are required in the R40, R30, R20, R12 and R9 Zones. Except in the case of private residential streets, sidewalks shall be provided on both sides of all collector streets and on one side of all local and all limited local streets. (Street class shall be as designated by the Commission and/or the Plan of Development.) The Commission may require the provision of a sidewalk in R80 Zones where it is found that such sidewalk will facilitate the transportation of school children. The sidewalk requirement may be waived or varied by a five-sixths vote of the full Commission providing that it is demonstrated that there will be no adverse effect upon the public safety. Any variance or waiver shall also comply with the provisions of Section 1.12. 
4.13.02 Pedestrian Accesses -The Commission may require, in order to facilitate pedestrian access from the streets to schools, parks, playgrounds or other nearby streets, perpetual unobstructed easements at least ten (10) feet in width. Easements shall be indicated on the record subdivision map. Such easement areas shall be improved by the applicant at the discretion of the Commission. 
4.14 UTILITIES -All utilities lines shall be located underground except that the Commission may approve overhead electrical and telephone lines in subdivisions not involving new streets, or where physical conditions make underground installations impractical. 
4.14.1 Underground locations shall generally comply with the following: 
i. Sanitary sewers -Center line of street. 
ii. Storm sewers -Edge of street opposite water line. 
iii. 	Water line -Within right-of-way above and at least 10 feet from sanitary sewer line. 
iv. 	Electric, telephone and cable TV -Within right-of-way opposite the waterline. 
4.14.2 Underground fuel oil distribution systems are prohibited. 

4.15 SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN -Each application submitted under these Regulations shall include measures to minimize soil erosion and sedimentation resulting from land development. Measures for controlling erosion and sediment shall equal or exceed those contained in “Connecticut Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control,” January, 1985. 
4.15.1 Submission of Detailed Plans -If the cumulative disturbed area within a subdivision shall exceed more than one-half acre, erosion and sediment control plans shall be submitted, certified and sites inspected in accordance with the administrative regulations promulgated by the Town Engineer. Such regulations are a part of these Subdivision Regulations and are contained in Appendix C. 
4.15.2 Site Grading -When the development of a subdivision plan involves the removal of 100 or more cubic yards of earth material off-site the Commission may employ the provisions of Article II. Section 22.A.1.a. through j. and B.1 through 3. of the Farmington Zoning Regulations. The Commission may also employ the abovementioned sections of the Farmington Zoning Regulations if a subdivision plan involves the import of 100 or more cubic yards of earth material from off site. 

4.16 DRIVEWAYS 
4.16.1 Where a lot has access to more than one street the Commission may restrict access to the lot from the less traveled street. The Commission may also prohibit access to one or more streets where it is determined that the establishment of access to such street or streets would adversely affect traffic safety. 
4.16.2 The Commission may require a joint driveway between lots having access to a major street or where it is determined that access from one or more lots to a street would adversely affect traffic safety. When common driveways are utilized, the responsibility for maintenance shall be equally shared by benefiting lot owners and clearly shown and noted on the record subdivision map and placed on the deed of each lot. 
4.16.3 The Commission may require lots having access to a major street to provide a driveway with sufficient turnaround area to prevent backing of vehicles onto such streets. 
4.16.4 All driveways shall contain a concrete or asphaltic concrete driveway apron constructed from the edge of the road pavement to the property lot line. 
4.16.5 The maximum grade of a driveway shall be fourteen percent (14%). The transition to this grade shall be gradual with the first twenty (20) feet of the driveway not to exceed an eight percent (8%) grade. 
4.16.6 The minimum unobstructed sight distance for a driveway at its intersection with an existing or proposed street shall equal ten (10) times the posted speed limit of the intersected street. 
4.17 PROTECTION OF VALUABLE SITE RESOURCES 
4.17.1 Subdivision plans shall be designed to minimize adverse impacts upon the natural and man-made resources listed in Section 4.17.02 which are located either on the subject premises or are contiguous thereto. The Commission in an effort to preserve and protect these resources may require the applicant to take one or more of the following actions: 
i.  Redesign of a submitted subdivision plan including but not limited to the modification of the road and lot layout, relocation of open space parcels and the reconfiguration of lot lines;  
ii.  Reduce the land area per lot, road length and general disturbance to the site by requiring the plan of subdivision to be designed and approved at its discretion as a cluster development (including cluster or open space subdivision) in accordance with Article II. Section 19. of the Farmington Zoning Regulations;  


iii.  Establishment of conservation easements upon land contained within the proposed subdivision;  
iv.  Regulate the manner in which a building lot is developed. This shall include but not be limited to grading, house and driveway location;  
v.  Reduce the total number of building lots.  
4.17.2  List of Valuable Site Resources -The provisions of Section 4.17 shall apply  

to the following list of site resources for which their conservation and protection have been found  to promote the general health, safety and welfare of the community: 
i. 	Land occupied by a farming operation including pastureland; or land consisting of important farmland soils as defined in a report entitled “Important Farmlands-Hartford County Connecticut, United States Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service.” 
ii. 	Sloping land in excess of 15% grade, as calculated by two-foot contour intervals. 
iii. 	Inland wetlands or watercourses as defined in Section 2. of the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations for the Town of Farmington. 
iv. 	
Structures or landscapes having historic or cultural value including archeological sites. 

v. 	
Land along ridgelines, defined as areas lying in the upper half of the area above the mean elevation of the subregional watershed in which the subject property is located. The subregional watersheds are defined on maps prepared by the Natural Resources Division of the Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection. 


vi. 	Existing or proposed public well sites and their respective area of contribution as defined in State Public Act 89-305. 
vii. 	Established marked trails. 
viii. 	Land containing existing permanently preserved open space or recreational areas or land containing areas proposed as open space or recreational areas as shown in the Plan of Development. 
ix. 	
Land containing areas of special concern as identified by the Connecticut Natural Diversity Data Base as prepared by the Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection. 

x. 	
Land containing one or more specimen trees, defined as trees having a diameter at breast height of 36 inches or more. 



xi.  Land located within any of the A zones as found on the Flood Insurance Rate Maps for the Town of Farmington as prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency dated July 17, 1986 and any revision thereto.  
4.17.3  Where the Commission finds evidence that any of the resources listed in Section  

4.17.02 of this Regulation exist either on or contiguous to the subject property, it may require the applicant to perform a detailed study to assess the impact of the proposed subdivision on such resources. This study shall also indicate recommended measures to mitigate any negative impacts upon such resources. 
4.18 FIRE PROTECTION -Where a subdivision is proposed by the applicant or required by these Regulations to be served by public water, no lot intended to be occupied by a one or two family dwelling shall be approved by the Commission unless such water system proposed to serve the subdivision provides a minimum of 1,000 gallons per minute at 20 p.s.i.. This standard may be reduced by the Commission to a minimum of 750 gallons per minute for conventional subdivisions located within the R40 and R80 Zones provided no dwelling proposed to be built shall exceed 2,000 square feet in floor area excluding the basement and garage. 
4.19 	FLOOD PRONE AREAS -Where a subdivision is proposed within a Special Flood Hazard Area, as indicated on the Flood Insurance Rate Map issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, the following requirements shall apply: 
i. 	All subdivision proposals shall be designed to minimize flood damage; 
ii. 	All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; 
iii. 	All subdivision proposals shall provide adequate drainage to reduce exposure to flood hazards; 
iv. 	
Base flood elevation data shall be provided by the applicant for all new subdivision proposals greater than fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres, whichever is the lesser. Such data shall be developed utilizing models employed by FEMA; 

v. 	
The development of all subdivision lots shall be in accordance with the provisions contained in the Farmington Zoning Regulations relating to flood protection. 


4.19.01 Where a subdivision lies adjacent to or contains a water body or watercourse the Commission may prohibit the installation of basements or require the elevation of basement floors to a height above the elevation of such water body or watercourse. 
4.20 INLAND WETLANDS AND WATERCOURSES -To the greatest degree possible land composed of soils designated as inland wetlands shall be set aside as open space outside of a building lot. The Commission may require the following minimum building setbacks or buffers from any wetland soils or watercourses: 
i. R80 Zone – Fifty (50) feet to poorly drained soils and watercourses. Seventy-five 
(75) feet to very poorly drained soils; 
ii. 	R40 and R30 zones – Thirty-five (35) feet to poorly drained soils and watercourses. Seventy-five (75) feet to very poorly drained soils; 

iii. 	R20, R12 and R9 Zones – Thirty (30) feet to poorly drained soils and watercourses. Sixty 
(60) feet to very poorly drained soils. 
1.20.1 	Where a subdivision lies adjacent to or contains an area of inland wetland soils the Commission may prohibit the installation of basements or require the elevation of basement floors to a height above the elevation of such inland wetlands. 
1.20.2 	Maximum Percentage of Residential Building Lot Area to be Comprised of Wetland Soils or Watercourses. (This provision shall not apply to cluster or open space subdivisions) 
i. 	In an R80 zone a proposed building lot shall contain within its boundaries a continuous area of 80,000 square feet that must contain the proposed house location and must contain no more than thirty (30) percent of such area as designated inland wetland soils or watercourses; 
ii. 	In R40 and R30 zones a proposed building lot shall contain a continuous area of 40,000 square feet and 30,000 square feet respectively, that must contain the proposed house location and must contain no more than twenty-five (25) percent of such area as designated inland wetland soils or watercourses; 
iii. 	In R20, R12 and R9 zones a proposed building lot shall contain a continuous area of 20,000 square feet, 12,000 square feet and 9,000 square feet respectively, that must contain the proposed house location and must contain no more than twenty 
(20) percent of such area as designated inland wetland soils or watercourses. 
1.21 	Landscaping Requirements – The Commission may require the submission and implementation of a landscape plan to buffer or beautify a residential subdivision in the following situations: 
i. 	Where such subdivision is located adjacent to a non-residential zoning district or non-residential land use: 
ii. 	Where such subdivision is located adjacent to or contains an arterial or collector street; 
iii. 	Where such subdivision is designed as a cluster or open space subdivision; 
iv. 	
Where such subdivision is approved with the establishment of planting areas as part of a plan to protect, re-establish or create an area of wetlands or a watercourse; 

v. 	
Where a subdivision has been designed to eliminate fifty (50) percent or more of the existing vegetation located on the subject property; 


vi. 	Where a proposed public or private road or common driveway is located in close proximity to an adjoining property’s property line. 

APPENDIX A 
ADMINISTRATIVE SPECIFICATIONS 
STANDARDS FOR MAPS AND PLANS 
A.1 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS -The maps and plans required by these Regulations shall show the information and be prepared in accordance with the standards hereinafter specified. All such maps and plans shall be prepared by, and shall bear the name and seal of, a land surveyor and/or engineer licensed as such by the State Board of Registration for Professional Engineers and Land Surveyors of the State of Connecticut. Pertinent survey data and computations shall be presented by the applicant to the Town Engineer for review if requested by him. 
A.2 SITE DEVELOPMENT PLAN -The Site Development Plan shall be drawn to a scale of not less than 1” = 100’ on a sheet size of 24” x 36”. The plan shall show existing conditions and the proposed layout of lots, streets and improvements for the proposed subdivision and all contiguous land of the applicant that may be subdivided in the future, in order to allow the Commission to complete a general planning review of the proposed subdivision including its relationship to the future subdivision of contiguous land of the applicant. Eight (8) blue or black line prints shall be submitted. The plan shall show at least the following information: 
i. 	Title of the subdivision, which shall not duplicate the title of any previous subdivision in the Town of Farmington. 
ii. 	Name of the owner of the land to be subdivided. 
iii. 	Date, scale, north point, key map at 1” = 1000’. 
iv. 	
Existing and proposed property and street lines; indication of adjoining property lines and street lines for a distance of 200 feet; and the names of all adjacent subdivisions or property owners. 

v. 	
Existing and proposed watercourses and ponds, conservation areas and easements and rights-of-way; base flood elevation data, wetland soils, other land subject to potential flooding; the location and limits of all swamps, floodplains. 


vi. 	Existing contours at an interval not exceeding two (2) feet based on field or aerial survey and using official Town, State or U. S. bench marks, which shall be noted on the plan. 
vii. 	Proposed lots and lot numbers, existing and proposed open spaces for parks, playgrounds, stream protection and other open spaces. 
viii. Existing permanent buildings and structures. 
ix. 	
Principal wooded areas. 

x. 	
Ledge outcrops and existing stonewalls and fences within the subdivision. 



xi.  Approximate dimensions on all proposed property and street lines; approximate lot area and the total acreage of land included in the subdivision.  
xii.  Proposed width of all streets, rights-of-way and easements; the proposed width of all pavement; and proposed street names.  
xiii.  Existing and proposed monuments; any municipal boundary line and zoning districts.  
xiv.  Existing and proposed storm drains, catch basins, manholes, ditches, watercourses, headwalls, sidewalks, gutters, curbs and other structures; and existing and proposed water mains, sanitary sewers and related facilities.  
xv.  Spot elevations on both existing and proposed roads to indicate tentative grading.  
xvi.  The approximate location of any test holes, test pits and borings.  
xvii.  The limits of any areas proposed for regrading by excavation or filling; and the limits  

of any areas proposed to be reserved and protected from excavation or filling. 
A.3 CONSTRUCTION PLANS -Four (4) sets of blue or black line print plan and profile drawings of all proposed streets, storm drains, sanitary sewers, catch basins, manholes, ditches, watercourses, headwalls, sidewalks, gutters, curbs and other structures shall be submitted on a sheet size of 24” x 36”, and drawn to a horizontal scale of 1” = 40’ and a vertical scale of 1” = 4’. Profile drawings and elevations shall be based on Town, State or U. S. benchmarks or other permanent benchmarks approved by the Town Engineer; the benchmarks used shall be noted on the plan. All construction plans, plans for streets, storm drainage, water supply and other utilities and structures shall be designed by, and bear the seal of, a professional engineer licensed to practice in the State of Connecticut. Plan-profile drawings shall show at least the following information in accordance with good engineering practice and as appropriate for the particular subdivision or re-subdivision: 
i. 	Title of the subdivision or re-subdivision, date, scale, Town and State. 
ii. 	For streets, the existing grades at the centerlines and both street lines and the proposed grade at the centerline and both street lines; width of pavement and typical cross section of roads with specifications. 
iii. 	Depth, invert, slope and size of all pipes, ditches, culverts, manholes, catch basins, headwalls and watercourses; typical ditch and watercourse cross  sections. 
iv. 	
Approximate location of lot lines intersecting the street line; lot numbers and street names. 

v. 	
Sidewalks, curbs, gutters and special structures to include streetlights. 


vi. 	Detail drawings of any bridges, box culverts, deep manholes and other special structures. 

vii. 	Notation and details on erosion and sedimentation control methods to be employed. 
A.4 GRADING PLAN -The area shown on the grading plan may be limited to the portion of the subdivision or re-subdivision affected by the proposed major regrading, cuts, fills, or soil or rock removal. Four (4) blue or black line prints of the grading plan shall be submitted. The grading plan shall be drawn on a sheet size of 24” x 36” and to the scale of 1” = 40’ or larger, and shall bear the seal of an engineer licensed to practice in the State of Connecticut. Contours and elevations shall be based on the same benchmarks as provided in Paragraph A.03. The grading plan shall show at least the following information: 
i. 	Title of the subdivision or re-subdivision. 
ii. 	Name of the owner of the land to be subdivided. 
iii. 	Date, scale, north point, Town and State. 
iv. 
Layout of existing and proposed lot lines and street lines. 

v. 	
Existing and proposed contours at an interval not exceeding two (2) feet based on field or aerial survey. 


vi. Existing and proposed drainage and watercourses. 
vii. 	Existing permanent buildings and structures, including well and septic locations. 
viii. 	Location of all test holes, test pits or borings. 
ix. 
Cross section drawings covering proposed excavation areas. 

x. 	
Notations and details on erosion and sedimentation control methods to be employed. 


A.5 RECORD SUBDIVISION MAP -The subdivision map shall be prepared with an accuracy meeting, or exceeding, standards for a Class A-2 Transit Survey as defined by the Connecticut Technical Council, Inc. The map shall be clearly and legibly drawn on a sheet size of 24” x 36” and submitted in eight (8) copies of blue or black line prints. The map shall be drawn to a scale of 1” = 40’. The map shall show the following: 
i. 	Title of the subdivision, which shall not duplicate the title of any previous subdivision in the Town of Farmington. 
ii. 	Name of the owner of the land to be subdivided. 
iii. 	Date, scale, north point, Town and State. 

iv. 	
Existing and proposed property and street lines; indication of adjoining property lines and street lines for a distance of 200 feet; and the names of all adjacent subdivisions and property owners. 

v. 	
Existing and proposed watercourses and ponds, conservation areas, easements and rights-of-way; the location and limits of all easements or reservation areas for the protection of swamps, floodplains or other land subject to potential floods, location and limits of wetland soils. 


vi. 	Proposed lots and lot numbers, existing and proposed open spaces for parks, stream protection and other open spaces; the square footage or acreage of all lots and open spaces, the total acreage of land included in the subdivision and zone designation. 
vii. 	Existing permanent buildings and structures. 
viii. 	Dimensions on all lines to the hundredth of a foot; and bearings or deflection angles on all straight lines, and the central angle, tangent distance and radius of all arcs. 
ix. 	
The width of all streets, rights-of-way and easements; street names. 

x. 	
Existing and proposed monuments; any municipal boundary line. 


xi. 	A location map showing the location of the subdivision in relation to existing streets in the Town at a scale of 1” = 1000’. 
xii. 	An index map, if the proposed subdivision is divided into sections or is of such size that more than one sheet is required, showing the entire subdivision with lots, lot numbers, streets, street names and delineation of areas covered by the section or sheet. 
xiii. 	The survey relationship of proposed streets to nearby monumented Town streets or State highways where practical. 
xiv. 	The error of closure, which shall not exceed 1 in 5000. 
xv. 	The following signature blocks: 
a) Approved by the Town Plan and Zoning Commission of the Town of Farmington on this day of ,    . In accordance with Sec. 8-26c. of the Connecticut General Statutes, all work in connection with this subdivision must be completed by 
,	. 

Chairman b) Water   supply   and   sewage  disposal   facilities  described as follows: 
approved this day of , . For conditions affecting the design, approval or installation of subsurface sewage disposal systems within this subdivision see letter by Farmington Valley Health District dated . 
Farmington Valley Health District c) If applicable: CONDITIONAL APPROVAL by the Town Plan and Zoning Commission of the Town of Farmington granted this day of , . 
Chairman 
This approval is conditional on 1) the actual construction, maintenance and installation of any improvements prescribed by the Commission or 2) the provision of a bond as provided in  Town Subdivision  Regulations  and  will lapse on unless  renewed  by the Commission. This approval does not permit the sale of any lot until final approval has been granted by the Commission. 
A.6 APPROVED MAPS -Upon approval of the subdivision, final plans shall be submitted as follows: 
i. Record Subdivision Map -2 sets drawn on mylar drafting film. 
ii. Construction and Grading Plan -4 blue or black line paper sets. 

APPENDIX B 
ADMINISTRATIVE SPECIFICATIONS 
SANITARY REPORT FOR ON SITE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS 
B.1 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS -Where subsurface sewage disposal systems are proposed a Sanitary Report shall be prepared by a professional engineer licensed in the State of Connecticut and submitted to the Farmington Valley Health District. Such report shall contain the following information as required by the Farmington Valley Health District: 
i. 	General nature and development of surrounding areas shown on map with explanation text. 
ii. 	Topography and natural drainage pattern. 
iii. 	Subsurface conditions as shown by subsurface investigation, including soil absorption characteristics, groundwater level conditions, ledge rock and general nature of soil. 
iv. 	
General description of type of development contemplated, noting type of dwelling units and structures, number of families per structure and number of bedrooms per dwelling unit. 

v. 	
Detailed description of proposed sewage disposal facilities, indicated sizes for various ground conditions, material to be used and general layout pattern to be used. 


vi. 	Special precautions that may be necessary to provide proper functioning of the proposed disposal systems. 
vii. 	Flood heights of any nearby streams, brooks or rivers. 
B.2 TEST RESULTS AND ENGINEERING EVALUATION -The report shall contain results and engineering evaluation of test results based on an extensive subsurface investigation. Investigation shall be made as to whether the soil is suitable for the absorption of septic tank effluent and, if so, how much area is required. The soil must have an acceptable percolation rate, without interference from groundwater or impervious strata below the level of the absorption system. 
B.2.1 Technical Standards should be within the range specified in the sanitary regulations as adopted by the Farmington Valley Health District, and enforced by the Farmington Valley Health District. Unless these conditions are satisfied, the area is unsuitable for subsurface sewage disposal systems in a subdivision. 
B.2.2 Subsurface Testing shall be performed according to procedures prescribed by the Farmington Valley Health District. 

B.3 ENGINEER’S STATEMENT -The report shall contain a statement by the engineer that, in his professional opinion, the area is suitable for the installation of individual sanitary sewage disposal systems of the general type and size described in his report. Any reservations or special conditions considered necessary by the engineer shall be repeated in this portion of his report. 

APPENDIX C 
ADMINISTRATIVE SPECIFICATIONS 

SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL SPECIFICATIONS 
FOR LAND DEVELOPMENT 

C.1 DEFINITIONS 

C.1.1 “Certification” means a signed, written approval by the Farmington Town Engineer, designated agent for the Farmington Town Plan and Zoning Commission, or the Hartford County Soil and Water Conservation District that a soil erosion and sediment control plan complies with the applicable requirements of theseregulations. 
C.1.2 “County Soil and Water Conservation District” means the Hartford County Soil and Water Conservation District established under subsection (a) of Section 22a-315 of the General Statutes. 
C.1.3 “Development” means any construction or grading activities to improve or unimproved real estate. 
C.1.4 “Disturbed area” means an area where the ground cover is destroyed or removed leaving the land subject to accelerated erosion. 
C.1.5 “Erosion” means the detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by water, wind, ice or gravity. 
C.1.6 “Grading” means any excavating, grubbing, filling (including hydraulic fill) or stockpiling of earth materials or any combination thereof, including the land in its excavated or filled condition. 
C.1.7 “Inspection” means the periodic review of sediment and erosion control measures shown on the certified plan. 
C.1.8 “Sediment” means solid material, either mineral or organic, that is in suspension, is transported or has been moved from its site of origin by erosion. 
C.1.9 “Soil” means any unconsolidated mineral or organic material of anyorigin. 
C.1.10 “Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Plan” means a scheme that minimizes soil erosion and sedimentation resulting from development and includes, but is not limited to, a map and narrative. 

C.2 ACTIVITIES REQUIRING A CERTIFIED EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN -A soil erosion and sediment control plan shall be submitted with any application for development when the disturbed area of such development is cumulatively more than one-half acre. 
C.3 EXEMPTIONS -A single family dwelling that is not a part of a subdivision of land shall be exempt from these soil erosion and sediment control regulations. 
C.4 EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN 
C.4.1 To be eligible for certification, a soil erosion and sediment control plan shall contain proper provisions to adequately control accelerated erosion and sedimentation and reduce the danger from storm water runoff on the proposed site based on the best available technology. Such principles, methods and practices necessary for certification are found in the “Connecticut Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control” 1985 as amended. Alternative principles, methods and practices may be used with prior approval of the Town Engineer. 
C.4.2 Said plan shall contain, but not be limited to: 
i. 	
A narrative describing: 

a. 	
The development; 

b. 	
The schedule for grading and construction activities including: start and completion dates; sequence of grading and construction activities; sequence for installation and/or application of soil erosion and sediment control measures; and sequence for final stabilization of the project site; 

c. 	
The design criteria for proposed soil erosion and sediment control measures and storm water management facilities; 

d. 	
The construction details for proposed soil erosion and sediment control measures and storm water management facilities; 

e. 	
The installation and/or application procedures for proposed soil erosion and sediment control measures and storm water management facilities; 

f. 	
The operations and maintenance program for proposed soil erosion and sediment control measures and storm water management facilities; 


ii. 
A site plan map at 1” = 100’ or larger scale to show: 

a. 	
The location of the proposed development and adjacent properties; 

b. 	
The existing and proposed topography including soil types, wetlands, watercourse and water bodies; 

c. 	
The existing structures on the project site, if any; 

d. 	
The proposed area alterations including cleared, excavated, filled or graded areas and proposed structures, utilities, roads and, if applicable, new property lines; 

e. 	
The location of and design details for all proposed soil erosion and sediment control measures and storm water management facilities; 

f. 	
The sequence of grading and construction activities; 

g. 	
The sequence of installation and/or application of soil erosion and sediment control measures; 

h. 	
The sequence for final stabilization of the development site. 



iii. 	Such plan shall be prepared by a Professional Engineer registered in the State of Connecticut unless a waiver is granted by the Town Engineer. Such engineer shall certify that the plans as prepared comply with the requirements and objectives of these regulations. 
iv. 	Any other information deemed necessary and appropriate by the Town Engineer. 
C.5 MINIMUM ACCEPTABLE STANDARDS 
C.5.1 Plans for soil erosion and sediment control shall be developed in accordance with these regulations using the principles as outlined in Chapters 3 and 4 of the “Connecticut Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control” 1985, as amended. Soil erosion and sediment control plans shall result in a development that minimizes erosion and sedimentation during construction; is stabilized and protected from erosion when completed; and does not cause off site erosion and/or sedimentation. 
C.5.2 The minimum standards for individual measures are those in the “Connecticut Guidelines for Soil and Sediment Control” 1985, as amended. The Town Engineer (or the County Soil and Water Conservation District) may grant exceptions when requested by the applicant if technically sound reasons are presented. 
C.5.3 The appropriate method from Chapter 90 of the “Connecticut Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control” 1985, as amended, shall be used in determining peak flow rates and volumes of runoff unless an alternative method is approved by the Town Engineer. 
C.6 ISSUANCE OR DENIAL OF CERTIFICATION 
C.6.1 The Town Engineer (or the Hartford County Soil and Water Conservation District) shall either certify that the soil erosion and sediment control plan, as filed, complies with the requirements and objectives of this regulation or deny certification when the development proposal does not comply with these regulations. 

C.6.2 Nothing in these regulations shall be construed as extending the time limits for the approval of any application under Chapter 124, 124a or 126 of the General Statutes. 
C.6.3 Prior to certification, any plan submitted to the municipality may be reviewed by the County Soil and Water Conservation District which may make recommendations concerning such plan, provided such review shall be completed within thirty days of the receipt of such plan. 
C.7 CONDITIONS RELATING TO SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTCONTROL 
C.7.1 The estimated costs of measures required to control soil erosion and sedimentation, as specified in the certified plan, shall be covered in a performance bond. Such bond shall be a cash bond accompanied by an agreement acceptable to the Town Engineer. 
C.7.2 Site development shall not begin unless the soil erosion and sediment control plan is certified and those control measures and facilities in the plan scheduled for installation prior to site development are installed and functional. 
C.7.3 Planned soil erosion and sediment control measures and facilities shall be installed as scheduled according to the certified plan. 
C.7.4 All control measures and facilities shall be maintained in effective condition to ensure the compliance of the certified plan. 
C.8 INSPECTION 
C.8.1 The Town Engineer may require the permittee to verify through progress reports that soil erosion and sediment control measures and facilities have been performed or installed according to the certified plan and are being operated and maintained. 
C.8.2 Where field conditions so indicate, the Town Engineer may require corrective or alternate means of soil erosion and sediment control measures not shown on the certified plan. 

W-1
TOWN OF FARMINGTON
REGULATIONS
FOR
INLAND WETLANDS AND
WATERCOURSES REGULATIONS
(Amended to April 27, 2018)
FARMINGTON TOWN HALL
One Monteith Drive
Farmington, Connecticut 06032-1053
W-2
INLAND WETLANDS AND WATERCOURSES REGULATIONS
TOWN OF FARMINGTON, CONNECTICUT
Section l. TITLE AND AUTHORITY
The inland wetlands and watercourses of the State of Connecticut are an indispensable and
irreplaceable but fragile natural resource with which the citizens of the State have been endowed.
The wetlands and watercourses are an interrelated web of nature essential to an adequate supply
of surface and underground water; to hydrological stability and control of flooding and erosion;
to the recharging and purification of groundwater; and to the existence of many forms of animal,
aquatic and plant life. Many inland wetlands and watercourses have been destroyed or are in
danger of destruction because of unregulated use by reason of the deposition, filling or removal
of material, the diversion or obstruction of water flow, the erection of structures and other uses,
all of which have despoiled, polluted and eliminated wetlands and watercourses. Such
unregulated activity has had, and will continue to have, a significant, adverse impact on the
environment and ecology of the State of Connecticut and has and will continue to imperil the
quality of the environment thus adversely affecting the ecological, scenic, historic and
recreational values and benefits of the State for its citizens now and forever more. The
preservation and protection of the wetlands and watercourses from random, unnecessary,
undesirable and unregulated uses, disturbance or destruction is in the public interest and is
essential to the health, welfare and safety of the citizens of the State. It is therefore, the purpose
of these regulations to protect the citizens of the State by making provisions for the protection,
preservation, maintenance and use of the inland wetlands and watercourses by minimizing their
disturbance and pollution; maintaining and improving water quality in accordance with the
highest standards set by federal, state or local authority; preventing damage from erosion,
turbidity or siltation; preventing loss of fish and other beneficial aquatic organisms, wildlife and
vegetation and the destruction of the natural habitats thereof; deterring and inhibiting the danger
of flood and pollution; protecting the quality of wetlands and watercourses for their
conservation, economic, aesthetic, recreational and other public and private uses and values; and
protecting the State’s potable fresh water supplies from the dangers of drought, overdraft,
pollution, misuse and mismanagement by providing an orderly process to balance the need for
the economic growth of the State and the use of its land with the need to protect its environment
and ecology in order to forever guarantee to the people of the State, the safety of such natural
resources for their benefit and enjoyment and for the benefit and enjoyment of generations yet
unborn.
A. These regulations shall be known as the “Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulation of
the Town of Farmington.”
B. These regulations have been prepared by the Farmington Inland Wetlands and Watercourses
Commission in accordance with the provisions of an Act Concerning Inland Wetlands and
Watercourses (Public Act 155, 1972 as amended) and as authorized by the Town Council of
W-3
the Town of Farmington in Ordinance No. 69, adopted October 23, 1973.
C. The Farmington Inlands Wetlands and Watercourses Commission, or designee as provided
herein, shall enforce the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Act and shall issue, issue with
terms, conditions, limitations or modifications, or deny permits for all regulated activities in
the Town of Farmington pursuant to sections 22a-36 to 22a-45, inclusive, of the Connecticut
General Statutes, as amended.
D. These regulations have been adopted and may be amended, from time to time, in accordance
with the provisions of the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Act and these regulations.
Section 2. DEFINITIONS
A. As used in these regulations:
1. “Act” means the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Act, sections 22a-36 through 22a-
45, inclusive, of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
2. “Bog” is a watercourse distinguished by evergreen trees and shrubs and underlain by
peat deposits, poor or very poor drainage, and highly acidic conditions.
3. “Clear cutting” means the harvest of timber in a fashion, which removes all trees down
to a two-inch diameter at breast height.
4. Commission” means the Farmington Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Commission.
5. “Continual Flow” means a flow of water, which persists for an extended period of time;
this flow may be interrupted during periods of drought or during the low flow period of
the annual hydrological cycle, June through September, but it recurs in prolonged
succession.
6. “Deposit” includes, but shall not be limited to, fill, grade, dump, place, discharge or
emit.
7. “Discharge” means the emission of any water, substance or material into waters of the
State whether or not such substance causes pollution.
8. “Disturbing the natural and indigenous character of the land” means that the activity
will significantly alter the inland wetland or watercourse by reason of removal or
deposition of material, clear cutting, alteration or obstruction of water flow or will
result in the pollution of the wetland or watercourse.
9. “Essential to the farming operation” means that the proposed activity is necessary and
indispensable to sustain farming activities on the farm.
10. “Farming” shall be consistent with the definition as noted in section 1-1 (q) of the
Connecticut General Statutes. (See Appendix A)
11. “Feasible” means able to be constructed or implemented consistent with sound
W-4
engineering principles.
12. “License” means the whole or any part of any permit, certificate or approval or similar
form of permission, which may be required of any persons by the provisions of these
regulations or sections 22a-36 to 22a-45 inclusive.
a. “Permit” means an approval to conduct a regulated activity under the licensing
authority of the Commission;
b. “Permittee” means the person to whom such permit has been issued.
13. “Management Practice” means a practice, procedure, activity, structure or facility
designed to prevent or minimize pollution or other environmental damage or to
maintain or enhance existing environmental quality. Such management practices
include, but are not limited to: erosion and sedimentation controls; restrictions on land
use or development; construction setbacks from wetlands or watercourses; proper
disposal of waste materials; procedures for equipment maintenance to prevent fuel
spillage; construction methods to prevent flooding or disturbance of wetlands and
watercourses; procedures for maintaining continuous stream flows; confining
construction that must take place in watercourses to times when water flows are low
and fish and wildlife will not be adversely affected.
14. “Marshes” are watercourses that are distinguished by the absence of trees and shrubs
and the dominance of soft-stemmed herbaceous plants. The water table in marshes is at
or above the ground surface throughout the year and areas of open water six inches or
more in depth are common, but seasonal water table fluctuations are encountered.
15. “Material” means any substance, solid or liquid, organic or inorganic, including, but not
limited to, soil, sediment, aggregate, land, gravel, clay, bog, mud, debris, sand, refuse or
waste.
16. “Nurseries” means places where plants are grown for sale, transplanting, or
experimentation.
17. “Permit” and “Permitee” see “License”.
18. “Person” means any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, limited liability
company, company, organization or legal entity of any kind, including municipal
corporations, governmental agencies or subdivisions thereof.
19. “Pollution” means harmful thermal effect, or the contamination or rendering unclean or
impure of any waters of the State by reason of any waste or other materials discharged
or deposited therein by any public or private sewer or otherwise so as directly or
indirectly to come in contact with any waters. This includes, but is not limited to,
erosion and sedimentation resulting from any filling, land clearing or excavation
activity.
20. “Prudent” means economically and otherwise reasonable in light of the social benefits
W-5
to be derived from the proposed regulated activity provided cost may be considered in
deciding what is prudent and further provided a mere showing of expense will not
necessarily mean an alternative is imprudent.
21. “Regulated activity” means any operation within or use of or having an effect upon a
wetland or watercourse involving removal, relocation or deposition of material, cutting,
removing or destroying any vegetation or any obstruction, construction, alteration or
pollution of such wetlands or watercourses, but shall not include the specified activities
in Section 4. of these regulations. Furthermore, any clearing, grubbing, grading, cutting
or removal of vegetation, paving, excavating, construction, deposition or removing of
material and discharge of material including storm water on land located within one
hundred and fifty (150) feet measured horizontally from the boundary of any wetland or
watercourse is a regulated activity (otherwise known as the upland review area). This
distance shall be measured from the actual boundary limit of the wetlands as determined
by a soil scientist or from the ordinary high water mark of a water body or watercourse.
In the case where a wetland or watercourse is located on a parcel of land other than that
upon which such regulated activity is to be conducted and it is not possible to field
determine such wetland limit or ordinary high water mark, the Commission or its agent
may apply such distance based upon information available including but not limited to
personal observation, aerial photography, remote sensing imagery, soils maps, and/or
the Towns Official Wetlands and Watercourses Map.
In addition, the Commission may find that any other activity located within such upland
review area or any activity located in any other non-wetland or non-watercourse area
that is likely to impact or affect wetlands or watercourses is a regulated activity.
22. “Regulated area” means inland wetlands and watercourses or upland review area.
23. “Remove” includes, but shall not be limited to, drain, excavate, mine, dig, dredge, suck,
bulldoze, dragline, or blast.
24. “Rendering unclean or impure” means any alteration of the physical, chemical or
biological properties of any of the waters of the State, including, but not limited to,
change in odor, color, turbidity or taste.
25. “Significant impact” means any activity, including, but not limited to, the following
activities which may have a major effect:
a. Any activity involving deposition or removal of material, which will or may have
a substantial effect on the wetland or watercourse or on wetlands or watercourses
outside the area for which the activity is proposed.
b. Any activity, which substantially changes the natural channel or may inhibit the
natural dynamics of a watercourse system.
c. Any activity, which substantially diminishes the natural capacity of an inland
wetland or watercourse to: support aquatic, plant or animal life and habitats;
prevent flooding; supply water; assimilate waste; facilitate drainage; provide
W-6
recreation or open space; or perform other functions.
d. Any activity, which is likely to cause or has the potential to cause substantial
turbidity, siltation or sedimentation in a wetland or watercourse.
e. Any activity, which is likely to cause or has the potential to cause pollution or a
wetland or watercourse
f. Any activity, which causes substantial diminution of flow of a natural watercourse
or groundwater levels of the wetland or watercourse.
g. Any activity, which damages or destroys unique wetland or watercourse areas or
such areas having demonstrable scientific or educational value.
26. “Soil Scientist” means an individual duly qualified in accordance with standards set by
the Federal Office of Personnel Management.
27. “Submerged lands” means those lands which are inundated by water on a seasonal or
more frequent basis.
28. “Swamps” are watercourses that are distinguished by the dominance of wetland trees
and shrubs.
29. “Town” refers to the Town of Farmington.
30. “Upland Review Area” means any area not consisting of wetland soils or classified as a
watercourse under these regulations located one hundred and fifty (150) feet measured
horizontally from the boundary limit or ordinary high water mark of any wetland,
watercourse or water body.
31. “Waste” means sewage or any substance, liquid, gaseous, solid or radioactive, which
may pollute or tend to pollute any of the waters of the State or any wetlands or
watercourses of the Town.
32. “Watercourses” means rivers, streams, brooks, waterways, lakes, ponds, marshes,
swamps, bogs and all other bodies of water, natural or artificial, public or private,
vernal or intermittent, which are contained within, flow through or border upon the
Town or any portion thereof not regulated pursuant to sections 22a-28 through 22a-35,
inclusive, of the Connecticut General Statutes. An intermittent watercourse shall be
delineated by a defined permanent channel and bank and the occurrence of two or more
of the following characteristics:
a. Evidence of scour or deposits of recent alluvium or detritus.
b. The presence of standing or flowing water for duration longer than a particular
storm event.
c. The presence of hydrophytic vegetation.
W-7
33. “Wetlands” means land, including submerged land as defined in this regulation, not
regulated pursuant to Section 22a-28 through 22a-35, inclusive, of the Connecticut
General Statutes, which consists of any of the soil types designated as poorly drained,
very poorly drained, alluvial and floodplain by the National Cooperative Soils Survey,
as it may be amended from time to time, of the National Resources Conservation
Service of the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA). Such areas may include filled,
graded or excavated sites, which possess an aquic (saturated) soil moisture regime as
defined by the USDA Cooperative Soil Survey.
Section 3. INVENTORY OF REGULATED AREAS
A. Areas of regulated soil types and watercourses are shown on the inventory map entitled
“Official Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Map Farmington, Connecticut, however the
definitions of wetlands and watercourses in Section 2.A.33. and 2.A.32. respectively of
these regulations shall govern for purposes of determining whether any area within the
Town is in fact a regulated area. Copies of said map are available for inspection in the
offices of the Town Clerk and Planning Department of the Town of Farmington. The
Commission may use aerial photography, remote sensing imagery, resource mapping, soils
maps, site inspection observations or other information in determining the location of the
boundaries of wetlands and watercourses. In cases where an applicant disputes the
designation of any part of his land as a regulated area or upland review area he shall have
the burden of proving that designation inapplicable.
B. To prove himself exempt from these regulations, the applicant must present documentation
by a Soil Scientist that the land in question, or a portion of it, does not contain a watercourse
or have a soil type classified by the National Cooperative Soils Survey as poorly drained,
very poorly drained, alluvial or floodplain.
C. The Commission and the Town Planner shall monitor and maintain general surveillance of
the regulated areas within the Town to ensure that no unauthorized regulated activities
occur.
D. The Commission shall maintain a current inventory of regulated areas within the Town. The
Commission may amend its map as more accurate information becomes available.
E. All map amendments are subject to the public hearing process outlined in section 15 of these
regulations.
Section 4. PERMITTED USES AS OF RIGHT AND NONREGULATED USES
A. The following operations and uses shall be permitted in inland wetlands and watercourses,
as of right:
1. Grazing, farming, nurseries, gardening and harvesting of crops, and farm ponds of three
acres or less essential to the farming operation, and activities conducted by, or under the
authority of, the Department of Energy and Environmental Protection for the purpose of
wetland or watercourse restoration or enhancement or mosquito control. The provisions
of this subsection shall not be construed to include road construction or the erection of
W-8
buildings not directly related to the farming operation, relocation of watercourses with
continual flow, filling or reclamation of wetlands or watercourses with continual flow,
clear cutting of timber except for the expansion of agricultural cropland, the mining of
topsoil, peat, sand, gravel or similar material from wetlands or watercourses for the
purposes of sale.
2. A residential home i) for which a building permit has been issued or ii) on a subdivision
lot, provided the permit has been issued or the subdivision has been approved by the
Town Plan and Zoning Commission as of the effective date of promulgation of these
regulations pursuant to subsection (b) of section 22a-42a, or as of July 1, 1974, which
ever is earlier, and further provided that no residential home shall be permitted as of
right pursuant to this subdivision unless the permit was issued on or prior to July 1,
1987.
3. Boat anchorage or mooring, not to include dredging or dock construction.
4. Uses incidental to the enjoyment and maintenance of residential property, such property
defined as equal to or smaller than the largest minimum residential lot size, which is
presently 80,000 square feet (R80 Zone). Such incidental uses shall include
maintenance of existing structures and landscaping but shall not include removal or
deposition of significant amounts of material from or onto a wetland or watercourse or
diversion or alteration of a watercourse.
5. Construction and operation by water companies as defined in Section 16-1 or by
municipal water supply systems as provided for in Chapter 102 of the Connecticut
General Statutes, of dams, reservoirs and other facilities necessary to the impounding,
storage and withdrawal of water in connection with public water supplies except as
provided in sections 22a-401 and 22a-403 of the Connecticut General Statutes.
6. Maintenance relating to any drainage pipe, which existed before the effective date of
any municipal regulations adopted pursuant to Section 22a-42a. of the Connecticut
General Statutes or July l, 1974, whichever is earlier, provided such pipe is on property
which is zoned as residential but which does not contain hydrophytic vegetation. The
term maintenance as it applies here shall mean the removal of accumulated leaves, soil
and other debris whether by hand or machine while the pipe remains in place.
7. Withdrawls of water for fire emergency purposes.
B. The following operations and uses shall be permitted as a nonregulated use in wetlands and
watercourses, provided they do not disturb the natural and indigenous character of the
wetland or watercourse by removal or deposition of material, alteration or obstruction of
water flow or pollution of the wetland or watercourse:
1. Conservation of soil, vegetation, water, fish, shellfish and wildlife.
2. Outdoor recreation including play and sporting areas, golf courses, field trails, nature
study, hiking, horseback riding, swimming, skin diving, camping, boating, water skiing,
trapping, hunting, fishing and shell fishing where otherwise legally permitted and
W-9
regulated.
3. The installation of a dry hydrant by or under the authority of the municipal fire
department, provided such dry hydrant is only used for firefighting purposes and there
is no alternative access to a public water supply. For purposes of this section, “dry
hydrant” means a non-pressurized pipe system that: (A) is readily accessible to fire
department apparatus from a proximate public road, (B) provides for the withdrawl of
water by suction to such fire department apparatus, and (c) is permanently installed into
an existing lake, pond or stream that is a dependable source of water.
C. All activities in wetlands or watercourses or upland review areas involving filling,
excavation, dredging, clear cutting, grading or any other alteration or use of a wetland or
watercourse not specifically permitted by this section and otherwise defined as a regulated
activity by these regulations shall require a permit from the Commission in accordance with
Sections 5. and 6. of these regulations, or for certain regulated activities located outside of
wetlands and watercourses from the duly authorized agent in accordance with section 6 of
these regulations.
D. To carry out the purposes of this section, any person proposing a permitted operation and use
or a nonregulated operation and use shall, prior to commencement of such operation and use,
notify the Agency on a form provided by it, and provide the Agency with sufficient
information to enable it to properly determine that the proposed operation and use is a
permitted or nonregulated use of a wetland or watercourse. The Agency shall rule that the
proposed operation and use or portion of it is a permitted or nonregulated operation and use
or that the proposed operation and use is a regulated activity and a permit is required.
Section 4A. ACTIVITIES REGULATED EXCLUSIVELY BY THE COMMISSIONER OF
DEEP
A. The Commissioner of the Department of Energy and Environmental Protection shall have
exclusive jurisdiction over regulated activities in or affecting wetlands or watercourses
undertaken by any department, agency or instrumentality of the State of Connecticut, except
any local or regional board of education, pursuant to sections 22a-39 or 22a-45a of the
Connecticut General Statutes.
B. The Commissioner of the Department of Energy and Environmental Protection shall have
exclusive jurisdiction over tidal wetlands designated and regulated pursuant to sections 22a-
28 through 22a-35 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
C. The Commissioner of the Department of Energy and Environmental Protection shall have
exclusive jurisdiction over activities authorized under a dam repair or removal order issued
by the Commissioner of Energy and Environmental Protection under section 22a-402 of the
Connecticut General Statutes or a permit issued by the Commissioner of Energy and
Environmental Protection under sections 22a-403 of the Connecticut General Statutes. Any
person receiving such dam repair or removal order or permit shall not be required to obtain a
permit from a municipal wetlands Commission for any action necessary to comply with said
dam order or to carry out the activities authorized by said permit.
W-10
D. The Commissioner of the Department of Energy and Environmental Protection shall have
exclusive jurisdiction over the discharge of fill or dredged materials onto the wetlands and
watercourses of the State pursuant to section 401 of the Federal Clean Water Act, as
amended, for activities regulated by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers under section 404 of
the Federal Clean Water Act.
Section 5. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
A. No person shall henceforth conduct a regulated activity in a regulated area of the Town of
Farmington without first obtaining a permit for such activity from the Commission or its
designee. Prior to conducting a regulated activity for which zoning or subdivision approval
is required the applicant shall have received a valid certificate of zoning or subdivision
approval, special permit or variance ensuring that the activity complies with the Zoning
and/or Subdivision Regulations of Farmington. Any person found to be conducting or
maintaining a regulated activity without the prior authorization of the Commission, or
violating any other provision of these regulations, shall be subject to the enforcement
proceedings and penalties prescribed in Section 11 of these regulations and any other
remedies as provided by law.
B. The Commission and the Town Planner or his designee shall have the right of free access at
reasonable times to the portion of the property under consideration. The property owner may
require that such persons have a letter of authorization from the Chairman or Secretary of
the Commission prior to permitting such access.
C. Changes in regulations, including boundaries, shall be made pursuant to Section 22a-42a. of
the Connecticut General Statutes.
Section 6. APPLICATION PROCEDURE FOR REGULATED ACTIVITIES AND CHANGES
IN REGULATIONS AND BOUNDARIES OF REGULATED AREAS
A. Any person wishing to undertake a regulated activity within a regulated area or to change
the regulations or the boundaries of the regulated area shall apply for a permit to the
Commission as follows:
1. All applications shall be submitted not less than 7 days prior to the date of a regular
meeting of the Commission in order for the application to be included on the agenda for
said meeting. If an application for regulated activity requires a public hearing such
hearing shall commence within 65 days of the official date of receipt of the application.
The hearing may be continued by a majority vote of the members of the Commission in
attendance, however all hearings shall be completed within 35 days of their
commencement. Action shall be taken within 35 days after completion of the public
hearing. In the absence of a public hearing, action shall be taken on applications within
65 days from the date of receipt of the application. The applicant may consent to one or
more extensions of the periods specified in this subsection, provided the total extension
of all such periods shall not be for longer than 65 days, or may withdraw the
application. The failure of the Commission to act within any time period specified in
this subsection, or any extension thereof, shall not be deemed to constitute approval of
the application.
W-11
The Commission may delegate to its duly authorized agent (the Town Planner,
Assistant Town Planner or Zoning Enforcement Officer), after having completed the
comprehensive training course offered by the Department of Energy and Environmental
Protection, the authority to approve an activity that is located within the upland review
area which is deemed to be accessory to a residential use (a one family or two family
home) including but not limited to accessory structures, maintenance of landscaped or
natural areas, minor land clearing, grading, drainage improvements or utility
installations when such agent finds that the activity would result in no greater than a
minimal impact on any area of wetlands or watercourse. Request for such approval
shall be made on a form provided by the Commission and the applicant shall provide
any other information the agent may reasonably require. The agent shall render a
decision on such application no later than thirty days from the date it is submitted. Any
person receiving such approval from such agent shall, within ten days of the date of
such approval, publish at their expense, notice of the approval in a newspaper having a
general circulation in the town wherein the activity is located or will have an effect.
Any person may appeal such decision of the agent to the Commission within fifteen
days after the publication date of the notice and the Commission shall consider such
appeal at its next regularly scheduled meeting provided such meeting is no earlier than
three business days after receipt by such Commission or its agent of such appeal. The
Commission shall, at its discretion, sustain, alter or reject the decision of its agent or
require an application for a permit in accordance with these regulations.
2. All applications shall be submitted on a form entitled “Application for Approval of
Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Activity or Change in Regulation” (hereinafter
called “Application”). The application shall contain the information described in this
section and any other information the Commission may reasonably require and deemed
necessary for a fair and informed determination thereon by the Commission.
Application forms may be obtained in the office of the Town Planner. Incomplete
applications may be denied.
3. The official date of receipt of such application shall be the date of the next regularly
scheduled meeting of the Commission immediately following the date of filing said
application or thirty-five (35) days after filing, whichever is sooner.
4. The application must be signed by the property owner of record or the holder of an
option to purchase such property.
5. If an application to the Town of Farmington Planning and Zoning Commission for
subdivision, resubdivision, site plan or special permit involves land containing a
wetland or watercourse, the applicant shall, in accordance with Section 8-3(g), 8-3c or
8-26, as applicable, of the Connecticut General Statutes, submit an application for a
permit to the Commission in accordance with this section, no later than the day the
application is filed with the Town Planning and Zoning Commission.
B. There shall be a minimum application fee as set forth in Chapter 98 of the Farmington Code
of Ordinances.
The Commission may charge an additional fee sufficient to cover the cost of reviewing and
W-12
acting on complex applications. Such fee may include, but not be limited to, the cost of
retaining experts to analyze, review, and report on issues requiring such experts. The
Commission or the duly authorized agent shall estimate the complex application fee, which
shall be paid pursuant to these regulations within ten days of the applicant’s receipt or notice
of such estimate. Any portion of the complex application fee in excess of the actual cost
shall be refunded to the applicant no later than thirty days after publication of the
Commission’s decision.
Waiver. The applicant may petition the Commission to waive, reduce or allow delayed
payment of the fee. Such petitions shall be in writing and shall state fully the facts and
circumstances the Commission should consider in its determination under this subsection.
The Commission may waive all or part of the application fee if the Commission determines
that:
1. the activity applied for would clearly result in a substantial public benefit to the
environment or to the public health and safety and the applicant would reasonably be
deterred from initiating the activity solely or primarily as a result of the amount of the
application fee, or
2 the amount of the application fee is clearly excessive in relation to the cost to the Town
for reviewing and processing the application.
C. At any time during the review period, the Commission or the Town Planner may require the
applicant to provide additional information about the wetlands and/or watercourses in
question and/or the proposed activity.
D. If the Commission finds, based on the information before it, that the proposal will involve a
significant activity or activity described below, the applicant shall be required to submit
such pertinent information set forth in Section 6.E. of these regulations.
1. A significant activity includes that which will have significant impact, and or an activity
which may cause:
a. Substantial turbidity, siltation or sedimentation in a stream, lake or reservoir; the
destruction or impairment of an identified aquifer or recharge area; a substantial
reduction of an inland wetland or watercourse’s natural flood storage capacity; the
construction or alteration of a watercourse channel which might result in
increasing the volume or velocity of water leading to upstream or downstream
flooding; or
b. A decrease in the minimum low flow of a watercourse during periods of drought;
or
c. The actual or potential pollution of an aquifer or watercourse; or
d. A reduction of the natural capacity of an inland wetlands or watercourse to support
desirable biological life and/or function effectively as part of the total wetland
ecosystem including loss of productivity of an economic resource; or
W-13
e. A loss of unique areas of wetlands and/or undisturbed areas of wetlands valuable
for scientific or educational purposes; or
f. A reduction of the wetlands or watercourses suitability for recreation which may
result from destruction of wildlife habitat, scenic values, or historic features; or
g. A conflict with the Plan of Conservation of Development or open space plan,
which may result from incompatible uses, loss of amenities; or
h. The creation of conditions which may adversely affect the health, welfare and
safety of the individual or the community, which may be incurred when unsuitable
development occurs in swamps, marshes, along watercourses or in areas subject to
flooding.
E. All applications shall include the following information as set forth in the application form
or by the submission of additional data (See Section 14 for submission requirements in
conjunction with application (petition) for amending these regulations or the Inland
Wetlands and Watercourses Map):
1. The applicant’s name, address and telephone number. If the applicant is a Limited
Liability Corporation or a Corporation, the managing member’s or responsible
corporate officer’s name, address and telephone number;
2. The owner’s name, address and telephone number and written consent if the applicant is
not the owner of the property involved in the application;
3. Applicant’s interest in the land;
4. The geographical location of the property which is to be affected by the proposed
activity, including but not limited to a description of the land in sufficient detail to
allow identification of the inland wetlands and watercourses, a computation of the
area(s) (in acres or square feet) of wetland or watercourse disturbance, soil type(s) and
vegetation;
5. The purpose and a description of the proposed activity and proposed erosion and
sedimentation controls and other management practices and mitigation measures which
may be considered as a condition of issuing a permit for the proposed regulated activity
including, but not limited to, measures to (a) prevent or minimize pollution or other
environmental damage (b) maintain or enhance existing environmental quality, or (c) in
the following order of priority: restore, enhance and create productive wetland or
watercourse resources;
6. A site plan showing existing and proposed conditions in relation to wetlands and
watercourses and identifying any further activities associated with, or reasonably
related to, the proposed regulated activity which are made inevitable by the proposed
regulated activity and which may have an impact on wetlands or watercourses;
7. Certification that the applicant is familiar with all the information provided in the
W-14
application and is aware of the penalties for obtaining a permit through deception or
through inaccurate or misleading information;
8. Authorization for the members and agents of the Commission to inspect the property, at
reasonable times, both before and after a final decision has been issued.
9. Alternative which would cause less or no environmental impact to wetlands or
watercourses and why the alternative as set forth in the application was chosen; all such
alternatives shall be diagramed on a site plan or drawing.
If the proposed activity involves a significant activity, additional information based upon the nature and
anticipated effects of the activity, including but not limited to the following, shall be provided as required
by the Commission:
1. Site plans for the proposed use or operation and the property which will be affected,
which show existing and proposed conditions, wetland and watercourse boundaries,
land contours, boundaries of land ownership, proposed alterations and uses of wetlands
and watercourses and other pertinent features of the development drawn by a licensed
surveyor, professional engineer or landscape architect registered in the State of
Connecticut or by such other qualified persons;
2. Engineering reports and analyses and additional drawings to fully described the
proposed project and any filling, excavation, drainage or hydraulic modifications to
watercourses;
3. Mapping of soil types consistent with the categories established by the National
Cooperative Soil Survey of the U. S. Soil Conservation Service (the Commission may
require the applicant to have the wetlands delineated in the field by a soil scientist and
that the field delineation be incorporated onto the site plans);
4. Description of the ecological communities and functions of the wetlands or
watercourses involved with the application and the effects of the proposed regulated
activities on these communities and wetland functions;
5. Description of how the applicant will change, diminish or enhance the ecological
communities and functions of the wetlands or watercourses involved in the application,
and with each alternative, and a description of why each alternative considered was
deemed neither feasible nor prudent;
6. Analysis of chemical or physical characteristics of any fill material;
7. Information from the State of Connecticut Natural Diversity Data Base concerning the
subject property or properties in the immediate vicinity of the subject property;
8. Measures, which mitigate the impact of the proposed activity. Such measures include,
but are not limited to, plans or action which avoid destruction or diminution of wetland
or watercourse functions, recreational uses and natural habitats, which prevent flooding,
degradation of water quality, erosion and sedimentation and obstruction of drainage, or
which otherwise safeguard water resources.
W-15
F. A public hearing is required on all applications involving a change in regulations or
boundaries of regulated areas. A public hearing is also required for all applications
involving a significant activity or where the Commission determines that a public hearing
would be in the public interest or where the Commission receives a petition requesting a
hearing, signed by a minimum of twenty-five persons who are eighteen years of age or older
and who reside in the municipality in which the regulated activity is proposed, filed not later
than fourteen (14) days after the date of receipt of an application. Notification of all hearings
concerning proposed regulations or amendments thereto shall be sent by the Commission to
the Commissioner of Energy and Environmental Protection at least thirty-five (35) days
before such hearing. Public hearings held in conjunction with an application for a regulated
activity or applications (petitions) to amend these regulations or the Inland Wetlands and
Watercourses map shall be held no later than sixty-five (65) days after the receipt of such
application.
1. With respect to applications to undertake regulated activities: Notice of the hearing
shall be published at least twice at intervals of not less than two days, the first not more
than fifteen days nor less than ten days, and the last not less than two days, before such
hearing. All applications and maps and documents relating thereto shall be open for
public inspection. At such hearing any person or persons may appear and be heard.
2. With respect to applications (petitions) for change in regulations or boundaries of
regulated areas: Notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be published in the
form of a legal advertisement, appearing in a newspaper having a substantial circulation
in the Town of Farmington, at least twice at intervals of not less than two days, the first
not more than fifteen days nor less than ten days and the last not less than two days,
before such hearing, and a copy of such proposed regulation or boundary shall be filed
in the office of the Farmington Town Clerk for public inspection at least ten days before
such hearing, and may be published in full in such paper.
3. For every application requiring a public hearing the applicant shall provide notice as
follows:
a. Notice of the public hearing shall be sent by the applicant, by certified mail, no later
than ten (10) days prior to such hearing to all owners of property, as recorded in the
office of the Town Assessor on the date the application is filed, located within 200 feet
of the property which is the subject of the application.
b. In the case where any property within 200 feet of the property which is the subject of
the application is owned by a common interest ownership, such as a condominium, the
required notice need only be sent to the homeowners’ association and to those owners
of buildings or dwelling units located within such 200 feet.
c. Evidence of such mailing shall be presented to the Planning Department at or before the
public hearing.
d. In addition, the applicant shall post a notification sign provided by the Planning
Department on the property along all public rights of way at least seven (7) days prior
to the date of the public hearing. The sign shall be no more than 15 feet from the curb
and fully visible from the roadway.
W-16
G. Notice of all applications for a regulated activity involving a wetlands or watercourse any
portion of which is within 500 feet of the boundary of another municipality shall be sent by
the applicant by Certified Mail return receipt requested to the Inland Wetlands Commission
of such municipality on the same day it is submitted to the Commission.
H. When an application is filed to conduct or cause to be conducted a regulated activity upon
an inland wetland or watercourse, any portion of which is within the watershed of a water
company as defined in section 25-32a, of the Connecticut General Statutes, the applicant
shall provide written notice of the application to the water company and the Commissioner
of Public Health in a format prescribed by said Commissioner, provided such water
company or said Commissioner has filed a map showing the boundaries of the watershed on
the land records of the municipality in which the application is made and with the inland
wetlands agency of such municipality. Such notice shall be made by certified mail, return
receipt requested, and shall be mailed not later than seven days after the date of the
application. The water company and the Commissioner of Public Health, through a
representative, may appear and be heard at any hearing on the application. Documentation
of such notice shall be provided to the Commission.
I. The Commission is required to notify the Clerk of any adjoining municipality of the
pendency of any application to conduct a regulated activity when:
1. Any portion of the property affected by a decision of the Commission is within 500 feet
of the boundary of an adjoining municipality;
2. A significant portion of the traffic to the completed project on the site will use streets
within the adjoining municipality to enter or exit the site;
3. A significant portion of the sewer or water drainage from the project site will flow
through and significantly impact the sewage or drainage system within the adjoining
municipality;
4. Water runoff from the improved site will impact streets or other municipal or private
property within the adjoining municipality.
The applicant shall provide such information required by the Commission in
determining whether such application must be sent to the adjoining municipality.
J. For any permit application involving property subject to a conservation restriction or
preservation restriction, the following shall apply:
1. For purposes of this section, “conservation restriction” means a limitation, whether or not
stated in the form of a restriction, easement, covenant or condition, in any deed, will or
other instrument executed by or on behalf of the owner of the land described therein,
including, but not limited to, the state or any political subdivision of the state, or in any
order of taking such land whose purpose is to retain land or water areas predominately in
their natural, scenic or open condition or in agricultural, farming, forest or open space.
2. For purposes of this section, “preservation restriction” means a limitation, whether or not
stated in the form of a restriction, easement, covenant or condition, in any deed, will or
W-17
other instrument executed by or on behalf of the owner of land, including, but not limited
to, the state or any political subdivision of the state, or in any order of taking of such land
whose purpose is to preserve historically significant structures or sites.
3. No person shall file a permit application, other than for interior work in an existing
building or for exterior work on an existing building that does not expand or alter the
footprint of such existing building, relating to property that is subject to a conservation
easement or a preservation restriction unless the applicant provides proof that the
applicant has provided written notice of such application, by certified mail, return receipt
requested, to the party holding such restriction, including, but not limited to, any state
agency that holds such restriction, not later than sixty days prior to the filing of the
permit application.
4. In lieu of such notice pursuant to subsection J3, the applicant may submit a letter from
the holder of such restriction or from the holder’s authorized agent, verifying that the
application is in compliance with the terms of the restriction.
Section 7. DECISION PROCEDURE
A. The Commission, which shall function as a legislative body in carrying out the purpose of
these regulations, shall consider the following in making its decision on the application:
1. Evidence offered at any public hearing.
2. Any reports from other Town departments, government or quasi-government agencies
and commissions and technical reports from organizations which promote the
preservation or protection of wetland or water body resources:
The Commission shall submit all applications involving significant activities to the
Farmington Conservation Commission and may submit applications to any other
Commission or organization, which may undertake additional studies or investigations.
3. Information submitted with the application.
4. All relevant facts and circumstances as they affect inland wetlands and watercourses,
reasonably known to the Commission as a result of its observations or experiences, and
all relevant facts and circumstances referred to in Section 8.A. below.
B. All action on the application shall be in conformance with Section 8. of these regulations
and shall be in writing.
1. Action shall be taken on the application (petition) for a change in the regulations or the
boundaries of the inland wetland area within 65 days after the completion of a public
hearing; a public hearing on said application (petition) shall be held within 65 days after
receipt of such application (petition). The applicant (petitioner) may consent to one or
more extensions of one or both of the aforementioned time periods provided the total
extension of all such periods shall not be for longer than 65 days, or may withdraw such
application (petition). Failure of the Commission to act within any time period
W-18
specified in the subsection or any extension thereof shall not be deemed to constitute
approval of the application (petition).
C. The Commission shall notify the applicant by Certified Mail of its decision within fifteen
(15) days of the date of the decision and the Commission shall cause notice of its order in
issuance, denial, revocation or suspension of a permit to be published in a newspaper having
general circulation in the Town of Farmington. The Commission shall send a copy of all
adopted regulations, boundaries or changes thereto to the Commissioner of Energy and
Environmental Protection no later than then (10) days after they have been adopted. In any
case in which such notice is not published within such fifteen (15) day period, the applicant
may provide for the publication of such notice within ten days thereafter.
D. The Commission shall file all of its decisions concerning regulations, boundaries or changes
thereto with the Town Clerk and shall cause the administrative officer or agent designated
by the Commission to maintain a record of all applications.
E. The Commission may cause to be posted conspicuously a sign on the premises of the inland
wetland or watercourse indicating those regulated activities authorized by the Commission.
F. Any permit issued by the Commission in conjunction with an application for site plan,
special permit, subdivision or resubdivision (collectively land use permit) shall be valid
until the land use permit expires or for ten years, whichever is earlier. Any permit issued for
any activity which does not require a land use permit shall be valid for a period of two (2)
years from the expiration of the appeal period. Any appeal of such permits shall extend these
time periods the length of such appeal. The Commission may establish a specific time
period within which any regulated activity shall be conducted. Any permit shall be renewed
by the Commission upon request in writing by the permit holder unless the Commission
finds that there has been a substantial change in circumstances which requires a new
application or an enforcement action has been undertaken with regard to the regulated
activity for which the permit was issued provided no permit shall be valid for more than ten
(10) years, and further provided that any permit issued prior to July 1, 2011 that did not
expire prior to May 9, 2011 shall be valid for no more than fourteen years.
G. Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 7F of these regulations, any permit issued by the
Commission prior to July 1, 2011 that was in effect and did not expire prior to May 9, 2011
shall be valid for a period of not less than nine years after the date of such approval.
H. Any application to renew or amend an existing permit shall be filed with the Commission at
least 30 days prior to the expiration date of the permit. Any application to renew or amend
such an existing permit shall contain the information required under section 6 of these
regulations provided:
1. the application may incorporate the documentation and record of the prior application;
2. the application shall describe the extent of work completed at the time of filing and the
schedule for completing the activities authorized by the permit;
3. the application shall state the reason why the authorized activity was not initiated or
W-19
completed within the time specified in the permit;
4. the application shall describe any changes in facts or circumstances involved with or
affecting wetlands or watercourses or use of the land for which the permit was issued;
5. the Commission may, prior to the expiration of a permit, accept an untimely application
to renew such permit if the authorized activity is ongoing and allow the continuation of
work beyond the expiration date if, in its judgment, the permit is likely to be renewed
and the public interest or environment will be best served by not interrupting the
activity.
Section 8. PERMIT DECISIONS
A. Pursuant to Section 22a-41. of the Connecticut General Statutes, all decisions in granting a
permit or granting a permit with modifications or denying a permit shall take into
consideration all the factors listed below. In granting permits with conditions or
modifications the Commission may include any reasonable measures which could mitigate
the impacts of the regulated activity and which would prevent or minimize pollution or other
environmental damage; maintain or enhance existing environmental quality or in the
following order of priority: restore, enhance and create productive wetland or watercourse
resources. Such terms may include restrictions as to the time of year in which a regulated
activity may be conducted, provided the Commission, or its agent, determines that such
restrictions are necessary to carry out the policy of sections 22a-36 to 22a-45, inclusive, of
the Connecticut General Statutes.
1. The environmental impact of the proposed regulated activity on wetlands or
watercourses;
2. The applicant’s purpose for, and any feasible and prudent alternatives to, the proposed
regulated activity which alternatives could cause less or no environmental impact to
wetlands or watercourses;
3. The relationship between the short-term and long-term impacts of the proposed
regulated activity on wetlands or watercourses and the maintenance and enhancement of
long-term productivity of such wetlands or watercourses;
4. Irreversible and irretrievable loss of wetland or watercourse resources which would be
caused by the proposed regulated activity, including the extent to which such activity
would foreclose a future ability to protect, enhance or restore such resources, and any
mitigation measures which may be considered as a condition of issuing a permit for
such activity including, but not limited to, measures to (a) prevent or minimize pollution
or other environmental damage, (b) maintain or enhance existing environmental quality,
or (c) in the following order of priority: restore, enhance and create productive wetland
or watercourse resources;
5. The character and degree of injury to, or interference with, safety, health or the
reasonable use of property which is caused or threatened by the proposed regulated
activity; and
W-20
6. Impacts of the proposed regulated activity on wetlands or watercourses outside the area
for which the activity is proposed and future activities associated with, or reasonably
related to, the proposed regulated activity which are made inevitable by the proposed
regulated activity and which may have an impact on wetlands or watercourses.
B. In regards to applications for a regulated activity in which a public hearing was held a
permit shall not be issued unless the Commission finds on the basis of the record that a
feasible and prudent alternative does not exist. In making it’s finding the Commission shall
consider the facts and circumstances set forth in Subsection A. of this section. Such finding
shall be stated on the record in writing. In the case of an application, which is denied on the
basis of a finding that there may be feasible and prudent alternatives to the proposed
regulated activity, which have less adverse impact on wetlands or watercourses, the
Commission shall propose on the record in writing the types of alternatives, which the
applicant may investigate. This subsection shall not be construed to shift the burden from
the applicant to prove that he is entitled to the permit or to present alternatives to the
proposed regulated activity.
C. The Commission in accordance with these regulations may grant the application as filed or
grant it upon other terms, conditions, limitations or modifications of the regulated activity
designed to carry out the purposes and policies of the Act, or deny the application. Such
terms may include any reasonable measures which would mitigate the impacts of the
regulated activity and which would (a) prevent or minimize pollution or other environmental
damage, (b) maintain or enhance existing environmental quality, or (c) in the following
order of priority: restore, enhance and create productive wetland or watercourse resources.
D. For the purposes of this section, (1) “wetlands and watercourses” includes aquatic, plant or
animal life and habitats in wetlands or watercourses, and (2) “habitats” means areas or
environments in which an organism or biological population normally lives or occurs.
E. The Commission shall not deny or condition an application for a regulated activity in an
area outside wetlands or watercourses on the basis of an impact or effect on aquatic, plant,
or animal life unless such activity will likely impact or affect the physical characteristics of
such wetlands or watercourses.
F. When considering applications within the upland review area, the Commission may permit
or require the planting of landscape material to mitigate the effects of such activity or to
protect or enhance the function of such wetland, water body or watercourse as demonstrated
by evidence submitted into the record.
G. The Commission shall state upon the record the reasons and basis for its decision.
H. If the Commission denies the permit after application, the applicant may attempt to modify
his proposal and resubmit.
I. If a bond is required in accordance with Section 10. of these regulations, no permit shall be
issued until such bond or insurance is provided.
J. No permit issued by the Commission shall be assigned or transferred without the written
W-21
permission of the Commission.
K. The Commission has relied in whole or in part on information provided by the applicant and
if such information subsequently proves to be false, deceptive, incomplete or inaccurate, the
permit may be modified, suspended or revoked.
L. All permits issued by the Commission are subject to and do not derogate any present or
future rights or powers of the Commission or the Town of Farmington, and convey no rights
in real estate or material nor any exclusive privileges, and are further subject to any and all
public and private rights and to any federal, state, and municipal laws or regulations
pertinent to the subject land or activity.
M. In the case of an application where the applicant has provided written notice pursuant to
section 6 J3 of these regulations, the holder of the restriction may provide proof to the
inland wetlands and watercourses Commission that granting of the permit application will
violate the terms of the restriction. Upon a finding that the requested land use violates the
terms of such restriction, the inland wetlands and watercourses Commission shall not grant
the permit approval.
In the case of an application where the applicant fails to comply with the provisions of
sections 6 J3 or 6 J4 of these regulations, (1) the party holding the conservation or
preservation restriction, other than a state Commission that holds such restriction, may not
later than fifteen days after receipt of actual notice of permit approval, file an appeal with
the inland wetlands and watercourses Commission, subject to the rules and regulations of
such Commission relating to appeals. The inland wetlands and watercourses Commission
shall reverse the permit approval upon a finding that the requested land use violates the
terms of such restriction; or (2) the state Commission that holds such restriction may, not
later than thirty days after receipt of actual notice of permit approval, file an appeal with the
inland wetlands and watercourses Commission, subject to the rules and regulations of such
Commission relating to appeals. The inland wetlands and watercourses Commission shall
immediately reverse such permit approval if the commissioner of the state Commission that
holds such restriction certifies that the land use authorized in such permit violates the terms
of such conservation or preservation restriction.
Nothing in sections 6 J3 or 6 J4 of these regulations shall be construed to prohibit the filing
of a permit application or to require such written notice when the activity that is the subject
of such permit application will occur on a portion of property that is not restricted under the
terms of such conservation or preservation restriction.
Section 9. OTHER PERMITS AND LICENSES
A. Nothing in these regulations shall obviate any requirement for the applicant to obtain any other
assent, permit or license required by law or regulations by the government of the United States or of
the State of Connecticut or any other political subdivision thereof. The obtaining of such assents,
permits or licenses is solely the responsibility of the applicant.
Section 10. BOND AND INSURANCE
W-22
A. The applicant, upon approval of the application and prior to the issuance of a permit, at the
discretion of the Commission may be required to file a performance bond and/or a
maintenance bond in an amount and with sureties and in a form approved by the
Commission.
B. The bond and sureties shall be conditioned on compliance with all provisions of these
regulations and conditions imposed on application approval.
C. Applicant may be required to carry public liability insurance against liability which might
result from proposed operation or use covering any and all damage which might occur
within two (2) years of completion of such operations, in an amount to be determined by the
Commission commensurate with the projected operation. A certificate of insurance shall be
filed with the Commission.
Section 11. ENFORCEMENT
A. Any person who shall commit, take part in or assist in any violation of any provision of
these regulations or of conditions imposed by the Commission upon a permit shall be served
with a written order by certified mail, at the direction of the Commission, or its designated
agent, stating the nature of the violation and providing a specified time within which such
violation shall cease and satisfactory corrective measures shall be taken by the violator.
Violators shall be fined in accordance with penalties set forth in Chapter 22 of the
Farmington Town Code. Each violation of this act shall be a separate and distinct offense,
and, in the case of continuing violation, each day’s continuance thereof shall be deemed to
be a separate and distinct offense. Within ten (10) days of the issuance of such order the
Commission shall hold a hearing to provide the person an opportunity to be heard and show
cause why the order should not remain in effect.
B. The Commission and/or its agent shall make regular inspections of all activities for which
permits have been issued under these regulations. Such activities shall be open to inspection
at all reasonable times. The owner, applicant or his agent shall have such permit readily
available and shall produce the same for inspection by such agent of the Commission upon
request.
C. The Commission shall consider the facts presented at the hearing and within ten (10) days of
the completion of the hearing notify the person by Certified Mail that the original order
remains in effect, that a revised order is in effect or that the order has been withdrawn. In
addition, the Commission may suspend or revoke a permit if it finds after the hearing that
the applicant has not complied with the terms or conditions of such permit or exceeded the
scope of the work as set forth in the application. The permittee shall be notified of the
Commission’s decision to suspend, revoke or maintain such permit by Certified Mail within
fifteen (15) days of the date of its decision.
D. The Commission shall cause notice of the aforementioned decisions to be published in a
newspaper having general circulation in the Town of Farmington.
E. The Commission or its designated agent, prior to initiating the process found in Section
11.A. of these regulations, may issue a notice of violation to such person violating the
W-23
provisions of these regulations or permit. Such notice may prescribe the necessary action
and steps to correct the violation including the halting of work in wetlands or watercourses.
The Commission or its designated agent may request that the individual appear at the next
regularly scheduled meeting of the Commission to discuss the unauthorized activity, and/or
provide a written reply to the notice or file a proper application for the necessary permit.
F. The Commission may suspend or revoke a permit if it finds that the permittee has not
complied with the terms, conditions or limitations set forth in the permit or has exceeded the
scope of the work as set forth in the application including application plans. Prior to
revoking or suspending any permit, the Commission shall issue notice to the permittee,
personally or by certified mail, return receipt requested, setting forth the facts or conduct,
which warrants the intended action. The Commission shall hold a hearing to provide the
permittee an opportunity to show that it is in compliance with its permit and any and all
requirements for retention of the permit. The permittee shall be notified of the
Commission’s decision to suspend, revoke, or maintain a permit by certified mail within
fifteen (15) days of the date of its decision. The Commission shall publish notice of the
suspension or revocation in a newspaper having general circulation in the municipality.
G. The Commission may file a certificate of violation order on the land records in the office of
the Town Clerk. Such certificate shall be released upon compliance with such order.
Section 12. CONFLICT AND SEVERANCE
A. Where there is a conflict between the provisions of these regulations and the Inland
Wetlands and Watercourses Act, Section 22a-36 through 22a-45, inclusive, of the
Connecticut General Statutes, the provisions of the said Act shall govern. Where there is a
conflict among the provisions of these regulations, the provision, which imposes the most
stringent standards for the use of wetlands and watercourses, shall govern. The invalidity
of any word, clause, sentence, section, part or provision of these regulations shall not affect
the validity of any other part, which can be given effect without such invalid part or parts.
Section 13. EFFECTIVITY
A. These regulations including boundaries of inland wetlands and watercourses shall not
become effective or be established until after a public hearing in relation thereto is held by
the Commission, at which parties in interest and citizens shall have an opportunity to be
heard. Notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be published in the form of a legal
advertisement, appearing in a newspaper having a substantial circulation in the Town of
Farmington at least twice at intervals of not less than two days, the first not more than
twenty-five (25) days nor less than fifteen (15) days, and the last not less than two (2) days,
before such hearing, and a copy of such proposed regulation or boundary shall be filed in the
office of the Farmington Town Clerk for public inspection at least ten (10) days before such
hearing, and may be published in full in such paper.
B. These regulations shall become effective upon filing in the office of the Town Clerk of
Farmington, Connecticut, after approval thereof by the Commissioner of Energy and
Environmental Protection and publication of notice of promulgation in a newspaper having
general circulation in the Town.
W-24
Section 14. AMENDMENTS
A. These regulations and the Official Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Map may from time to
time may be amended by the Commission in accordance with changes in the General
Statutes or regulations of the State Department of Energy and Environmental Protection, and
as new information regarding soils, hydrology or botanical species, peculiar to inland
wetlands and watercourses in the Town of Farmington becomes available.
B. Any application filed with an inland wetlands Commission which is in conformance with
the applicable inland wetlands regulations as of the date of the receipt of such application
shall not be required thereafter to comply with any change in inland wetland regulations,
including changes to setbacks and buffers, taking effect on or after the date of such receipt
and any appeal from the decision of such Commission with respect to such application shall
not be dismissed by the superior court on the grounds that such a change has taken effect on
or after the date of such receipt. The provisions of this section shall not be construed to
apply (a) to the establishment, amendment or change of boundaries of inland wetlands or
watercourses; or (b) to any change in regulations necessary to make such regulations
consistent with the provisions of the Act as of the date of such receipt.
C. These regulations and the Official Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Map shall be amended
in the manner specified in Section 22a-42a. of the Connecticut General Statutes as amended.
D. Applications (petitions) requesting changes or amendments to the Inland Wetlands and
Watercourses Map shall contain at least the following information:
1. the petitioner’s name, mailing address and telephone number;
2. the address, or location of the land affected by the petition;
3. the petitioner’s interest in the land affected by the petition;
4. map(s) showing the geographic location of the land affected by the petition and the
existing and the proposed wetland(s) and watercourse(s) boundaries on such land in
accurate detail together with the documentation supporting such proposed boundary
locations; and
5. the reason for the requested action.
E. Any person who submits an application (petition) to amend the Inland Wetlands and
Watercourses Map shall bear the burden of proof for all requested map amendments. Such
proof may include, but is not limited to, professional interpretation of aerial photography
and remote sensing imagery, resource mapping, soils mapping, or other information
acceptable to the Commission. If such person is the owner, developer or contract purchaser
of the land which is the subject of the petition, or if such person is representing the interests
of such an owner, developer or purchaser, in addition to the information required in
subsection 14.D, the petition shall include:
1. the name, mailing address and telephone number of the owner(s) of such land and
W-25
owner(s) agent or other representative;
2. the names and mailing addresses of the owners of abutting land;
3. documentation by a soil scientist of the distribution of wetland soils on said land. Such
documentation shall at a minimum include the report of the soil scientist documenting
the location of wetland soils on the land and a map of the said land indicating the flag
locations set by the soil scientist and defining the boundaries of wetland soil types; and
4. map(s) showing any proposed development of the land in relation to existing and
proposed wetland and watercourse boundaries.
F. Watercourses shall be delineated by a soil scientist, geologist, ecologist or other qualified
individual.
Section 15. APPEALS
A. Appeal on actions of the Commission shall be made in accordance with the provisions of
Section 22a-43. of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
B. Notice of such appeal shall be served upon the Commission and the Commissioner of
Energy and Environmental Protection.
As Amended Effective April 27, 2018.