CODE OF ORDINANCES TOWN OF GROTON, CONNECTICUT 
____________ 
Adopted May 12, 1994 
Effective July 1, 1994 
____________ 
Published in 1994 by Order of the Town Council 
____________ 
 
> 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
TOWN OF 
GROTON, CONNECTICUT 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Dolores E. Hauber 
Mayor 
____________ 
Kenneth N. Barber  
Jane S. Dauphinais  
Frank O'Beirne, Jr.  
Bernard W. Steadman  
Archie C. Swindell  
Harry Watson  
David Winkler, Jr.  
Chaz Zezulka, III 
Town Council 
____________ 
Ronald P. LeBlanc 
Town Manager 
____________ 
James F. Brennan 
Town Attorney 
____________ 
Barbara Tarbox, CMC 
Town Clerk 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a complete recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the 
Town of Groton, Connecticut. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1969 Code, as supplemented through 
July 7, 1987, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the town council. The source of each section is 
included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note 
indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use 
of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 
1969 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various 
sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of 
the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law 
citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many 
state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The 
figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of 
the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first 
section of chapter 4 is 4-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same 
time new sections or even whole chapters can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal 
system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come 
between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New 
chapters may be included in the same manner. If the new material is to be included between chapters 12 
and 13, it will be designated as chapter 12.5. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of 
chapters is maintained when including new chapters. New articles and new divisions may be included in 
the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, 
and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next 
successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon 
are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon 
represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the 
left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter 
immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of 
codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding 
prefixes: 
CHARTER 
CHT:1 
SPECIAL ACTS 
SA:1 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 
CHTCT:1 
CODE 
CD1:1 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES 
CCT:1 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
SLT:1 
CHARTER AND SPECIAL ACTS INDEX 
CHTi:1 
CODE INDEX 
CDi:1 
 
Indexes 
    The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed 
under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and 
still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous 
cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the 
particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of 
the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory 
legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will 
be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new 
pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. 
As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the 
amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher 
that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, 
that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Jan Shekitka, Supervising Editor, and Ron 
McLaughlin, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to 
the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the 
project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Barbara Tarbox, Town Clerk, and James F. Brennan, Town 
Attorney, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is 
hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make 
the active law of the town readily accessible to all citizens and which will be valuable tool in the day-to-
day administration of the town's affairs. 

MUNICIPAL CODE CORPORATION  
Tallahassee, Florida 
 
ORDINANCE NO. 224 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE TOWN OF GROTON; 
PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING 
A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH 
CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE TOWN COUNCIL OF THE TOWN OF GROTON: 
    Section 1. ?The Code entitled "Code of Ordinances, Town of Groton, Connecticut," published by 
Municipal Code Corporation consisting of Chapters 1 through 16, each inclusive, is adopted. 
    Section 2. ?All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before March 10, 1993, 
and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
    Section 3. ?The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any 
ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this 
ordinance. 
    Section 4. ?Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in the form as to indicate the 
intention of the town council to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in 
the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
    Section 5. ?Ordinances adopted after March 10, 1993, that amend or refer to ordinances that have 
been codified in the Code, shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
    Section 6. ?This ordinance shall become effective July 1, 1994. 
    Passed and adopted by the Town Council this 17th day of May, 1994. 

/s/ Dolores E. Hauber  
Mayor 
/s/ Barbara Tarbox  
Town Clerk 

 


SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have 
been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent 
nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general 
and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omitted." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be 
able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ordinance/  
Resolution  
?Number 
Date  
Adopted 
Included/  
Omitted 
Supplement  
Number 
272 
?5-?6-08 
Omitted 
6 
274 
11-?4-09 
Included 
6 
277 
?7-10-12 
Omitted 
6 
278 
?3-12-13 
Included 
6 
281 
?8-20-13 
Included 
6 
282 
?6-26-15 
Included 
7 
283 
?8-12-15 
Omitted 
7 
284 
?8-14-16 
Omitted 
7 
285 
12-20-16 
Included 
7 
286 
11-?8-17 
Omitted 
7 
287 
?4-?3-18 
Included 
7 
288 
?5-?1-18 
Omitted 
7 
289 
?8-?7-18 
Included 
7 
290 
10-?2-18 
Included 
7 
291 
10-23-18 
Omitted 
7 
292 
?1-?2-19 
Included 
7 
 


Subpart B - SPECIAL ACTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed in this subpart of the volume are selected Special Acts of the General Assembly 
which are specific to the Town of Groton. Article I contains for historical purposes a list of Special Acts by 
year, act number and subject matter. Article II contains the text of certain Special Acts printed at the 
request of the town. 


ARTICLE I. - LIST OF SPECIAL ACTS 
Year 
Act 
No. 
Subject Matter 
1941 
198 
Consolidation of school districts 
1945 
108 
Establishes voting precincts in the Second Voting District 
1945 
443 
Validates certain acts and deeds 
1953 
569 
Duties of the assessor 
1957 
251 
Collection of taxes 
1961 
295 
Authorizes the town to defray the cost of certain improve- ments by the assessment of 
benefits 
1961 
317 
Authorizes the town to amend its retirement system 
1963 
153 
Concerns pensions for town employees 
 


ARTICLE II. - AN ACT CONCERNING COLLECTION OF TAXES IN THE TOWN OF GROTON 


Sec. 1. - Town collector of taxes designated ex officio collector for boroughs, municipal associations, etc. 
    The collector of taxes of the Town of Groton shall be, ex officio, collector of taxes for all boroughs, 
fire districts, school districts and other municipal associations located wholly within said town. 


Sec. 2. - Remitting of taxes, lien fees, etc., by collector of taxes. 
    All taxes, lien fees and interest charges received by the collector of taxes shall be remitted to the 
treasurers of the respective taxing subdivisions on the fifth day of the month following their receipt. 


Sec. 3. - Payment of expenses of office of collector by town; reimbursement of town. 
    Said town shall pay the expenses of the office of collector, and shall be reimbursed by all the 
subdivisions therein on the basis of actual tax collections. Such reimbursement shall be apportioned to 
and paid by each district named herein in the proportion which the total revenue received in each district 
bears to the total annual tax receipts of town and districts combined. 


Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
? 


Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
    The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated 
the "Code of Ordinances, Town of Groton, Connecticut," and may be so cited. 
(Code 1969, § 1-1) 


Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
(a) ?In the interpretation of this Code, and of all ordinances, the following rules shall be observed, unless 
the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
    Board, commission, department. Boards, commissions, departments are construed as if followed by 
the words "of the town" and shall include duly authorized representatives. 
    Business. The term "business" includes businesses, professions, trades and occupations, and every 
kind of calling. 
    Computation of time. The time within which an act is to be done shall be computed by excluding the 
first and including the last day; and if the last day is Sunday or a legal holiday that day shall be excluded. 
    Gender. The use of any gender shall include the other gender. 
    Goods. The term "goods" includes wares or merchandise. 
    Joint authority. All words given in joint authority to three or more persons or officers shall be 
construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers. 
    Month. The word "month" shall mean a calendar month unless otherwise expressed. 
    Number. The use of the singular shall include the plural and the use of the plural shall include the 
singular. 
    Oath. The term "oath" includes an affirmation. 
    Officers, employees. The title of any officer or employee used in this Code shall be construed as if 
the words "of the town" followed it, and shall include his duly authorized representative. 
    Owner. The term "owner," when applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, or 
owner of a community or partnership interest, life tenant, tenant in common, or joint tenant, of the whole 
or a part of such building or land. 
    Person. The term "person" means natural person, joint venture, joint stock company, partnership, 
association, club, company, corporation, business trust, organization, or the manager, lessee, agent, 
servant, officer or employee of any of them, and includes all political subdivisions and governmental 
agencies, and every department of such political subdivisions, together with every officer and employee 
thereof while working in the course of his employment. 
    Property. The term "property" includes real and personal property. 
    Public place. The term "public place" includes any and all streets, highways and boulevards, alleys 
or other publicly owned or controlled parks, squares, spaces, grounds and buildings. 
    Real property. The term "real property" includes lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
    Sale. The term "sale" includes any sale, exchange, barter or offer for sale. 
    Shall, may, must. "Shall" and "must" are mandatory; "may" is permissive. 
    State law, general law, C.G.S. or general statutes. The terms "state law, general law, C.G.S. and 
general statutes" refer to the General Statutes of Connecticut, Revision of 1958, as amended. 
    Street. The term "street" means the entire width between the boundary lines of every publicly 
maintained way when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular or 
pedestrian travel, including, but not limited to, alleys, lanes, courts and sidewalks. 
    Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and the 
present. 
    Year. The word "year" shall mean a calendar year. 
(b) ?In the construction of this Code of Ordinances, except as otherwise provided in this Code of 
Ordinances, words and phrases shall be construed according to the general statutes; technical 
words and phrases, and such as have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in the law, shall 
be construed and understood accordingly. 
(Code 1969, § 1-2) 
State Law reference— Rules of construction of terms used in the general statutes, C.G.S. § 1-1. 


Sec. 1-3. - Effect of Code on prior actions and obligations. 
    Neither the adoption of this Code nor the repeal hereby of any ordinance of this town shall in any 
manner affect the prosecution for violation of ordinances, which violation was committed prior to the 
effective date hereof, nor be construed as a waiver of any license or penalty at such effective date due 
and unpaid under such ordinance, nor be construed as affecting any of the provisions of such ordinance 
relating to the collection of any such license or penalty or the penal provisions applicable to any violation 
thereof, nor to affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit in lieu thereof, required to be posted, filed or 
deposited pursuant to any ordinance, and all rights and obligations thereof appertaining shall continue in 
full force and effect. 
(Code 1969, § 1-6) 


Sec. 1-4. - Catchlines, history notes and references. 
(a) ?The catchlines of the several sections of this Code are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the 
contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections nor as any part 
of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such 
sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(b) ?The history notes appearing in parentheses after each section and the references and notes 
scattered throughout the Code are for the benefit of the user of the Code and shall have no legal 
effect. 
(Code 1969, § 1-4) 


Sec. 1-5. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a) ?The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinance in force before or at the time the 
ordinance repealed took effect. 
(b) ?The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal 
took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal for an offense 
committed under the ordinance repealed. 
(Code 1969, § 1-5) 


Sec. 1-6. - Validity and severability. 
    If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this Code is for any reason held to be 
invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Code. 
The town council hereby declares that it would have passed this Code, and each section, subsection, 
sentence, clause and phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, 
sentences, clauses or phrases had been declared invalid or unconstitutional, then the remainder of this 
Code shall be in full force and effect. 
(Code 1969, § 1-3) 


Sec. 1-7. - General penalty. 
(a) ?Whenever in this Code or any other ordinance of the town, or rule or regulation promulgated by any 
officer thereof under authority vested in him by law or ordinance, any act is prohibited or is declared 
to be unlawful or an offense, or the doing of any act is required, or the failure to do any act is 
declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided, the violation of such ordinance, rule or 
regulation shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $250.00. Each day any such violation shall 
continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b) ?The imposition of any punishment under this Code shall not prevent the enforced abatement of any 
lawful condition by the town. 
(c) ?Any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this Code, officially 
designated as such and each day that such condition continues shall be regarded as a new and 
separate offense. 
(Code 1969, § 1-7; Ord. No. 287, § 1, 4-3-18) 
State Law reference— Penalty authorized for violation of municipal ordinances, C.G.S. § 7-
148(c)(10)(A). 


Sec. 1-8. - Amendments to Code. 
    All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code, which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code, 
may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion herein, 
or in the case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof, by subsequent 
ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission thereof from reprinted 
pages affected thereby, and the subsequent ordinances, as numbered and printed, or omitted in the case 
of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and 
subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code by the town council. 


Sec. 1-9. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a) ?In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be 
excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(b) ?When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or 
organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in 
ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to 
embody them into the unified code. For example the codifier may: 
(1) ?Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2) ?Provide appropriate headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed 
in the supplement, and make changes in such headings and titles; 
(3) ?Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, 
where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing or other subdivision numbers; 
(4) ?Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this 
article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _____ to _____" (inserting 
section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of 
the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5) ?Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance 
sections inserted into the Code; but, in no case shall the codifier make any change in the 
meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplemental or already in the Code. 


Sec. 1-10. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
(a) ?Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise 
affect the validity of any of the following: 
(1) ?Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the town, or any evidence 
of the town's indebtedness. 
(2) ?Any appropriation ordinance providing for the levy of taxes or for any annual budget. 
(3) ?Any ordinance granting any franchise, permit or other right. 
(4) ?Any zoning ordinance. 
(5) ?Any subdivision ordinance. 
(6) ?Any ordinance creating a special services district. 
(7) ?Any ordinance approving, authorizing or otherwise relating to any contract, agreement, lease, 
deed or other instrument. 
(8) ?Any ordinance adopting a preliminary or development plan. 
(9) ?Any temporary or special ordinance. 
(10) ?Any ordinance establishing or promulgating inland wetlands and watercourses regulations. 
(b) ?All such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent 
as if set out at length in this section. 


Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Elections, ch. 6. 


ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 


Sec. 2-1. - Reserve fund for capital and nonrecurring expenditures. 
(a) ?Creation of fund. Pursuant to C.G.S. §§ 7-359 through 7-368, there is hereby established a reserve 
fund for capital and nonrecurring expenditures for the town. 
(b) ?Allocation to reserve fund. The town manager shall include in the proposed annual budget to the 
town council an allocation of funds to the reserve fund based on the following formula: Calculate the 
amount of not less than four percent of the general fund budget, subtract the sum necessary to 
defray general fund obligated annual debt service, the remainder amount to be allocated to the 
reserve fund for capital and nonrecurring expenditures. The amount so allocated shall be subject to 
the annual budget and appropriation or supplemental appropriation process as provided in the 
Charter. No appropriation shall be made to such fund so that the total fund balance exceeds 50 
percent of the total general fund budget, or the unappropriated portion of the fund exceeds 12 
percent of the total general fund budget. 
(c) ?Appropriation from the fund. The town manager shall annually recommend expenditures from such 
fund for the purpose of planning, construction, reconstruction, or acquisition of any specific capital 
improvement or acquisition of any specific item of equipment as provided by statute, such 
expenditures proposed shall be subject to the annual budget and appropriation or supplemental 
appropriation process as provided by the Charter. Appropriations from the fund shall be made only 
for capital assets, projects, or acquisitions of a nonrecurring nature, with a cost of over $25,000.00, 
and with a useful life expectancy of over five years. Supplemental appropriations from the fund shall 
require public notice, a public hearing, and simple majority vote of the town council and 
representative town meeting. 
(d) ?Maintenance of the fund. At least quarterly, the town manager shall report to the town council on the 
status of the fund and the expended and unexpended balances of each appropriation. 
(Ord. No. 179, 9-17-85) 


Sec. 2-2. - Sale of town property acquired by tax collector's deed. 
    The town council may sell by auction any property which the town has acquired by tax collector's 
deed. The different subdivisions of the town shall receive their proportionate share of the proceeds of the 
sale as their interests appear. 
(Ord. of 9-26-49; Code 1969, § 2-2) 
Charter reference— Sale or purchase of real estate, § 8.5. 


Sec. 2-3. - Adoption of state law as to zoning. 
    The town hereby adopts for that portion of the town which is not included within the limits of 
boroughs or fire districts having the power to zone, the provisions of the zoning laws of the state. 
(Ord. of 6-14-56, § 1; Code 1969, § 2-3) 


Sec. 2-4. - Applicability of zoning law. 
    Zoning regulations shall apply not only to that portion of the town which is not included within the 
limits of boroughs or fire districts having the power to zone, but shall also apply to that portion of the 
Mystic Fire District which is located within the town and to that portion of the town located within any 
subdivision of the town having the power to zone, whenever the zoning powers of any such subdivision 
are extinguished and shall apply as of the time of such extinguishment. 
(Ord. No. 38, § 4, 8-21-63; Code 1969, § 2-4) 


Sec. 2-5. - Disposition of lost goods. 
    The town hereby consents to and adopts the provisions of C.G.S. §§ 50-10 through 50-14 which 
shall provide that found articles shall be turned over to the town police department, and, if not claimed 
within six months shall be returned to the finder. 
(Code 1969, § 2-4.1; Ord. No. 101, 4-12-72) 


Sec. 2-6. - Boundary line between Groton and Stonington fixed and established. 
    Pursuant to C.G.S. § 7-113, the boundary line between the Towns of Groton and Stonington is 
hereby fixed and established as shown on a plan entitled, "Plan Showing Location of Boundary Line 
Between the Towns of Groton and Stonington, August 30, 1991," which plan is incorporated in this 
section and made a part of this chapter by reference. A copy is available at the town clerk's office. 
(Ord. No. 211, § 1, 10-15-91) 


Sec. 2-7. - Geographic information system fees. 
(a) ?The following fees are established for information produced by the geographic information system: 
(1) ?Programming time. $35.00/hour (minimum charge $20.00) 
(2) ?Central processing unit time. $30.00/hour (minimum charge $10.00) 
(3) ?Plotter time. $25.00/hour (minimum charge $10.00) 
(4) ?Media costs: 
Screen plots ..... 
$?2.00 (B size) 
Vellum/bond ..... 
??2.00 (E size) 
Mylar ..... 
??4.00 (E size) 
5.25-inch diskette ..... 
??2.00* 
3.50-inch diskette ..... 
??2.50* 
9 track tape ..... 
?12.00* 
TK50 tape ..... 
?15.00* 
 
*Magnetic media formats are limited to ERSI ARC/INFO Export Format using the UNIX TAR 
archive format. 
(b) ?The fees established in subsection (a) of this section may be revised or amended from time to time 
by resolution of the town council. 
(Ord. No. 214, § 1, 6-2-92) 


Secs. 2-8—2-25. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE II. - TOWN COUNCIL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— Town council, § 4.1 et seq. 


Secs. 2-26—2-35. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE III. - DEPARTMENTS 


DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 


Secs. 2-36—2-39. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 2. - DEPARTMENT OF SOCIAL SERVICES 


Subdivision I. - In General 


Secs. 2-40—2-42. - Reserved. 


Subdivision II. - Elihu Spicer Trust[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Committee for supervising investment of town trust funds, § 2-181 et seq. 


Sec. 2-43. - Allocation of funds. 
(a) ?The town council shall on an annual basis allocate funds from the Elihu Spicer Trust to the 
department of social services to be used for the provision of direct grants or payments to or on behalf 
of an individual or family requiring assistance and meeting the income eligibility standards adopted 
by the town council. 
(b) ?No trust funds shall be allocated directly to any agency or organization or municipal department 
other than the department of social services. However, the director of social services may authorize 
payment to an agency, department or organization for services provided directly to an individual 
eligible to receive assistance under the fund. 
(c) ?No trust funds shall be used for administrative costs which for the purposes of this article shall mean 
overhead and/or salaries for personnel services. 
(Ord. No. 153, § 1, 10-20-80) 


Sec. 2-44. - Expenditure plan, policies, records. 
(a) ?The director of social services shall submit through the town manager on an annual basis to the 
town council an expenditure plan for the use of the trust funds including: 1) the amount of projected 
expenditures; 2) the purposes for which the funds may be expended; 3) the income eligibility limits 
for assistance and 4) expenditure limits per family or individual. 
(1) ?This expenditure plan shall be submitted to the town council at least 45 calendar days prior to 
July 19, the date by which the town council is required to file its report with the attorney general. 
(2) ?The town council may amend, alter or otherwise change the plan. Any such action shall be 
taken prior to July 19, or the plan as submitted shall become effective. 
(b) ?Policies and procedures shall be approved by the town council by resolution, and may be amended 
from time to time as deemed appropriate, for determining eligibility for assistance, application 
procedure, disbursement of funds, and monitoring expenditures. 
(c) ?Separate accounting records shall be maintained of all income and expenditures, and concurrently 
with the expenditure plan a summary of the income and expenditures for the prior year shall be 
submitted to the town council. 
(Ord. No. 153, § 2, 10-20-80) 


Sec. 2-45. - Responsibility and authority of town council. 
(a) ?The town council shall retain fiduciary responsibility for the management of the fund in accordance 
with its role as trustee of the fund. 
(1) ?Investment of the principal and interest of the fund shall be in accordance with C.G.S. § 45-88 
with the director of finance delegated the responsibility for such investments who shall report 
annually to the town council 30 days prior to July 19. 
(2) ?On or before July 19 of each year, the town council shall submit to the office of the attorney 
general of the state a report showing the income and expenditures made from the fund during 
the preceding year. 
(b) ?The town council may, upon the recommendation of the director of social services, waive income 
eligibility and/or expenditure limits for an individual or family in cases of unusual need or special 
circumstances. 
(Ord. No. 153, § 3, 10-20-80) 


Secs. 2-46—2-50. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE IV. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Charter reference— Officers and electors, § 2.1 et seq. 
State Law reference— Municipal employees, C.G.S. § 7-407 et seq. 


DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 


Secs. 2-51—2-60. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 2. - RETIREMENT SYSTEM[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Charter reference— Retirement of town employees, § 9.5. 


Sec. 2-61. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings 
ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Annual pay shall mean the annual salary or wages for service to the town for one year plus longevity 
and overtime payments up to $3,000.00 per year. One year shall be the one-year period immediately 
preceding the effective date of the employee's retirement. 
    Average annual pay shall mean the average of the highest three years annual pay out of the five-
year period immediately preceding the effective date of the employee's retirement. 
    Fiscal year shall mean the 12 months from July 1 of any year to June 30 of the following year, both 
dates inclusive. 
    Pension shall mean a payment made to an employee according to the provisions of this chapter 
other than a return of contributions. 
    Regular interest shall mean interest compounded annually on the last day of the fiscal year at the 
rate determined from time to time by the retirement board. 
    Retirement board and board shall mean the Board created in this division for the administration of 
the retirement system. 
    Retirement fund shall mean the fund derived from contributions made as provided for the payment of 
pensions under this division. 
    Retirement system shall mean the plan for retirement of town employees covered by this division. 
(Ord. No. 192, § 1, 4-5-88) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 


Sec. 2-62. - Retirement board. 
    The management of the retirement system shall be vested in a retirement board constituted, 
appointed and with powers as provided in section 5.5 of the charter of the town. The members of the 
retirement board shall serve without compensation. 
(1) ?The board may make such rules and regulations for the operation of the retirement system, 
and may from time to time alter, amend, revoke and change the same as it may deem proper; 
provided that such rules and regulations are consistent with the provisions of this division. 
(2) ?The board shall employ such actuarial, medical, clerical and other services as are necessary 
for the proper operation of the retirement system. 
(3) ?The board shall submit annually, to the trustee of the retirement fund and shall have full power 
to control the investment of same, either directly in accordance with the laws of the state 
governing the investment of trust funds (C.G.S. § 45-88), or by depositing such funds with a 
trust company or insurance company licensed under the laws of the state or the trust 
department of a bank and trust company licensed under the laws of the state or the National 
Banking Act, for investment by such company. In the event the board does so deposit such 
funds with a proper trust or insurance department it shall instruct the department concerning 
types of investments to assure that the objectives set by the board are met. 
(4) ?The members of the retirement board may be required to furnish bond in such amount as shall 
be determined by the town council and the cost of such bonds shall be paid by the town. 
(Ord. No. 192, § 2, 4-5-88) 


Sec. 2-63. - Applicability. 
(a) ?This division shall apply to all full-time nonunion employees in the classified service of the town, the 
town clerk and such other groups as may be included in the system by resolution of the town council. 
Eligible employees shall be required to participate in the retirement system and such participation 
shall be a condition of continued employment. 
(b) ?The town manager, from time to time, may become a member of the retirement system and thereby 
participate therein to the same extent as do members who are full-time employees in the classified 
service of the town, should he desire to do so, provided he gives the board written notice of such 
desire within 12 months of the date he commences employment with the town. The town manager's 
membership in the retirement system shall commence as of the beginning of that fiscal year of the 
town in which he notifies the board of his desire to become a member of the system, or as of the 
beginning of his employment with the town whichever is the later and the contributions required from 
him as a member of the retirement system shall be payable by him from the beginning of his 
membership. Such payment may be made by installments satisfactory to the board provided it shall 
be made in full within one year from the date the town manager gives the board written notice of his 
desire to become a member of and to participate in the retirement system. 
(c) ?Participation in the retirement system shall be optional for the assistant town manager and the 
assistant to the town manager. The option shall be exercised within 30 days from date of 
appointment or from November 25, 1988, whichever is later. 
(d) ?The chief of police and the deputy chief of police shall have the option to participate in the 
retirement system of the town under the provisions of this division or under the pension agreement 
applicable to uniformed police officers of the town. Such option shall be exercised at the time of 
appointment to the position. 
(e) ?Part-time employees if and when appointed full time may buy back any or all part-time service at no 
cost to the town (i.e. employee pays 100 percent of the buy back cost as determined by the 
retirement board). 
(f) ?Eligible employees who are not members of the plan may be allowed to join the plan at such time 
and under such conditions as may be established by the town council. The retirement fund shall be 
made whole for all current and future costs incurred as a result of the employee's participation in the 
plan either through employee contributions or general fund appropriations. 
(g) ?Full time employees who leave the service of the town and later return to a full time position with the 
town shall have the option to buy back their previous service at no cost to the town. The previous 
service, if bought back, shall be for the purpose of benefit calculation only and shall not be used to 
determine eligibility for retirement under section 2-67. The option to buy back service must be 
exercised within one year of appointment or six months from November 25, 1988, whichever is later 
and shall be under such terms and conditions as may be prescribed by the retirement board. 
(Ord. No. 192, § 3, 4-5-88; Ord. No. 196, § 3, 10-4-88) 


Sec. 2-64. - Contributions by town. 
    The town shall pay into the retirement fund such amounts determined by the board on sound 
actuarial principles as necessary, in addition to contributions of the employees, to provide future pensions 
on account of service rendered by employees subsequent to the date upon which each shall begin 
participation in the retirement system. Whenever the retirement benefits payable to employees under this 
division are increased, the town shall also be liable to the retirement board for an amount on account of 
future pensions representing services rendered prior to the effective date of such amendment as shall be 
determined by the retirement board, adequate to compensate the retirement fund for the difference 
between monies received from other sources as specifically provided for in the resolution or amendment, 
towards the actuarial value of these prior services and the full actuarial value of the prior services, which 
amount shall be payable periodically as necessary to discharge such liability over a definite period not to 
exceed 30 years; provided that in no fiscal year shall the payment made on this account be less than the 
regular interest on the amount of such liability still outstanding. 
(Ord. No. 192, § 4, 4-5-88) 


Sec. 2-65. - Contributions of employees. 
(a) ?Contribution rate. The rate of contribution to be made by an employee participating in the retirement 
system shall be four percent of annual pay. All contributions shall be collectible from the employee 
as deductions from pay and transmitted immediately to the retirement fund. 
(b) ?Return of contribution. Upon termination of employment of any employee from the retirement 
system, provided that he does not elect to leave his contributions in the retirement fund as provided 
herein, or upon his death prior to the effective date of his retirement, the board shall pay to him or to 
his legal representative an amount equal to his contributions under this section, plus regular interest 
thereon compounded annually; or, at the death of an employee subsequent to the effective date of 
his retirement, provided he has not elected the contingent beneficiary option or the ten-year certain 
option, the amount of any excess of his accumulated contributions as of such effective date of 
retirement over pension payments made to him; or, in the event of the discontinuance of the 
retirement system in whole or in part, an amount equal to his accumulated contributions and interest 
thereon. 
(Ord. No. 192, § 5, 4-5-88) 


Sec. 2-66. - Vesting. 
    No employee shall have a vested interest in any funds of the retirement system, other than in an 
amount equal to his own contributions plus regular interest thereon, except that upon termination of 
employment after at least ten years of continuous service an employee shall be 100 percent vested in the 
town's contributions and, provided he shall elect to leave his contributions in the retirement fund, shall be 
entitled to receive a deferred retirement benefit computed as provided in section 2-68 for normal 
retirement, commencing at the earliest date on which he could have retired under section 2-67 if he had 
continued in the service of the town. 
(Ord. No. 192, § 6, 4-5-88) 


Sec. 2-67. - Retirement eligibility. 
(a) ?Normal retirement. Any member of the retirement system who has completed 25 years of 
continuous service as an employee of the town and has attained the age of 55 or has completed 15 
years of continuous service as an employee of the town and has attained the age of 60 years or has 
completed ten years of continuous service as an employee of the town and has attained the age of 
65 years shall be eligible for retirement for superannuation under the provisions of this division. 
(b) ?Early retirement. Any member of the retirement system who does not meet these age and service 
requirements, but who has attained the age of 55 and has completed 20 years of continuous service 
as an employee, may be granted an early retirement in accordance with section 2-69(b). 
(c) ?Notice of retirement. Any such eligible member may retire from service by filing with the retirement 
board a written statement duly attested, setting forth at what time, subsequent to the date of filing 
thereof, but not earlier than 60 days subsequent to the date of filing thereof, his desire to be retired. 
The employee shall then be retired by the vote of the retirement board. 
(d) ?Disability retirement. Any member of the retirement system, who, after ten years of continuous 
service as an employee of the town, shall be totally and permanently disabled, except as a result of 
his own willful misconduct, from earning compensation at any employment may be retired for 
disability according to the provisions of this contract; provided proof of total disability be submitted to 
the retirement board, which shall cause examinations to be made by at least two impartial medical 
examiners; and provided such total disability, if shown to the satisfaction of the board to have been 
sustained during the performance of essential duties pertaining to his employment by the town, shall 
entitle such member to retirement for disability, irrespective of the duration of his employment. 
(Ord. No. 192, § 7, 4-5-88) 


Sec. 2-68. - Continuous years of service. 
(a) ?In the case of absence from employment for more than one year, the retirement board shall 
determine the period within which the employee may return without breaking the continuity of his 
service. Reinstatement of an employee in the retirement system shall be conditioned upon such 
medical examinations as the board may prescribe. In no event will reinstatement be permitted if the 
employee has received a refund of his contribution to the system upon his former withdrawal from 
the system; such employee shall be deemed to be a new employee from the date of such 
reemployment or resumption, and his period of continuous service shall be counted from such date. 
(b) ?In the case of eligible employees of the town who were such prior to July 31, 1962, credit shall be 
given for service prior to August 1, 1962, only to the extent that the employee has made the 
contributions required with respect to such service according to the provisions of this division. 
(c) ?The period during which any employee is on leave of absence for service in the military or naval 
forces of the United States in time of war, or for compulsory service in the military or naval forces of 
the United States in time of peace, shall be included in computing length of service, provided that the 
employee shall have received an honorable discharge or certificate of satisfactory completion of 
service and shall have returned to the employ of the town within 90 days after such discharge, or 
completion of service, except this period may be further extended from time to time by the retirement 
board in its sole discretion for disability incurred in the course of such service. 
(d) ?Employees shall have the option to buy back up to three years of full-time military service for the 
purpose of benefit calculation, but not retirement eligibility at such times or under such terms and 
conditions as may be prescribed by resolution of the town council. 
(Ord. No. 192, § 8, 4-5-88) 


Sec. 2-69. - Retirement benefits. 
(a) ?Normal retirement. The retirement board shall pay to each member of the retirement system who 
has been retired for superannuation, according to the provisions of this division, a pension for life in 
an amount determined as follows: 1.6 percent of his average annual pay multiplied by the number of 
years of his continuous service with the town up to 25 years of service and 1¼ percent of average 
annual pay multiplied by years of continuous service thereafter. 
(b) ?Early retirement. The retirement board shall pay to each member who has been granted an early 
retirement in accordance with the provisions of this division a pension for life determined as in the 
case of retirement for superannuation, as provided herein, but based upon his average annual pay 
and continuous service prior to the date of his early retirement; provided, however, that the early 
retirement pension thus determined will be reduced in accordance with the following schedule: 
Retirement Age 
Reduction Factor 
59 
0.94 
58 
0.88 
57 
0.82 
56 
0.76 
55 
0.70 
 
The reduction factor shall be applied to the benefits the employee would have received based on the 
formula contained in this section. 
(c) ?Disability retirement. The retirement board shall pay to each member who has been retired for 
disability, according to the provisions of this division, a pension during the continuance of such 
disability in an amount determined as in the case of a member retiring for superannuation, as 
provided herein, but based upon his average annual pay and continuous service prior to the date of 
his retirement for disability. The board may, from time to time, call for medical evidence that the 
employee continues totally disabled. If the retirement board shall, upon competent medical evidence, 
conclude that the disability for which the employee is receiving a pension no longer exists, or if it be 
established that such employee is engaged in gainful occupation, the board shall thereupon order a 
discontinuance of the pension payable to such employee and he shall be entitled to any excess of 
his accumulated contributions as of the date of commencement of disability over the amount of 
disability pension paid. 
(d) ?Optional pension benefits. Each member of the retirement system shall have the option to be 
exercised by written direction to the retirement board, at any time at least six months prior to the 
commencement of his pension benefits, or at any time within such six-month period, provided he 
furnishes evidence of good health satisfactory to the retirement board, to elect to have his pension 
paid according to either one of the following optional forms: 
(1) ?Contingent beneficiary option. An actuarially reduced pension benefit payable to him during his 
lifetime after retirement with all or part of such reduced pension benefit, as the member shall 
specify, to continue to a contingent beneficiary for his life after the death of the retired member. 
(2) ?Ten-year certain option. An actuarially reduced pension benefit payable to him during his 
lifetime, and upon his death within a period of ten years after his retirement, the same reduced 
amount shall be paid for the remainder of such ten-year period to his designated beneficiary. 
The reduced pension payable under the terms of these options shall be actuarially equivalent, as 
determined by the retirement board according to such actuarial tables as it may prescribe for this 
purpose, to the pension otherwise payable in accordance with the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 192, § 9, 4-5-88) 


Sec. 2-70. - Payment provisions. 
(a) ?Normal benefits. All pension payments shall represent completed months of retirement, and shall 
become due and payable to the person entitled thereto on the last day of each calendar month; 
provided the initial pension payment to a retired member shall be computed at the proportion of the 
amount of his regular monthly pension corresponding to the fraction of the month elapsed since the 
effective date of his retirement. 
(b) ?Maximum benefit. No pension paid to any member under this division shall exceed 66 2/3 percent of 
his average annual pay. 
(c) ?Minimum benefits. The town guarantees that no pension for superannuation or for disability which 
shall become payable under this division shall be less than $300.00 per month or the amount which 
the member's accumulated contributions will purchase according to the actuarial tables employed by 
the board for this purpose, whichever is greater. The town also guarantees that no pension payable 
hereunder to an employee who was a member of the retirement system on June 30, 1962, shall be 
less than the pension to which the employee would have been entitled under Act No. 378 of the 
Special Acts of 1943, as amended. 
(d) ?Disability benefits. No pension payable on account of total permanent disability sustained during the 
performance of essential duties pertaining to the town, as provided herein, shall be less than 
$3,600.00 per annum including any concurrent payment available under the Workers' Compensation 
Act but excluding disability payments under the Federal Social Security Act. 
(e) ?Contingent beneficiary option. In the case of the contingent beneficiary option, the following rules 
shall apply: 
(1) ?If a member who has elected this option dies before his actual retirement date, no benefits 
under this option shall be payable to his designated contingent beneficiary. However, if the 
member has met the requirements for normal retirement as specified in section 2-67, and dies 
prior to actual retirement, it shall be presumed that the member had elected the contingent 
beneficiary option with the member's spouse being the designated contingent beneficiary and 
as such entitled to benefits under this option as if the member had died subsequent to 
retirement. 
(2) ?If the contingent beneficiary of a member who has elected this option dies before the member's 
actual retirement date, the monthly pension benefit normally provided under this division will be 
payable to the member upon his retirement as if this option had not been elected. 
(3) ?If the contingent beneficiary dies after the member's actual retirement date and prior to the 
death of the member, the amount of the pension payments which the retired member is then 
receiving will continue unchanged and will cease upon the member's death. 
(4) ?Election of this option is conditional upon the designation of the name and sex of the 
contingent beneficiary and furnishing to the retirement board proof satisfactory to such board of 
the age of the contingent beneficiary prior to the member's retirement. 
(5) ?Any change may be made in the election of this option provided that such change is made at 
least six months prior to the commencement of the member's pension benefits, or the 
retirement board may permit a change within such six-month period provided the member and 
the proposed contingent beneficiary furnish to the retirement board evidence of good health 
satisfactory to such board. 
(f) ?Ten-year certain option. In the case of the ten-year certain option, the following rules shall apply: 
(1) ?If a member who has elected this option dies before his actual retirement date, no benefits 
shall be payable under this option. 
(2) ?At any time, and from time to time, each member shall have the unrestricted right to designate 
the beneficiary to receive the death benefits, if any, provided for by this option, and to change 
any such designation. Each such designation shall be evidenced by a written instrument filed 
with the retirement board in such form as the board may prescribe. If no such designation is on 
file with the board at the time of death, or if for any reason such designation is defective, then 
the estate of such member shall be deemed to be the beneficiary designated to receive such 
benefits; in this event, the computed value of the balance of payments, as determined by the 
retirement board, shall be paid in a lump sum to the estate of the deceased member. 
(g) ?Payments for accidental death resulting from performance of duty. If it shall be shown to the 
satisfaction of the retirement board that a member sustained bodily injuries effected directly or 
independently of all other causes through external violent and accidental means, while engaged in 
essential duties pertaining to his employment by the town, and that such injuries, independently and 
exclusively of all other causes, and within nine months from the date of the accident, caused the 
death of such member, the surviving spouse of such member shall be entitled to an annuity of 
$3,600.00 payable in monthly installments, during her legal status as such, but for a period not to 
exceed ten years, the first payment to become due one month subsequent to the discontinuance of 
any payments for which the town may be liable under the Worker's Compensation Act. 
(1) ?In the event that no surviving spouse shall survive the deceased member, or in case of the 
death of any such surviving spouse prior to receipt of such annuity payments for a period of ten 
years, the right to receive any remaining payments shall vest in the children of the deceased 
member, if any thereby, share and share alike, provided no payment shall be made to any such 
child after the attainment of his 18th birthday and provided the liability of the town under this 
section shall be limited in any case to payments amounting to $3,600.00 per annum for ten 
years. The town shall reimburse the retirement board for all monies paid out to beneficiaries in 
accordance with this section. 
(2) ?If the surviving spouse is entitled to benefits as a designated contingent beneficiary under 
section 2-69, the spouse has the option to receive benefits under either section. However, the 
election of benefits must be made within 90 days from receipt of a notice from the retirement 
board requesting election of benefits. 
(Ord. No. 192, § 10, 4-5-88) 


Sec. 2-71. - Employees of certain political subdivisions. 
(a) ?If an employee of a political subdivision of the town terminates his employment with the subdivision 
and simultaneously becomes an employee of the town, or if any employee of the town terminates his 
employment with the town and simultaneously becomes an employee of a political subdivision of the 
town which has included its employees in the retirement system, the retirement benefits of any such 
employee shall not be affected by any such change of employment provided that the contributions 
required from such employee are continued to be made by him to the retirement board and provided 
that the new employer of any such employee makes to the fund the contribution required from the 
employer on account of such employee. 
(b) ?If an individual is employed by both the town and a political subdivision of the town which has 
included its employees in the retirement system, the contributions of such an employee to the 
retirement fund and the benefits afforded such an employee shall be determined as though the 
services of such employee were performed solely for the town provided that the employer's 
contributions to the fund for such employee shall be shared by the town and the political subdivision, 
each being responsible for the proportion of the total employer's contribution as the pay received by 
such employee from each employer bears to the pay received by such employee from both 
employers. The collection of both the employee's and employer's contributions shall be in 
accordance with such rules and regulations as the board may prescribe. 
(Ord. No. 192, § 11, 4-5-88) 


Sec. 2-72. - Limitations of action. 
    No action for any amount due under the provisions of this division shall be brought but within six 
years after the right of action shall accrue. Persons legally incapable of bringing an action when the right 
shall accrue may sue at any time within three years next after becoming legally capable of instituting suit. 
All amounts not claimed within such period shall remain absolutely a part of the retirement fund. 
(Ord. No. 192, § 12, 4-5-88) 


Sec. 2-73. - Exception from taxation. 
    The right of any person to a pension or to the return of contributions, any benefit or right accrued or 
accruing to any person under the provisions of this division shall be exempt from any state or municipal 
tax, and exempt from levy and sale, garnishment, attachment or any other process, and shall be 
unassignable. 
(Ord. No. 192, § 13, 4-5-88) 


Sec. 2-74. - Annual report. 
    The retirement board shall file with the town council an annual report showing the financial condition 
of the retirement system as of the end of the completed fiscal year, including an actuarial valuation of 
assets and liabilities, and setting forth such other factors, recommendations and date as may be of value 
to the members of the retirement system and the town. 
(Ord. No. 192, § 14, 4-5-88) 


Sec. 2-75. - Special provision for retirement of certain employees. 
    All provisions of the retirement system established for the employees of the town by Act No. 378 of 
the Special Acts of 1943, as amended, shall continue to apply without change to all members retired prior 
to August 1, 1962, without regard to the terms of this division. 
(Ord. No. 192, § 15, 4-5-88) 


Sec. 2-76. - Amendments. 
    Upon the recommendation of the town manager retirement benefits for employees of the town 
covered by this division may be increased by resolution of the town council. All other revisions shall be by 
amendment to this division in accordance with the provisions of the Charter. 
(Ord. No. 192, § 16, 4-5-88) 


DIVISION 3. - CODE OF ETHICS 


Sec. 2-77. - Declaration of policy and purpose. 
    Public office is a public trust. The trust of the public is essential for government to function effectively. 
Therefore, herewith is an established code of ethics for all town officials, officers and employees. The 
purpose of this code is to establish suitable ethical standards for all such officials, officers and employees 
by prohibiting acts related to financial gain or financial interests which are not in the best interests of the 
Town of Groton. 
(Ord. No. 290, § I, 10-2-18) 


Sec. 2-78. - Applicability. 
(a) ?This division shall apply to all town officials, officers and employees, whether elected and/or 
appointed, paid or unpaid. 
(b) ?All of the above shall be referred to hereinafter as "persons governed by this division". 
(c) ?The ordinance codified in this division shall not be applicable if and to the extent it conflicts in whole 
or in part with the Charter, any labor agreement, employment contract and/or state statute. 
(Ord. No. 290, § II, 10-2-18) 


Sec. 2-79. - Definitions. 
    Business means any entity through which activity for profit or not for profit is conducted including, but 
not limited to, a corporation, limited liability company, partnership, proprietorship, firm, enterprise, 
franchise, association, organization, or self-employed individual. 
    Business with which associated and similar phrasing means any business in which a town official, 
officer or employee or member of his or her immediate family is a director, officer, owner employee, 
limited or general partner, manager, member, or shareholder, excluding publicly traded businesses in 
which such official, officer, employee or his or her immediate family member's only association with such 
entity is as a holder of stock constituting five percent or less of the total outstanding stock of such entity. 
    Complainant means any person who signed a complaint under penalties of false statement alleging 
a violation of this division. 
    Confidential information means information, whether transmitted orally or in writing, which is obtained 
by reason of the public position or office held, that is not, at the time of transmission, a matter of public 
record or public knowledge. 
    Confidential investigation means the examination, prior to the finding of probable cause, of both 
written and oral evidence, that is not to be disclosed to any third party by anyone connected with the 
investigation, except upon the written request of the respondent. 
    Financial interest means pecuniary or material benefit or loss accruing to a person governed by this 
division, and/or to a member of his or her immediate family and/or a business in which such person 
and/or his or immediate family member is associated, as a result of a contract, transaction, zoning or 
other decision or matter which is, or may be, the subject of an official act or action by or with the Town of 
Groton except for such interests, contracts or transactions which by their terms and by the substance 
confer the opportunity and right to realize the accrual of similar benefits to all persons, businesses and/or 
property similarly situated and/or which are shared in common with a substantial segment of the town's 
population. 
    Gift means anything of economic value in excess of $100.00 for any one occasion. A gift does not 
include: 
(1) ?A political contribution, reported as required by law or a donation or payment as described in 
subdivision (9) or (11) of subsection (b) of 9-601a of the Connecticut General Statutes. 
(2) ?Services provided by persons volunteering their time. 
(3) ?A commercially reasonable loan made on terms not more favorable than loans made in the 
ordinary course of business. 
(4) ?A gift received from a member of a person's immediate family or significant other living at the 
same residence. 
(5) ?Goods or services which are provided to the municipality and facilitate government actions or 
functions. 
(6) ?A certificate, plaque or other ceremonial award. 
(7) ?A rebate or discount on the price of anything of value made in the ordinary course of business, 
without regard to that person's status. 
(8) ?Printed or recorded information germane to government action or functions. 
(9) ?An honorary degree bestowed upon a public official or public employee by a public or private 
university. 
(10) ?A meal provided at an event or business meeting and/or the registration or entrance fee to 
attend such an event, in which a person(s) governed by this division participates in his/her 
official capacity. 
    Immediate family means spouse, child, parent, grandchild, brother, sister, grandparent, daughter-in-
law, son-in-law, mother-in-law, father-in-law, sister-in-law, brother-in-law, and significant other living at the 
same residence. 
    On the record means in writing, signed and dated or a directive to the secretary taking the minutes of 
a meeting to note in the minutes of the meeting a special disclosure or statement. 
    Probable cause is defined by determining whether the facts would warrant a reasonable person to 
believe that a town official, officer or employee violated this division; the belief should be more than a 
mere suspicion, but less than proof beyond a reasonable doubt. 
    Respondent means any person accused of violating this division. 
    Town official, officer or employee means an individual whether elected or appointed, whether paid or 
unpaid, full or part time, including members of boards, commissions and committees in the service of the 
Town of Groton. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the term "town official, officer or 
employee" shall include officers and officials of the Town of Groton Board of Education, but not 
employees of said board of education. 
(Ord. No. 290, § III, 10-2-18) 


Sec. 2-80. - Conflict of interest. 
(a) ?Persons governed by this division shall not discharge their duties owed to or use his or her office, 
employment and/or position with the town for the financial interest of him/herself, and immediate 
family member and/or any business in which such person and/or an immediate family member is 
associated, including, but not limited to, derive a financial interest in any contract, transaction or 
purchase order for supplies, materials, equipment or services between, to be used by or furnished to 
the town or any board, agency or commission thereof by any such person, immediate family member 
or business. 
(b) ?(1) ?Except as provided in subsection (b)(2) of this section below, persons governed by this 
division shall recuse himself/herself from and refrain from voting upon or otherwise participating 
in any matter before or on behalf of the town if he/she, or a member of his/her immediate family 
and/or a business with which such person and/or his/her immediate family member, has a 
financial interest in the matter, act, transaction or contract at issue, including, but not limited to, 
the sale of real estate, material, supplies or services to or by the town. If such participation is 
within the scope of such person's official responsibilities to the town, he or she shall declare on 
the record that person (or persons) has or have a conflict of interest. 
(2) ?Notwithstanding the obligations set forth in subsection (b)(1) of this section, above, a town 
official, officer or employee may vote or otherwise participate in a matter if it involves a 
determination of general policy and/or the interest, contract or transaction is shared in common 
with a substantial segment of the population of the Town of Groton and/or which by the terms 
and by the substance confer the opportunity and right to realize the accrual of similar benefits to 
all persons, businesses and/or property similarly situated. In the event such person has an 
interest in the matter, but reasonably believes the provision of this subsection (2) apply, such 
person shall still disclose on the record that nature and extent of such interest, but may 
otherwise vote and/or participate in the matter. 
(c) ?Persons governed by this division shall not accept any gift that could reasonably be expected to 
influence or create an appearance of influencing the actions or judgement of such person in 
connection with his/her public position, office, duties or employment. Persons governed by this 
division shall disclose and gift he or she is aware which involves any member of such person's 
immediate family and/or business with which such person or member of his or her immediate family 
is associated if such gift could reasonably be expected to influence or create an appearance of 
influencing the actions or judgment of such person in connection with his or her town position, office, 
duties or employment. 
(d) ?Persons governed by this division shall not request or permit the use of town owned vehicles, 
equipment, facilities, materials, or property for personal convenience or profit, except when such are 
available to the public generally, or as provided pursuant to a municipal policy and/or, collective 
bargaining agreement. 
(Ord. No. 290, § IV, 10-2-18) 


Sec. 2-81. - Municipal ethics commission—Members; appointment; qualifications; compensation. 
(a) ?There shall be a municipal ethics commission consisting of five regular members and three 
alternates. Members shall be appointed by the town council to two-year terms. 
(b) ?All members shall be electors of the municipality. No member shall: 
(1) ?Hold or campaign for any public office; 
(2) ?Hold office in any political party; or 
(3) ?Serve as a member of any other municipal agency, commission or board. 
A person will not be disqualified from serving on the commission if he/she has a member of his/her 
immediate family employed by the town or the Groton Board of Education. 
(c) ?The commission shall elect a chairperson who shall preside at meetings of the commission, a vice-
chairperson to preside in the absence of the chairperson and a secretary. Three members shall 
constitute a quorum. At least three votes of the commission shall be required for action of the 
commission except as otherwise specifically provided for herein. 
(d) ?Members will serve without compensation except for authorized expenses in conjunction with their 
duties. 
(Ord. No. 290, § V, 10-2-18) 


Sec. 2-82. - Duties of town attorney/commission—Reports, advisory opinions, memoranda, and 
regulations, staff. 
(a) ?The town attorney shall: 
(1) ?Compile and maintain a record with the town clerk of all reports, advisory opinions, statements, 
and memoranda filed by and with the commission to facilitate public access to such reports and 
statements; 
(2) ?Issue advisory opinions with regard to the requirements of this division upon the request of any 
person, provided there is no pending complaint before the commission on this issue. Advisory 
opinions rendered by the town attorney, until amended or revoked by the town attorney at any 
time, shall be binding and shall be deemed to be final decisions. Any advisory opinion 
concerning the person who requested the opinion and who acted in reliance thereon, in good 
faith, shall be an absolute defense in any matter brought under the provisions of this division; 
(3) ?Report annually on or before February 1 to the town council summarizing the activities of the 
commission; 
(4) ?Receive complaints and determine whether or not the ethics commission has jurisdiction. 
(b) ?The commission will use the town attorney or an attorney specially appointed by the town attorney 
for assistance, as needed, in carrying out his/her duties. 
(Ord. No. 290, § VI, 10-2-18) 


Sec. 2-83. - Complaints, procedures, time limits, investigation; notice; hearings. 
(a) ?Complaints. The ethics commission shall receive written complaints of any violation of the code of 
ethics only upon referral by the town attorney. The commission shall have the power and duty to 
investigate and hear complaints concerning allegations of violations of this division as set forth 
herein. The time period for filing a complaint shall be the later of 180 days of the event(s) giving rise 
to the complaint or 180 days from the date on which the complainant actually knew or had access to 
sufficient information to have constructive knowledge of the event(s) giving rise to the complaint. In 
no event, however, will the commission have jurisdiction to hear complaints where the event(s) 
giving rise to the complaint actually occurred more than one year prior to the filing date. 
    Complaints of violation of the code of ethics must relate to financial gain or financial interests which 
are not in the best interests of the Town of Groton. The complaint may be made by any person but must 
be in writing on a form prescribed by the town attorney and signed under penalty of false statement. 
Included in a complaint shall be the name of the person accused (respondent), and also specific acts 
alleged to constitute the violation of section 2-80 of this division, when they occurred, and when the 
complainant claims to have obtained knowledge of them. It shall also state whether or not these 
allegations have been presented to other administrative or judicial authorities. All information supplied to 
or received from the town attorney and/or commission during evaluation or investigation shall remain 
confidential, as specified by provisions of the C.G.S. § 1-82a, in relation to operations of an ethics 
commission unless the commission makes a finding of probable cause for a hearing, or unless the 
respondent requests in writing that the entire record and any hearings be open to the public. 
(b) ?Evaluation and acknowledgment. 
(1) ?[Evaluation.] If the town attorney determines that the complaint is not timely filed, is not in 
proper form, the allegations, even if true, would not constitute a violation of this division, the 
complaint relates to an issue or incident adjudicated (or in the process of adjudication) as part of 
a previously filed complaint (whether or not filed) by the same complainant and/or the matter 
otherwise may be more appropriately addressed through the investigation and disciplinary 
processes for union and/or non-union employees, then the town attorney shall dismiss the 
complaint and duly notify the complainant of said fact and the reasons therefore by registered or 
certified mail. The town attorney will refer allegations applicable to other administrative or 
judicial authority to the proper authority. 
(2) ?[Notification of compliant.] If the town attorney determines that the complaint is in proper form 
and the allegations if true would constitute a violation of this division then the town attorney 
shall, not later than ten business days after said determination, provide a copy of the complaint 
by registered or certified mail to all respondents against whom such complaint is filed and shall 
provide notice of the receipt of such complaint to the complainant. The respondent(s) shall have 
ten business days to submit any response to the commission. 
(3) ?Investigation of probable cause—Confidential investigation. The commission shall make or 
cause an investigation to be made sufficient to decide whether there is probable cause to 
believe a violation of this division has occurred. The investigation shall be concluded within 90 
days. In the conduct of this stage of its investigation, the commission shall have the power to 
hold hearings administer oaths, examine witnesses, receive oral and documentary evidence, 
subpoena witnesses, and to require the production for examination by the commission of any 
books and papers as permitted by law which are relevant in any manner under investigation or 
in question; the commission may, but is not required to, conduct hearing at this stage of its 
investigation. During this stage of the investigation, the respondent(s) shall have the right to 
offer any information which may tend to clear the respondent of probable cause to believe that 
the respondent has violated any provision of the code of ethics. This investigation shall be 
confidential pursuant to C.G.S. § 1-82a. 
(4) ?No probable cause. If the commission finds no probable cause it shall within five business days 
advise the complainant and the respondent in writing of its finding and a summary of the 
reasons therefore and the complaint and the record of investigation shall remain confidential. 
(5) ?Probable cause. If the commission finds probable cause by the concurring vote of four out of 
five voting members, it shall within three business days after the termination of its investigation 
and its decision, advises the complainant and the respondent of its findings in writing and a 
summary of the reasons therefore. If there is found such probable cause, the commission shall 
make public its finding within five business days after the termination of its investigation and 
decision thereon and the entire record of the investigation shall become public with the 
exception for postponement of the release of said record for a period not to exceed 14 days 
during negotiations for the resolution of the matter by stipulation, agreed settlement, or consent 
order and/or as provided for in C.G.S. § 4-177 as referenced in C.G.S. § 1-82a(e). It shall also, 
unless resolved as stated above, fix a date for a hearing on a complaint. It shall give notice of 
that date to the complainant and respondent. Such date shall be not less than 30 days following 
notice, nor more than 90 days after the finding of probable cause. 
(6) ?Hearings. Following a determination of probable cause, all hearings shall be opened to the 
public and recorded in a manner to be determined by the town attorney. Hearings shall not be 
subject to rules of court. The rules of evidence and all applicable rights under the United States 
and Connecticut Constitutions, including, without limitation, the rights: 
a. ?Of an accused to confront and cross-examine his/her accuser; 
b. ?Of every witness or party to be represented by an attorney at law of his/her choice; and 
c. ?Of every witness to decline to answer questions in accordance with the Fifth Amendment to 
the Constitution of the United States apply. 
The commission chairperson, or in his/her absence, another commission member 
designated by the commission to act as chairperson, shall preside at such hearings, which 
shall be conducted by the commission, with the advice and assistance of the town 
attorney, in order to facilitate the prompt and fair disposition of the proceedings. While 
conducting a hearing under this subsection (7), the commission shall have the authority to 
administer oaths, examine witnesses, receive oral and documentary evidence. The 
commission shall have the authority to issue subpoenas or subpoenas duces tecum 
enforceable upon application to the Superior Court for the State of Connecticut, to compel 
attendance of persons at hearings and the production of books, documents, records and 
papers, pursuant to C.G.S. § 7-148(c)(10)(B), subject to the inherent power of the 
commission to decline or limit such request where it is merely duplicative or is 
unnecessarily burdensome or harassing and not likely to lead to evidence which will aid the 
commission in its determination. 
(7) ?Finding/sanctions. No finding of violation of this division shall be made except upon concurring 
vote of five out of five members of the commission. The chairperson shall render the finding of 
the commission in writing within 30 days after conclusion of the hearing. A copy of the finding 
shall be sent at the same time to the complainant, respondent, town attorney and the town 
manager of the Town of Groton. Upon finding of a violation of any provision of the division, the 
commission will refer the matter to the appropriate appointing or supervisory authority. The 
authority affected will report within 30 days to the commission the action taken, if any. 
(Ord. No. 290, § VII, 10-2-18) 


Secs. 2-84, 2-85. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE V. - BOARDS, COMMISSIONS, COMMITTEES AND AGENCIES[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Charter reference— Appointive officers—Boards and commissions, § 5.1 et seq. 
Cross reference— Flood erosion and control board, § 8-2; housing site development agency, § 9-2; fair 
rent commission, § 9-31 et seq.; sewer commission, § 15-21 et seq. 


DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 


Sec. 2-86. - Permit, application fees. 
(1) ?Connecticut General Statutes Section 8-1c provides for the town council to adopt fee schedules for 
land use applications and reviews associated with the work programs of the planning commission, 
zoning commission, inland wetlands agency, and zoning board of appeals. An ordinance, when 
adopted, supersedes any specific fee schedules established by respective agencies. 
The schedule herein is intended to establish reasonable fees for the processing of all land use 
applications in a manner that funds the approximate actual municipal administrative costs of reviewing, 
evaluating, processing, and advertising land use applications as is necessary. These administrative costs 
shall further be defined to include additional payment(s) by the applicant for direct costs of materials and 
services associated with work performed by professionals, other than town employees, including but not 
limited to professional/consultant reports, third party professional certifications, stenographic and 
transcription services associated with an application, and such other required certifications as the case 
may be. 
(2) ?The following fees and/or charges for permits, applications and related administrative actions shall 
be as follows: 
(a) ?Subdivision or resubdivision review: 
Base fee ..... $400.00 
1—4 lots, per lot, plus base fee ..... 225.00 
5—49 lots, per lot, plus base fee ..... 150.00 
50 lots or over, per lot, plus base fee ..... 125.00 
Subdivision modification ..... 250.00 
(b) ?Site plan review: 
Site plan modification ..... 150.00 
Building size of 25,000 square feet or less ..... 150.00 
Building size of 25,000—100,000 square feet ..... 250.00 
Building size over 100,000 square feet ..... 350.00 
Administrative site plan ..... 50.00 
(c) ?Coastal site plan review: 
Non-exempt activities ..... 150.00 
Combined with subdivision, variance, site plan, special permit ..... 75.00 
(d) ?Special permit review ..... 400.00 
(e) ?Inland wetlands review: 

Minor 
Major 
1 lot/1—2 dwelling units 
$150.00 
$400.00 
2 or more lots/3 or more dwelling units 
150.00 
400.00 
1 lot/1 commercial or industrial building 
150.00 
400.00 
Permit amendment, modification, renewal or extension 
150.00 
400.00 
 
Regulation or map amendment ..... 400.00 
Permitted or nonregulated activity ..... No charge 
(f) ?Zoning and subdivision amendment review: 
Regulation amendment ..... 400.00 
Map change ..... 400.00 
(g) ?Variance/appeal ..... 400.00 
(h) ?Zoning compliance certification ..... 25.00 
(i) ?Certificate of location ..... 150.00 
All fees include a $30.00 State Land Use Fee where applicable. 
(3) ?Complex application fee . If an application is deemed by the town staff or board or commission to be 
complex, the town may charge an additional fee sufficient to cover the cost of reviewing and acting 
on complex application. Such fee may include, but not be limited to, the cost of retaining experts to 
analyze and review reports submitted by the applicant as part of the complex application. The town 
staff and/or designated agent as the case may be shall estimate the complex application fee within 
21 days of the official receipt of the application by a respective board or commission. The fee shall 
be paid prior to the respective board or commission taking action on the complex application. Any 
portion of the complex application fee in excess of the actual costs incurred shall be refunded to the 
applicant after publication of the board or commission's decision as required by law. Failure to pay 
as aforesaid shall be grounds for denial of the application. 
(4) ?Other requirements. The office of planning and development services is authorized to create and 
implement reasonable and necessary procedures to address such necessary administrative costs 
and requirements noted in subsections (1) and (3) above to accomplish the provisions of this section. 
(5) ?[Exemptions.] Boards, commissions, councils, and departments of the Town of Groton are exempt 
from all fee requirements under this section. 
(Ord. No. 194, 4-19-88; Ord. No. 267, §§ 1—5, 1-29-07) 


Secs. 2-87—2-95. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 2. - REGIONAL COUNCIL OF GOVERNMENTS 


Sec. 2-96. - Adoption of state statutes by reference regarding formation of and membership in the state 
regional council of governments. 
(a) ?The town hereby adopts C.G.S. §§ 4-124i through 4-124p, providing for the formation of the 
Southeastern Connecticut Regional Council of Governments, and does hereby join such regional 
council of governments when and as such council is duly established in accordance with the 
statutes, upon the adoption of the statutes by not less than 60 percent of the eligible municipalities 
within the Southeastern Connecticut Planning Region, as defined by the Secretary of the Office of 
Policy and Management and upon certification by the Secretary of the Office of Policy Management 
that a regional council of governments has been duly established. 
(b) ?When the regional council of governments is duly established, and the transition period called for in 
C.G.S. § 4-124-1(b), as amended, has been completed, the town does hereby rescind the ordinance 
of April 4, 1960, and any amendments thereto that created the town's participation in the 
Southeastern Connecticut Regional Planning Agency. 
(Ord. No. 213, § 1, 3-8-92) 


Secs. 2-97—2-110. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 3. - INLAND WETLANDS AGENCY[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal inland wetlands agencies, C.G.S. § 22a-42 et seq. 


Sec. 2-111. - Created; duties and responsibilities; membership. 
    There is hereby created an agency consisting of five members which shall constitute the inland 
wetlands agency for the town, which shall have all the rights, powers, duties and obligations conferred 
and imposed by C.G.S. § 22a-28 et seq. The inland wetlands agency shall consist of five members, 
electors of the town, appointed by the town council for two-year staggered terms. There shall be two 
alternate members, electors of the town, appointed by the town council for two-year staggered terms. 
(Code 1969, § 2-53; Ord. No. 112, 10-1-73; Ord. No. 125, 6-16-75) 


Secs. 2-112—2-125. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 4. - SHELLFISH COMMISSION[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference— Local shellfish commissions, C.G.S. § 26-257a. 


Sec. 2-126. - Creation; composition; powers and duties generally. 
    There is hereby established a shellfish commission for the town, consisting of five regular members 
and three alternate members, all of whom shall be resident electors of the town and none of whom shall 
during the term of their office serve in any capacity as enforcement officers for or on behalf of the shellfish 
commission. Such commission shall have all of the rights, powers, duties and obligations conferred and 
imposed by C.G.S. § 26-257a. Such alternate members shall when seated have all the powers and duties 
set forth in the general statutes relating to the shellfish commission and its members. 
(Code 1969, § 2-71; Ord. No. 139, § 1, 12-18-78) 


Sec. 2-127. - Appointment of members; terms; vacancies; removal. 
    The town council, on or before January 1, following the adoption of this article, shall appoint five 
members whose terms shall commence on January 1. The initial members shall serve staggered terms. 
Thereafter, the town council shall appoint a regular member and alternate member of the commission for 
terms of five years from and after the expiration of the term of his predecessor in office or until his 
successor is appointed and has qualified. Such vacancies as may occur shall be filled by the town council 
for the unexpired portion of any term. The town council may remove any member of the shellfish 
commission for cause and upon written notice. 
(Code 1969, § 2-72; Ord. No. 139, § 2, 12-18-78) 


Sec. 2-128. - Designation of officers; meetings; quorum; records. 
    The members of the shellfish commission shall designate one of their number to be chairman and 
one to be the secretary of the commission. Regular meetings of the shellfish commission shall be held at 
such times as the commission may determine, and at all other times at the call of the chairman. The 
commission shall hold at least four meetings annually. Three members of the commission shall constitute 
a quorum for the transaction of business. The commission shall keep accurate minutes and records of its 
proceedings and official actions, showing the vote of each member upon any question, or the absence or 
the failure of any such member to vote. 
(Code 1969, § 2-73; Ord. No. 139, § 3, 12-18-78) 


Sec. 2-129. - Jurisdiction; licenses; quotas; disposition of fees. 
    The shellfish commission of the town shall have charge of all the shellfisheries and shellfish grounds 
lying within the jurisdiction of the town, not granted to others and not under the jurisdiction of the 
commissioner of agriculture, including all rivers, inland waters and flats adjacent to all beaches and 
waters within the limits and marine bounds of the town. The commission may issue licenses for the taking 
of shellfish therefrom and fix the fees therefor, may designate the quantities of such shellfish to be taken, 
the sizes of such shellfish and the methods of taking. The commission may prohibit the taking of such 
shellfish from certain designated areas for periods not in excess of one year. All moneys collected by the 
commission under the provisions of this section shall be paid to the commission and used by it for the 
protection and propagation of the shellfish under its control. 
(Code 1969, § 2-74; Ord. No. 139, § 4, 12-18-78) 


Sec. 2-130. - Rules, regulations subject to approval by council. 
    The shellfish commission shall have the power to adopt, amend and repeal rules and regulations 
governing its procedures and the exercise of its powers and duties. All such rules and regulations shall be 
subject to the approval of the town council prior to becoming effective. Such regulations and any 
amendments, or the repeal thereof, shall take effect immediately upon filing in the office of the town clerk 
after such approval. 
(Code 1969, § 2-75; Ord. No. 139, § 5, 12-18-78) 


Sec. 2-131. - Violation; penalty. 
    Any person who violates any regulation issued by the shellfish commission pursuant to this division 
shall be fined as provided in C.G.S. § 26-257a(b). 
(Code 1969, § 2-76; Ord. No. 139, § 6, 12-18-78) 


Secs. 2-132—2-145. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 5. - ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION 


Sec. 2-146. - Established. 
    The town hereby accepts the provisions of C.G.S. § 7-136 and establishes hereby an economic 
development commission. 
(Ord. of 10-23-61, § 1) 


Sec. 2-147. - Purposes; powers and duties. 
    The purposes of the economic development commission shall be the promotion and development of 
the business and industrial resources of the town and for that purpose the economic development 
commission shall have all the rights, powers, duties and obligations conferred and imposed by C.G.S. § 
7-136. 
(Ord. of 10-23-61, § 2) 


Sec. 2-148. - Membership; appointment; terms of office. 
    The economic development commission shall consist of nine members appointed by the town 
manager. Members of the economic development commission shall serve for five years each from the 
date of appointment, except that the terms shall be so fixed that the terms of not more than two members 
expire annually. In addition, the town manager may also appoint up to three ex officio, nonvoting 
members representing various other interests, but not limited to the community at large, the city, utilities, 
regional, state, and/or federal agencies for a one-year term. 
(Ord. of 10-23-61, § 3; Ord. No. 35, 2-18-63; Ord. No. 163, 2-15-83; Ord. No. 221, 10-5-93) 


Secs. 2-149—2-160. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 6. - HARBOR MANAGEMENT COMMISSION[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
State Law reference— Harbor management commissions, C.G.S. § 22a-113k et seq. 


Sec. 2-161. - Composition. 
(a) ?There shall be a harbor management commission which shall consist of a total of seven members, 
five regular members and two alternates, who must be electors and residents of the town. These 
members shall be appointed by the town council. The harbor master shall serve as an ex-officio 
member of the commission, without vote. 
(b) ?No member of the harbor management commission shall receive compensation for service, but may 
be reimbursed for any necessary expenses. 
(Code 1969, § 2-96; Ord. No. 173, § 1, 7-16-85; Ord. No. 180, 10-1-85) 


Sec. 2-162. - Term; officers; formation of subcommittee authorized. 
(a) ?The terms of all members shall run for three years except that the initial term shall be staggered so 
that terms of not more than three members shall terminate in any single year. If a member shall 
terminate for any reason, in advance of his term, a replacement shall be appointed, within two 
months of termination, by the town council to complete his term. 
(b) ?The commission shall elect a chairperson. The commission can form subcommittees to address 
specific duties of the commission. The commission shall also elect a secretary, who shall serve at 
the discretion of the chairperson. 
(Code 1969, § 2-97; Ord. No. 173, § 2, 7-16-85) 


Sec. 2-163. - Jurisdiction. 
    The harbor management commission shall have jurisdiction within the area of navigable waters 
below mean high water within territorial limits of the town and bounded by the projection of the boundary 
line of neighboring municipalities, as delimited by the following harbor areas: 
(1) ?Noank Harbor: Lower Mystic River, West Cove, Palmer's Cove, and Beebe Cove as shown in 
the adopted Noank Harbor Plan. 
(2) ?Other harbor waters defined by future adopted harbor management plans. 
(Code 1969, § 2-98; Ord. No. 173, § 3, 7-16-85) 


Sec. 2-164. - Powers, duties and responsibilities. 
    The harbor management commission shall have such other powers, duties and responsibilities as 
provided by the state statute including the power and responsibility: 
(1) ?To prepare a harbor management plan for the harbor in accordance with C.G.S. §§ 22a-113m 
through 22a-113o. 
(2) ?To review the harbor management plan annually and make any additions and/or modifications 
to the plan that may be deemed appropriate subject to the process set forth in C.G.S. §§ 22a-
113m through 22a-113o or other subsequent harbor management legislation enacted by the 
state legislature. 
(3) ?To propose ordinances and regulations to implement the harbor management plan in 
accordance with the procedures for adoption found in the town Charter, and to specify fines for 
violation of those ordinances and regulations. 
(4) ?To assist the harbor master in the assignment of moorings, the management of mooring and 
anchorage areas and the collection of mooring fees after a local mooring fee system is 
established by regulations. 
(5) ?To prepare an operating budget for the commission, to be approved by the town council, using 
funds from sources which may include, but are not limited to, local appropriations, mooring fees, 
violation fines, or a harbor management fund established by local ordinance. Any fee collected 
under this article shall be used for the maintenance and improvement of the harbor for the 
public and for expenses for personnel and equipment directly related to the function of the 
commission and harbor master. 
(6) ?To assist in the coordination of all public and private agencies, commissions and other 
organizations which provide service to other facilities based upon the use of the harbor and 
water of the town. 
(7) ?To review and make recommendations on proposed land and water use activities along the 
waterfront and within the waters of the jurisdiction described in section 2-163 that are received 
for review by other municipal agencies in accordance with the procedure described in section 2-
165. 
(8) ?To review for consistency with the harbor management plan, any public notice of an application 
for a state or federal permit for an activity taking place within the commission's jurisdiction as 
described in section 2-163, and to respond with recommendations to the regulating agencies. 
(9) ?To conduct or cause to be conducted studies of the conditions and operations in and out of 
town waters and to present to the town council proposals for the harbor's efficient operations. 
(10) ?When appropriate, to request a general permit from the United States Army Corps of 
Engineers and/or delegation of enforcement authority pursuant to C.G.S. § 22a-2a. 
(11) ?To hire staff and/or consultants in conjunction with performance of the above duties, powers 
and responsibilities. 
(Code 1969, § 2-99; Ord. No. 173, § 4, 7-16-85) 


Sec. 2-165. - Referral of proposal submitted to other municipal agencies. 
(a) ?Pursuant to C.G.S. § 22a-113p, the commission shall review and make recommendations, 
consistent with the harbor management plan, on any proposal affecting the real property on, in or 
contiguous to the harbor that is received by the planning commission, zoning commission, zoning 
board of appeals, historic district commission, flood and erosion control board, water pollution control 
authority, shellfish commission and any special district with zoning or other land use authority. The 
harbor management commission shall be notified in writing of any such proposal at least 35 days 
prior to the commencement of the hearing thereon or where no hearing is held, at least 35 days prior 
to the taking of any final action on the proposal. The respective municipal agency shall send a copy 
of the application/proposal to the commission upon request. 
(b) ?The respective municipal agency authorized to act on the proposal shall consider the 
recommendations of the commission. A two-thirds vote of all the members of the agency having 
authority to act on the proposal shall be required to approve a proposal which has not received 
favorable recommendation from the commission, provided that the provisions of this section shall not 
be deemed to alter the authority of the agency having primary jurisdiction over the proposal to deny, 
modify or condition the proposal. Failure of the commission to submit a recommendation shall be 
deemed to be approval of the proposal. 
(Code 1969, § 2-100; Ord. No. 173, § 5, 7-16-85) 


Secs. 2-166—2-180. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 7. - COMMITTEE FOR SUPERVISING INVESTMENT OF TOWN TRUST FUNDS[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Cross reference— Elihu Spicer Trust, § 2-43 et seq. 


Sec. 2-181. - Created. 
    A committee consisting of the town manager, the director of finance and the town treasurer is hereby 
constituted for the purpose of supervising the investment and reinvestment of all trust funds now owned, 
held or managed by the town or which may hereafter be owned, held or managed by the town. The 
committee shall have the power of investing and reinvesting such trust funds in such investments as the 
committee, in its sole discretion, shall deem proper; provided, that all such investments shall be such as 
are legal for the investment of trust funds in the state, unless the creator of any such trust has limited the 
investment of any such trust funds, in which case such investments and reinvestments shall be confined 
to the types so limited by such creator. 
(Ord. of 7-20-59; Code 1969, § 2-1) 


Secs. 2-182—2-190. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 8. - HISTORIC COMMISSION AND DISTRICTS[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
State Law reference— Historic districts, C.G.S. § 7-147a et seq. 


Sec. 2-191. - Purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this division to promote the educational, cultural, economic and general welfare of 
the town through the preservation and protection of buildings, places and districts of historic interest 
within the town by maintenance of such landmarks in the history of architecture of the town, of the state or 
of the nation and through the development of appropriate settings for such buildings, places and districts. 
(Code 1969, § 2-39; Ord. No. 121, § 4, 1-6-75) 


Sec. 2-192. - Authority and creation of districts. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of C.G.S. § 7-147c there are created historic districts within the town. 
(Code 1969, § 2-40; Ord. No. 121, § 1, 1-6-75) 


Sec. 2-193. - Districts enumerated; boundaries. 
(a) ?There shall be the following historic districts within the town: 
(1) ?Burnett's Corners. 
(2) ?Center Groton. 
(3) ?Mystic. 
(b) ?The boundaries of each district shall be as set forth in the descriptions annexed hereto and made a 
part hereof by reference. 
(Code 1969, § 2-41; Ord. No. 121, § 2, 1-6-75) 
Editor's note— A description of the boundaries of the historical districts is on file in the office 
of the town clerk. 


Sec. 2-194. - Commission created. 
    There is hereby established an historic district commission which shall hereafter perform all the 
functions of the historic district study committee relative to establishing new districts and otherwise 
administering the provisions of C.G.S. §§ 7-147a through 7-147k, inclusive. 
(Code 1969, § 2-42; Ord. No. 121, § 3, 1-6-75) 


Sec. 2-195. - Membership; powers; appointment, removal and filling vacancies; terms; officers; 
compensation. 
    There is created an historic district commission of five members and three alternates, at least two 
members and one alternate shall be property owners within one or more of the various historic districts 
within the town who shall be electors of the town, holding no public office, and who shall be empowered 
to perform all functions appointed to them by C.G.S. §§ 7-147a through 7-147k. Members and alternate 
members of the historic district commission shall be appointed by the town council. The town council may 
remove members for cause and may fill any vacancies for the balance of any unexpired term. The initial 
appointments of members of the commission and alternate members shall be made in such manner that 
the term of at least one member shall expire each year. Within the month of January of each year, the 
commission shall elect from its own number a chairman, vice-chairman and clerk. Members and 
alternates shall serve without compensation. 
(Code 1969, § 2-43; Ord. No. 121, § 5, 1-6-75) 


DIVISION 9. - BOARD OF ASSESSMENT APPEALS 


Sec. 2-196. - Membership. 
    The membership of the board of assessment appeals shall be increased by two additional members 
for a total of five members plus three alternate positions. 
    This division shall become effective on the 44th day after publication of the notice of passage of the 
ordinance and shall be applicable for any assessment year in which a revaluation becomes effective and 
for the assessment year following such year of revaluation. 
(Ord. No. 253, 12-4-01) 
Charter reference— Board of tax review, § 5.4. 


Chapter 4 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Liquor permits, C.G.S. §§ 30-14—30-62a; classes of liquor permits, C.G.S. § 30-
15; liquor manufacturer's permit, C.G.S. § 30-16; liquor wholesaler's permit, C.G.S. § 30-17; hotel liquor 
permits, C.G.S. § 30-21; restaurant liquor permits, C.G.S. § 30-22; tavern permits, C.G.S. § 30-26; 
druggist liquor permit, C.G.S. § 30-36; storage of liquor, approval required, C.G.S. § 30-38; application for 
liquor permit, C.G.S. § 30-39; liquor permit fees, C.G.S. § 30-41; granting and denial of liquor permits, 
C.G.S. § 30-43; permit to specify location and revocability, C.G.S. § 30-52; revocation of liquor permit, 
C.G.S. §§ 30-55—30-59; prohibition against unauthorized sale of liquor, C.G.S. § 30-74; sales to minors, 
intoxicated persons and drunkards, C.G.S. § 30-86; hours and days of closing, C.G.S. § 30-91. 


Sec. 4-1. - Hours of tavern operation on Sundays. 
    Pursuant to C.G.S. § 30-91(c), places in the town operating under a tavern permit are permitted to 
sell alcoholic liquor between 12:00 noon and 11:00 p.m. on Sundays. 
(Code 1969, § 3½-1; Ord. No. 117, 10-21-74) 


Sec. 4-2. - Possession, consumption prohibited on public school grounds or public grounds of school 
functions; exceptions. 
    No person shall possess or consume any alcoholic liquor within the confines or parking area of any 
public school grounds, public school buildings, public school playing field, basketball court or other public 
places in the town in which town or public school sponsored activities, athletic contests or athletic events 
are being held, unless otherwise permitted or licensed under the laws of the state and the regulations of 
the liquor control commission of the state or any successor control authority established by the state. A 
violation of this section shall constitute an offense for which any person found in violation thereof shall be 
fined in accordance with section 1-7. 
(Code 1969, § 3½-2; Ord. No. 135, 5-15-78) 


Sec. 4-3. - Consumption, possession of open containers in public places. 
(a) ?Findings. The possession of open containers of alcoholic and intoxicating liquors and the 
consumption of alcoholic liquors on the public streets, sidewalks, alleys, boulevards, parking lots and 
other places in the town constitutes an immediate danger to the public health, safety and welfare. 
(b) ?Definition. "Other places" as used in this section are defined as those streets, sidewalks, alleys, 
boulevards, parking lots which are generally and customarily classified as private property but must 
necessarily be used by the public for access and convenience to conduct private and personal 
business. 
(c) ?Acts prohibited; exemptions. The consumption of alcoholic liquor, as defined in C.G.S. § 30-1(3), or 
the possession of a container which is open and which contains alcoholic liquor is prohibited in the 
town on its public streets, sidewalks, alleys, boulevards, parking lots and other places; except, at 
such times and such places as may be specifically exempted temporarily from the provisions hereof 
from time to time by the town council or its authorized agent in connection with public, civic and 
fraternal celebrations. This section prohibits the above acts in or on the aforesaid places by persons 
in motor vehicles or other conveyances, as well as by persons on foot. Nothing in this section shall 
be construed to restrict the consumption of alcoholic liquors sold at retail on premises licensed for 
that purpose by the state liquor control commission. 
(d) ?Penalty for violation. A violation of this section shall constitute an offense for which any person 
found in violation thereof shall be fined in accordance with section 1-7. 
(Code 1969, § 3½-3; Ord. No. 147, §§ 1—3, 4-7-80) 


Sec. 4-4. - Alcohol possession by minors. 
(1) ?Findings. 
(a) ?The possession and consumption of alcoholic liquor by minors is a matter of a growing local, 
regional, and national concern. 
(b) ?Consumption of alcoholic liquor by minors unsupervised by parental authority creates a health 
and safety risk not only to our children but also to the general public. 
(c) ?The Town of Groton seeks to protect, preserve and promote the health, safety, welfare, and 
quality of life of its residents by regulating the possession of alcohol by minors. 
(2) ?Purpose. [The purpose of this section is] to regulate the possession of alcoholic beverages by 
minors on both public and private property. 
(3) ?Definitions. 
Alcholic liquor shall have the same meaning as the same term defined in C.G.S. § 30-1, as amended 
from time to time. 
Host means to organize a gathering of two or more persons, or to allow the premises under one's 
control to be used with one's knowledge, for a gathering of two or more persons for personal, social, 
or business interaction at which the host knows or should know that alcohol is consumed by a minor 
or minors. 
Minor means any natural person under the age of 21 years old. 
Person means any natural person, firm, partnership, association, syndicate, company, trust, 
corporation, limited-liability company, municipality, agency, or political or administrative subdivision 
of the state or other legal entity of any kind. 
(4) ?Possession. No minor under the age of 21 shall be in possession within the Town of Groton of a 
container, whether open or closed, which contains alcoholic liquor, except when accompanied by or 
in the presence of his or her parent, legal guardian, or spouse, who has attained the age of 21 years. 
This restriction shall apply to both public and private property. 
(5) ?Hosting events. No person shall host an event or gathering at which the host knows or should know 
that alcohol is consumed by or dispensed to any minor unless said minor is accompanied by or in the 
presence of his or her parent, guardian, or spouse who has attained the age of 21. This restriction 
shall apply to any event or gathering within the Town of Groton, whether conducted on public or 
private property. 
(6) ?Exceptions. The provisions of subsections (4) and (5) of this section shall not apply to the following: 
(a) ?A minor who possesses alcoholic liquor on the order of a practicing physician or any person 
who sells, ships, delivers or gives any alcoholic liquors to a minor on the order of a practicing 
physician. 
(b) ?A natural person over the age of 18 who is an employee or permit holder under C.G.S. § 30-
90a and who possesses alcoholic liquor in the course of such natural person's employment or 
business or in the course of a sale, shipment, or delivery of alcoholic liquor made to a person 
over age 18 who is an employee or permit holder under C.G.S. § 30-90a and where such sale, 
shipment, or delivery is made in the course of such person's employment or business. 
(c) ?Provided that neither paragraph of this subsection (6) shall be applied or be construed to apply 
to violations of sections 4-2 and 4-3 of the Groton Code of Ordinances. 
(7) ?Penalties. Any person violating any provision of this section shall be subject to a fine of $95.00. 
(Ord. No. 266, §§ 1—7, 11-1-05) 


Sec. 4-5. - B.Y.O.B. establishments. 
(a) ?Findings. In recognition of the growing practice of allowing patrons to bring alcoholic beverages to 
restaurants, clubs, meeting spaces, lounges and the like in the Town of Groton which establishments 
are not otherwise licensed by the State of Connecticut Liquor Control Division; the town seeks to 
preserve and promote the health, safety, welfare, and quality of life of its residents by defining, 
clarifying and regulating this practice at such establishments. 
(b) ?Purpose. The purpose of this section is to regulate the practice of allowing patrons to bring their 
own alcohol to commercial establishments within the town. 
(c) ?Definitions. 
    Alcoholic liquor shall have the same meaning as the same term defined in C.G.S. § 30-1, as 
amended from time to time. 
    B.Y.O.B. establishment often referred to as "Bring Your Own Bottle" means any business facility, 
such as a dance hall, club, restaurant, lounge, meeting room or association, not licensed by the State of 
Connecticut Liquor Control Division, wherein patrons 21 years of age or older are allowed to bring their 
own alcoholic liquor to the facility and to consume thereon. This designation includes any such facility 
regardless of whether such facility requires an entry fee, cover charge, membership fee or allows the 
practice only when associated with making a purchase at the facility. 
(d) ?Operation of B.Y.O.B. establishments within the Town of Groton. 
(1) ?No alcoholic liquor may be consumed on the premises of such B.Y.O.B. establishments as 
follows: 
a. ?Monday through Friday, between the hours of midnight and 10:00 a.m. 
b. ?Saturday and Sunday, between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. 
(2) ?The consumption of alcoholic liquor by visibly intoxicated persons shall be prohibited at 
B.Y.O.B. establishments. 
(3) ?The consumption of alcoholic liquor by persons under the age of 21 shall be prohibited at 
B.Y.O.B. establishments. 
(4) ?Alcoholic liquor shall not be offered as a prize for any activity conducted at the B.Y.O.B. 
establishment. 
(e) ?Penalties. Any person violating any provision of this section shall be subject to a fine of $250.00. 
(f) ?Relationship with other laws, ordinances. The provisions of this section shall in no way be read to 
substitute for, replace and/or conflict with the provisions of the Connecticut Liquor Control Act and/or 
sections 4-1 through 4-5 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 289, 8-7-18) 


Chapter 5 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
? 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Authority to regulate the construction, repair, demolition, etc., of buildings, § 1.4(41); 
to regulate and prohibit the moving of buildings, § 1.4(42). 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, ch. 7; flood erosion and control, ch. 8; housing, ch. 9; 
solid waste management, ch. 13; construction, demolition and special waste, § 13-117; streets and 
sidewalks, ch. 13.5; utilities, ch. 15. 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate the mode of using buildings, C.G.S. § 7-148(c)(7)(A)(ii); 
state building code applicable to all municipalities, C.G.S. § 29-253. 


Sec. 5-1. - Fees for permits and certificates of occupancy. 
(a) ?The fee for a building and/or mechanical permit shall be $20.00 for the first $1,000.00 of cost, and 
$8.00 for each additional $1,000.00 of cost or portion thereof effective January 1, 1998; and $10.00 
for each additional $1,000.00 of cost or portion thereof effective January 1, 1999. 
(b) ?The minimum fee for a certificate of occupancy shall be $10.00 or two percent of the building permit 
fee or portion thereof, whichever is greater. 
(c) ?The fee for a demolition permit shall be $20.00 for the first $1,000.00 of cost and $8.00 for each 
additional $1,000.00 of cost or portion thereof effective January 1, 1998; and $10.00 for each 
additional $1,000.00 of cost or portion thereof, effective January 1, 1999. 
(d) ?After January 1, 1999, fees may be amended by resolution of the town council and will be kept on 
file in the office of the town clerk. 
(Code 1969, § 5-4; Ord. No. 120, §§ 1—3, 12-2-74; Ord. No. 190, § 1, 7-7-87; Ord. No. 236, § 
1, 10-7-97) 


Sec. 5-2. - Demolition of structures under certain conditions. 
(a) ?The building official shall order the owner of a structure found to be unfit for human habitation and 
unreasonable to repair or raze and remove such structure within a reasonable period of time. For 
purposes of this section, a structure or part thereof shall be presumed to be unreasonable to repair 
and a public nuisance if either: 
(1) ?The cost of repairs to bring such structure into compliance with the provisions of the state 
building code exceeds 50 percent of the replacement value of such structure; or 
(2) ?The structure has remained vacant for a period of six months from the date of placarding by the 
building official. 
(b) ?However, within ten days from the issuance of an order to raze and remove a structure or part 
thereof, the owner of the premises shall be granted the option to repair the structure so as to be in 
compliance with the provisions of the state building code within a reasonable period of time as 
determined by the building official but not to exceed six months from the date of the notice. 
(c) ?The owner of the premises shall also have the right to request a hearing by the building code board 
of appeals at which time the owner shall be provided the opportunity to show cause why the order 
should be rescinded or modified. The hearing shall be held in accordance with section 903 of the 
rental housing code. However, the board may rescind or modify the order of the building official only 
if such order is found to be unreasonable. 
(Code 1969, § 5-6; Ord. No. 152, §§ 1—3, 8-4-80; Ord. No. 155, §§ 1—3, 11-17-80) 


Sec. 5-3. - Blighted premises. 
(1) ?Purpose. 
(a) ?This section is enacted pursuant to authority granted by the Connecticut General Statutes, 
including without limitation by C.G.S. § 7-148(c)(7)(H)(xv), as amended by P.A. 12-146, §§ 2 
and 4; C.G.S. § 7-148o(b) and C.G.S. § 7-152c. 
(b) ?This section prohibits any owner, occupant, agent, tenant and/or person in control of real 
property located in the Town of Groton, from allowing, creating, maintaining or causing to be 
created or maintained blighted premises. 
(c) ?This section shall apply to public and private property, regardless of principal or accessory 
uses, and is intended to protect, preserve, and promote public health, safety and welfare, 
including the preservation of property values. 
(d) ?Notwithstanding the foregoing, this section shall not apply within the jurisdictional boundaries of 
the City of Groton or Groton Long Point. 
(2) ?Definitions. The following words, terms, and phrases shall have the following meaning ascribed to 
them in this section: 
(a) ?Blighted premises means any building, structure or parcel of land where at least one of the 
following conditions exists: 
1. ?A condition exists that poses a serious or immediate threat to the health, safety or general 
welfare of the community. 
2. ?A building or structure is a fire hazard. 
3. ?The property is in a state of disrepair or is becoming dilapidated. "State of disrepair" or 
"becoming dilapidated" shall mean in a physically deteriorating condition causing unsafe or 
unsanitary conditions or a nuisance to the general public and be evidenced by one or more 
of the following conditions: 
a. ?Missing, broken or boarded up windows and doors longer than six months. 
b. ?Collapsing or missing exterior walls or roof, or other exterior features including, but not 
necessarily limited to, stairs, porches, railings, hatchways, chimneys or floors. 
c. ?Seriously damaged or missing siding or roofing. 
d. ?Unrepaired fire or water damage longer than six months. 
e. ?Rodent harborage and/or infestation. 
f. ?Persistent garbage or trash on the property. 
g. ?Storage of unregistered vehicles and/or waste materials as described in Section 4.12 
of the Zoning Regulations. 
h. ?Rubbish, broken glass, trash, refuse, debris, stumps, roots, or boats and machinery in 
a state of disrepair that cannot be used for its intended purpose. 
i. ?Parking lots in excess of ten parking spaces in a state of disrepair or abandonment 
evidenced, for example, by cracks, potholes, overgrowth of vegetation within the 
surface, pavement or macadam, or within medians and buffers. 
j. ?Shrubs, hedges, grass, plants, weeds or any other vegetation that have been left to 
grow in an unkempt manner that are covering or blocking means of egress or access 
to any building or that are blocking, interfering with, or otherwise obstructing any 
sightline, road sign, or emergency access to or at the property, when viewed from any 
property line. 
k. ?On any premises with a building or dwelling located thereon, whether said building or 
dwelling is occupied or not, no grass or weeds shall be permitted by any owner or 
occupant to reach a height greater than two feet. 
l. ?The overall condition of the property structure and/or grounds causes an unreasonable 
negative impact on the value of neighboring properties. 
(b) ?Town means the Town of Groton, CT. 
(c) ?Blight ordinance enforcement officer means a town official(s) and/or employee(s) designated by 
the town manager to enforce this section to compel compliance, to issue citations and/or to take 
other actions authorized under this section. 
(d) ?Naturalized areas, for the purpose of this section, shall be defined as contiguous areas of 
vegetation that come from natural regeneration and/or intentional plantings with native plant 
material. These areas are an approach to landscaping as a means of promoting bio diversity, 
reducing water use, and reducing maintenance costs. 
(3) ?Exemptions. The following properties and/or portions of properties shall be exempt from this section: 
(a) ?Agricultural lands pursuant to C.G.S. § 22-3(b); 
(b) ?Land dedicated as public open space or parks; 
(c) ?Land preserved in its natural state through conservation easements or conservation 
restrictions; 
(d) ?Areas designated as buffers or development free areas by a land use agency; 
(e) ?Upland review areas or wetlands and watercourses; 
(f) ?Maintained gardens, flower beds, and/or xeriscape landscaping as part of a landscape design, 
or naturalized areas as defined in subsection (2)(d), provided they do not cover or block means 
of egress or access to any building or block, interfere with, or otherwise obstruct any sightline, 
road sign, or emergency access to or at the property or promote rodent harborage and/or 
infestation. 
(4) ?Prohibition. No owner, agent, occupant and/or a tenant required by a lease to maintain a property, 
and/or any person in control of real property located in the town shall allow, maintain or cause to be 
maintained a blighted premises. 
(5) ?Enforcement. 
(a) ?The blight ordinance enforcement officer may enforce this article according to law by civil 
action or in such manner is authorized by town Charter and ordinance. In addition to any other 
administrative, legal or equitable remedy, such officer may serve written notice to an owner, 
agent, tenant or other responsible person of any violation and may order the correction and 
cessation of such violation and may establish deadlines, plans and methods for compliance, 
which shall constitute an order to abate. The notice may be hand delivered or mailed to the last 
known address of the owner, operator, or any of the persons identified in section 5-3. If the 
notice is mailed only to one of the responsible parties it shall in no way be, or be construed to 
be, a release of any other responsible party or evidence that any other party is responsible. If 
there is more than on responsible identified in the order, the responsibility for complying with the 
order shall be joint and several. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, the notice shall state 
the violation(s) of this article and, notwithstanding any provision herein to the contrary, when 
necessary for the health and safety of town residents, the enforcement office may require 
abatement within 24 hours from the time of notification or in exigent circumstances, may require 
abatement immediately. 
(b) ?If the owner, agent, tenant or responsible person fails to correct the violations or fails to provide 
notice to the town of his or her intent to correct the violations set forth in the order to abate 
within a reasonable period of time, and if any violation continues unabated after ten days from 
the date such order to abate served or if the owner fails to correct the violations as set forth in 
his or her notice to the town, the town may issue an enforcement citation with a fine up to the 
amount set forth in section 1-7 of the Code of Ordinance or to such higher amount as the town 
council may establish from time to time by resolution. Said citation shall be subject to the 
provisions of subsection (7) of this section. 
(c) ?If the owner, agent, tenant or responsible person fails to correct the violations as ordered, the 
town may take any action necessary to abate the nuisance at any time after the initial period 
established in the order at the expense of the owners and send an invoice for the town's costs 
of such abatement to the owner of the property. Said access may include reasonable entry to 
the property, after notice, to accomplish said purposes. The expense incurred by the town to 
abate the violation, together with a reasonable administrative fee that relates to the abatement 
as set forth in the invoice, shall become a lien upon the land records a notice of lien which shall 
state the address of the property, the name of the record owner, and the amount of the lien. 
Said lien may be foreclosed and enforced in the same manner as an emergency lien or other 
municipal liken as provided in C.G.S. § 7-148aa. 
(d) ?In addition to other remedies, without limitation, the enforcement officer is authorized to issue 
correction orders signed by the person(s) responsible. The enforcement office may, through 
such a signed order, establish inter alia, deadlines, plans and methods for compliances, 
penalties, a requirement for certifications upon stages of compliance, a requirement of the 
involvement of professional opinion, and access to property for the purposes of determining 
compliance. The signed order shall be enforceable in the same manner and to the same extent 
as any correction or administrative order issued hereunder, including fines, injunctive relief, 
attorney fees and penalties. A signed order by the person responsible, and fines imposed 
therein, shall not be subject or an appeal or a hearing, and shall be final. 
(6) ?Penalty for violation. Violations of this section shall be punishable by a civil penalty of no less than 
$10.00 and no more than $100.00 for each day a violation continues. Each day after due notice of 
the violation has been served shall constitute a separate offense. 
(7) ?Enforcement citation. 
(a) ?A citation hearing procedure per C.G.S. § 7-152c is hereby established for purposes of this 
section. The town manager shall appoint one or more citation hearing officers for the town. 
(b) ?If a violation remains unabated after the time allowed for abatement contained in the notice of 
violation issued per subsection (5) hereof has expired, the blight code enforcement officer may 
issue a citation to the owner and occupant, and may issue a citation to any other person 
responsible for the violation in accordance with this section. The citation shall state the date by 
which the uncontested payment of fines, penalties, costs or fees shall be made. 
(c) ?Any person issued a citation pursuant to this section shall be entitled to a hearing to contest the 
citation pursuant to the provisions of C.G.S. § 7-152c. 
(d) ?At any time within 12 months from the expiration of the final period for the uncontested 
payment of fines, penalties, costs or fees set by a citation issued pursuant to this section, the 
town shall send notice to the person or persons cited to inform the person or persons: 
1. ?Of the allegations against him/her/it and the amount of the fines, penalties, costs or fees 
due; 
2. ?That he/she/it may contest liability before a citation hearing officer by delivering in person 
or by mail written notice within ten days of the date thereof; 
3. ?That if he/she/it does not demand such a hearing, an assessment and judgment shall be 
entered against him/her/it; and 
4. ?That such judgment may issue without further notice. 
For purposes of this subsection (7), notice shall be presumed to have been properly sent if such 
notice was mailed to such person's last-known address on file with the tax collector. If the 
person to whom notice is issued is a registrant, the town may deliver the notice in accordance 
with C.G.S. § 7-148ii, provided nothing in this section shall preclude the town from providing 
notice in another manner permitted by applicable law. 
(e) ?If the person to whom notice is sent pursuant to this section wishes to admit liability, he/she/it 
may, without requesting a hearing, pay the full amount of the fines, penalties, costs or fees 
admitted to in person or by mail to an official designated by the town. 
(f) ?Any person who does not deliver or mail written demand for a hearing within ten days of the 
date of the first notice provided for by subsection (7)(c) of this section shall be deemed to have 
admitted liability, and the designated municipal official shall certify such person's failure to 
respond to the hearing officer. The hearing officer shall thereupon enter and assess the fine, 
penalties, costs or fees provided for by this section and shall follow the procedures for obtaining 
a judgment from the Superior Court set forth in C.G.S. § 152c(f). 
(g) ?A person who makes a timely request for a hearing shall be given written notice of the date, 
time and place of the hearing. The hearing shall be held at a time and conducted in the manner 
provided by C.G.S. § 7-152c(e). 
1. ?The hearing officer shall announce his decision at the end of the hearing. If he determines 
that the person is not liable, he shall dismiss the matter and enter his determination in 
writing accordingly. If he determines that the person is liable for the violation, he shall 
forthwith enter and assess the fines, penalties, costs or fees against such person as 
provided by this section. 
2. ?If the hearing officer's assessment is not paid on the date of its entry, he shall send by first 
class mail a notice of the assessment to the person found liable and shall file, not less than 
30 days nor more than 12 months after such mailing, a certified copy of the notice of 
assessment and an entry fee with the clerk of a superior court facility designated by the 
chief court administrator. 
3. ?The person against whom an assessment has been entered by the hearing officer pursuant 
to this section is entitled to judicial review by way of appeal pursuant to the provisions and 
requirements of C.G.S. § 7-152c(g). 
(8) ?Recording of lien. Any unpaid fine imposed shall, upon issuance, constitute a lien upon the real 
estate in accordance with C.G.S. § 7-148aa. Each such lien may be perfected by recording and may 
be continued, recorded and released as provided for in C.G.S. § 7-148aa and the General Statutes. 
(9) ?Municipal performance. 
(a) ?In addition to any penalties as permitted by statue, and the citation, hearing and assessment 
provisions of this section, the blight code enforcement officer is authorized to institute any and 
all legal proceedings before the superior court to compel compliance with this section. 
(b) ?In the event the blight code enforcement officer prevails in such legal proceedings, the violator 
shall be liable for all costs of bringing the property into compliance, and shall further be liable for 
all legal costs incurred by the town in bringing the property into compliance, including its 
reasonable attorney's fees. 
(10) ?Exceptions and pending approvals. Any blighted premises for which any land use or building 
permit application for improvements to the blighted premises is pending, or which has been sold to a 
bona fide purchaser, shall be exempt from the provisions of this section for a period of 90 days from 
the date of submittal of a complete application to the town or from the date of sale. 
(Ord. No. 281, §§ 1—10, 8-20-13; Ord. No. 292, 1-2-19) 


Chapter 6 - ELECTIONS[1] 
? 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Officers and electors, § 2.1 et seq. 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
State Law reference— Elections, C.G.S. Title 9. 


Sec. 6-1. - Voting districts. 
    The following areas shall hereafter constitute the voting districts in the Town of Groton and are 
hereby adopted to conform to the 2011 Plan of Congressional Districting approved by the State of 
Connecticut Supreme Court on February 10, 2012, and published by the State of Connecticut Secretary 
of State on February 15, 2012, and to enact other changes to be made hereby by the Groton Town 
Council pursuant to Town of Groton Charter § 3.7: 
(1) ?First voting district. Beginning at the northeast corner of this voting district at a point at the 
intersection of the centerline of Flanders Road and the centerline of the southbound lane of 
Interstate Route 95; thence running southerly with the centerline of Flanders Road to a point at 
its intersection with the centerline of Fort Hill Road (U.S. Route 1), thence running southerly and 
westerly with the centerline of Fort Hill Road (U.S. Route 1) to a point at the intersection with the 
centerline of Fort Hill Brook; thence running southerly with the centerline of Fort Hill Brook to 
Mumford Cove; thence running southerly with the centerline of Mumford Cove and crossing 
Fishers Island Sound to the south boundary of the Town of Groton; thence running westerly 
along the south boundary of the Town of Groton to its intersection with the east boundary of the 
City of Groton; thence running northerly along the east boundary of the City of Groton through 
Baker Cove; thence running northwesterly and northerly along the east boundary of the City of 
Groton through Baker Cove and Birch Plain Creek to an angle point in the City of Groton 
boundary on the south side of Poquonnock Road; thence running northwesterly along the City 
of Groton boundary and the south side of Poquonnock Road to an angle point in the City of 
Groton boundary; thence running northerly along the City of Groton boundary to its intersection 
with the centerline of Meridian Street Extension; thence running southeasterly and easterly with 
the centerline of Meridian Street Extension to Long Hill Road (U.S. Route 1); thence running 
northwesterly with the centerline of Long Hill Road (U.S. Route 1) to the intersection with the 
centerline of the southbound lane of Clarence B. Sharp Highway (Connecticut Route 349); 
thence running easterly with the centerline of the southbound lane of Clarence B. Sharp 
Highway (Connecticut Route 349) to its intersection with the centerline of the Interstate Route 
95 exit 87 southbound ramp; thence running easterly with the centerline of the Interstate Route 
95 exit 87 southbound ramp to its intersection with the centerline of the southbound lane of 
Interstate Route 95; thence running easterly with the centerline of the southbound lane of 
Interstate Route 95 to its intersection with the centerline of Flanders Road and to the point of 
the beginning. All areas lying within the foregoing boundaries shall constitute the first voting 
district of the Town of Groton. 
(2) ?Second voting district. Beginning at the northwest corner of this voting district at a point on the 
Groton-New London town line; thence running due east to the intersection of Eastern Point 
Road and Nicholas Avenue; thence running easterly with the centerline of Nicholas Avenue to 
Benham Road; thence crossing Benham Road to Hynes Avenue and continuing easterly with 
the centerline of Hynes Avenue to Brandegee Avenue; thence running northerly with the 
centerline of Brandegee Avenue to Rainville Avenue; thence running easterly and northeasterly 
with the centerline of Rainville Avenue to Poquonnock Road; thence running southeasterly with 
the centerline of Poquonnock Road to a point on the east boundary of the City of Groton; thence 
running southerly along the east boundary of the City of Groton to an angle point in the City of 
Groton boundary on the south side of Poquonnock Road; thence running southeasterly along 
the City of Groton boundary to the east boundary of the City of Groton; thence running southerly 
and southeasterly along the east boundary of the City of Groton through Birch Plain Creek and 
Baker Cove; thence running southerly along the east boundary of the City of Groton through 
Baker Cove and Fishers Island Sound to the south boundary of the Town of Groton; thence 
running westerly along the south boundary of the Town of Groton; thence running northerly 
along the Groton-New London town line to a point due west of the intersection of Eastern Point 
Road and Nicholas Avenue and to the point of the beginning. All areas lying within the foregoing 
boundaries shall constitute the second voting district of the Town of Groton. 
(3) ?Third voting district. Beginning at the northwest corner of this voting district and the northwest 
corner of the City of Groton; thence running easterly along the north boundary of the City of 
Groton and the north side of Grove Avenue; thence running southeasterly, southerly and 
southeasterly along the northeast boundary of the City of Groton to a point in the vicinity of 
Meridian Street Extension; thence running southerly along the east boundary of the City of 
Groton on to a point in the centerline of Poquonnock Road; thence running northwesterly with 
the centerline of Poquonnock Road to Rainville Avenue; thence running southwesterly and 
westerly with the centerline of Rainville Avenue to Brandegee Avenue; thence running southerly 
with the centerline of Brandegee Avenue to Hynes Avenue; thence running westerly with the 
centerline of Hynes Avenue to Benham Road; thence crossing Benham Road to Nicholas 
Avenue and continuing westerly with the centerline of Nicholas Avenue to Eastern Point Road; 
thence running due west to the Groton-New London town line; thence running northerly along 
the Groton-New London town line to the northwest corner of the City of Groton and to the point 
of the beginning. All areas lying within the foregoing boundaries shall constitute the third voting 
district of the Town of Groton. 
(4) ?Fourth voting district. Beginning at the northwestern corner of this voting district running along 
the Groton-Ledyard town line to the intersection of North Road (Connecticut Route 117); thence 
running southerly with the centerline of North Road (Connecticut Route 117); thence running 
westerly with the centerline of the southbound lane of Interstate Route 95 to its intersection with 
the Interstate Route 95 exit 87 southbound ramp; thence running southwesterly with the 
centerline of the Interstate Route 95 exit 87 southbound ramp to its intersection with U.S. Route 
1; thence running southeasterly with the centerline of U.S. Route 1 to the intersection of 
Meridian Street Extension; thence running westerly and northwesterly with the centerline of 
Meridian Street Extension to its intersection with the easterly boundary of the City of Groton; 
thence running northerly and northwesterly along the northeast boundary of the City of Groton 
to a point on the north side of Grove Avenue; thence running westerly along the north boundary 
of the City of Groton to the Groton-New London town line; thence running northerly along the 
Groton-New London town line and the Groton-Waterford town line to its intersection with the 
Groton-Ledyard town line and to the point of the beginning. All areas lying within the foregoing 
boundaries shall constitute the fourth voting district of the Town of Groton. 
(5) ?Fifth voting district. Beginning at the northeast corner of this district and the northeast corner of 
the Town of Groton at a point in Hyde Pond; thence running southerly along the Groton-
Stonington town line through Whitford Brook and the Mystic River to its intersection with the 
centerline of the south bound lane of Interstate Route 95; thence running westerly with the 
centerline of the south bound lane of Interstate 95 to its intersection with the centerline of 
Connecticut Route 117; thence running northerly with the centerline of Connecticut Route 117 
to its intersection with the Groton-Ledyard town line; thence running easterly along the Groton-
Ledyard town line to the point of beginning. All areas lying within the foregoing boundaries shall 
constitute the fifth voting district of the Town of Groton. 
(6) ?Sixth voting district. Beginning at the northeast corner of this voting district at a point where the 
centerline of the south bound lane of Interstate Route 95 crosses the Groton-Stonington town 
line in the Mystic River; thence running southerly along the Groton-Stonington town line through 
the Mystic River to a point southeasterly of the railroad bridge over Beebe Cove; thence running 
northwesterly through the railroad bridge over Beebe Cove to a point in Beebe Cove west of 
Half Penny Island; thence running northerly in Beebe Cove to a point in line with the 
prolongation southeasterly of the centerline of Fishtown Road; thence running northwesterly 
with the prolongation of Fishtown Road, crossing Beebe Cove, the shore and Elm Street 
(Connecticut Route 215) to Fishtown Road; thence running northwesterly and northerly with the 
centerline of Fishtown Road to its intersection with New London Road (U.S. Route 1) and 
Noank Ledyard Road; thence running northerly, northeasterly and northerly with the centerline 
of Noank Ledyard Road to its intersection with the centerline of the south bound lane of 
Interstate Route 95; thence running easterly with the centerline of the south bound lane of 
Interstate Route 95 to the Groton-Stonington town line and to the point of the beginning. All 
areas lying within the foregoing boundaries shall constitute the sixth voting district of the Town 
of Groton. 
(7) ?Seventh voting district. Beginning at a point on the Groton-Stonington town line southeast of 
the railroad bridge over Beebe Cove; thence running southerly along the Groton-Stonington 
town line to the south boundary of the Town of Groton; thence running westerly along the south 
boundary of the Town of Groton to a point south of Mumford Cove; thence running northerly 
along the centerline of Mumford Cove to Fort Hill Brook; thence running northerly along the 
centerline of Fort Hill Brook to its intersection with the centerline of Fort Hill Road (U.S. Route 
1); thence running easterly with the centerline of Fort Hill Road (U.S. Route 1) to the 
intersection of Flanders Road; thence running northerly along the centerline of Flanders Road to 
its intersection with the centerline of the south bound lane of Interstate Route 95; thence 
running easterly with the centerline of the south bound lane of Interstate Route 95 to its 
intersection with the centerline of Noank Ledyard Road; thence running southerly, southwesterly 
and southerly with the centerline of Noank Ledyard Road to its intersection with New London 
Road (U.S. Route 1) and Fishtown Road; thence running southerly and southeasterly with the 
centerline of Fishtown Road to its intersection with Elm Street (Connecticut Route 215); thence 
running southeasterly along the prolongation southeasterly of the centerline of Fishtown Road, 
crossing Elm Street (Connecticut Route 215), to the shore and Beebe Cove; thence running 
southerly in Beebe Cove to a point west of Half Penny Island and northwesterly of the railroad 
bridge over Beebe Cove; thence running southeasterly in Beebe Cove through the railroad 
bridge to the Groton-Stonington town line and to the point of the beginning. All areas lying within 
the foregoing boundaries shall constitute the seventh voting district of the Town of Groton. 
(Ord. No. 105, 10-2-72; Ord. No. 212, § 1, 2-18-92; Ord. No. 217, § 1, 3-2-93; Ord. No. 254, 7-
2-02; Ord. No. 278, § 1, 3-12-13) 
Charter reference— Voting and election districts, § 3.9. 


Sec. 6-2. - Term of office for town clerk and registrars of voters. 
    The town clerk and the registrars of voters of the town shall, at the next succeeding regular election 
for such office and thereafter, be elected for a term of four years from the first Monday of January 
succeeding his election in the case of the town clerk, and from the first Wednesday following the first 
Monday of January succeeding their election in the case of the registrars of voters. 
(Code 1969, § 2-4.2; Ord. No. 104, 7-17-72) 


Chapter 7 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Authority to organize, regulate and maintain a fire department, § 1.4(43); town fire 
marshal, § 5.11. 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 5; housing, ch. 9. 
State Law reference— Authority to provide for fire protection, C.G.S. § 7-148(c)(4)(B); fire marshals, fire 
hazards and the fire safety code, C.G.S. § 29-291 et seq. 


ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 


Secs. 7-1—7-25. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE II. - FIRE LANES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Motor vehicles and traffic, ch. 11; parking, stopping and standing, § 11-56 et seq. 
State Law reference— Establishment of fire zones, C.G.S. § 29-293. 


Sec. 7-26. - Definitions. 
    A fire lane is a designated, unobstructed passageway sufficient in size to permit free passage of fire 
apparatus and other emergency equipment from a public highway to all necessary areas or portions of 
any private or public property as set forth in this article. 
(Code 1969, § 5½-21; Ord. No. 146, § 1, 2-19-80; Ord. No. 223, § 1, 10-5-93) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 


Sec. 7-27. - Established by fire marshal. 
    Whenever the fire marshal having jurisdiction within any district in the town shall determine that the 
reasonable safety of persons occupying or using any public or private premises within such district having 
a capacity of at least 15 persons requires the establishment of a fire lane for orderly access of fire and 
other emergency equipment to the premises, he shall establish such fire lane by written order designating 
and describing such lane. The fire marshal shall cause a copy of such order to be delivered by certified 
mail to the owner, or owners, or tenants thereof, of any private land on which such fire lane is established, 
and shall cause a public announcement to be made of the establishment of such lane. 
(Code 1969, § 5½-22; Ord. No. 146, § 2, 2-19-80; Ord. No. 223, § 2, 10-5-93) 


Sec. 7-28. - Aggrievement procedure. 
    Whenever the fire marshal of any such district establishes a fire lane, he shall file one copy of his 
order with the clerk of the town council and one copy with the traffic authority of the town. Any person 
aggrieved by such order may file with the clerk of the town council within 15 days of the date of the 
mailing of such order, written notice of appeal, setting forth therein reasons of aggrievement. After 
hearing, the town council shall affirm, modify or rescind such order within 60 days of the date of order. 
(Code 1969, § 5½-23; Ord. No. 146, § 3, 2-19-80; Ord. No. 223, § 3, 10-5-93) 


Sec. 7-29. - Erection of signs, markings, etc. 
    Upon establishment of a fire lane, the traffic authority of the town shall within 90 days cause to be 
erected or installed, adequate signs, markings or other devices to delineate such fire lane. Such signs, 
markings or other devices must conform to specifications provided by the traffic authority. It is required 
that white markings be used to delineate permissible parking areas and only yellow markings be used 
where restricted parking, pursuant to a fire lane, exists. This will include, but not be limited to, parking 
spaces, curb sides, sidewalk lines, and sides of buildings. When it is determined that curbs and/or sides 
of sidewalks are to be painted yellow, the entire exposed area of such curb or sidewalk side will be 
painted. Signs, markings and other devices erected or installed on privately owned premises shall be at 
the cost of the owner and may be billed for and collected in the same manner as municipal taxes, 
provided such traffic authority causes a notice of lien to be filed on the land records within 60 days after 
such erection or installation. 
    Upon installation of a fire lane by the owner or agents thereof, or in a situation of noncompliance in 
which the traffic authority of the town causes such compliance, such owner, owners, or agents thereof 
shall then have the cost and responsibility to maintain in good condition the adequate signs, markings 
and other devices already erected or installed to delineate such fire lane, and promptly replace and/or 
install or repair such signs, markings or other devices necessitated by theft, vandalism, accident, 
weathering or other unforeseen circumstance or need. 
    Whenever the town traffic authority identifies a need for replacement, repair, maintenance or 
installation of signs, markings or other devices to delineate a fire lane which is already established, it shall 
notify the owner, owners or agents of such private property by written order by certified mail describing 
such repair, replacement and/or improvement to be made. In the event of an owner's failure to respond to 
such order, the traffic authority of the town shall, after 30 days from the mailing of such order, cause such 
repair, replacement and/or improvement to be made at the cost of the owner. Such cost may be billed for 
and collected in the same manner as described above. 
(Code 1969, § 5½-24; Ord. No. 146, § 4, 2-19-80; Ord. No. 223, § 4, 10-5-93) 


Sec. 7-30. - Parking within prohibited; exception. 
    No person shall park or permit any motor vehicle to stand in a fire lane or to obstruct a fire hydrant 
except when actually picking up and discharging passengers. 
(Code 1969, § 5½-25; Ord. No. 146, § 5, 2-19-80; Ord. No. 223, § 5, 10-5-93) 


Sec. 7-31. - Notice of violation; fines. 
    Whenever any police officer finds any vehicle in violation of section 7-30, he shall attach to such 
vehicle a notice to the owner or operator that such vehicle has been parked in violation of the law. Said 
notice shall indicate the nature of the violation and the amount of the fine and shall instruct such 
owner/operator how and by when payment of the fine may be made and the consequences for failing to 
pay the fine in full within the time provided by this section. The amount of the fine shall be $50.00 if 
payment in full is received at police headquarters within 14 days of the date on which such notice was 
attached to the owner/operator's vehicle. The fine shall be $100.00 if payment in full is received at police 
headquarters after the 14th but no later than the 30th day after the notice was placed on the vehicle. 
Payment may be made either in person at the police headquarters or by mail addressed to police 
headquarters and postmarked before the end of the 14th or the end of the 30th day period, as the case 
may be. The police chief may designate other acceptable means of payment from time to time, provided 
he gives prior written notice thereof to the town council. If such owner/operator does not pay the full 
amount of the fine before the end of the 30th day after the notice was placed on the vehicle, the police 
department shall cause such owner or operator to be prosecuted for such violation in the court having 
jurisdiction of such violations. 
(Code 1969, § 5½-26; Ord. No. 146, § 6, 2-19-80; Ord. No. 223, § 6, 10-5-93; Ord. No. 287, § 2, 
4-3-18) 


Sec. 7-32. - Removal of vehicle by police department. 
    Any vehicle found parked in violation of this article may, if public convenience and necessity so 
require, be removed or conveyed by or under the direction of a member of the police department by 
towing the same or by other means to a public garage in the town and such removal shall be at the cost 
and risk of the owner. Before the owner or person in charge of such vehicle shall be permitted to remove 
the same from the custody of the police department, he shall furnish evidence of his identity and 
ownership or right to possession and shall pay to the police department the towing and storage charges 
reasonably incurred in such removal. 
(Code 1969, § 5½-27; Ord. No. 146, § 7, 2-19-80; Ord. No. 223, § 7, 10-5-93) 


Sec. 7-33. - Distribution of money collected. 
    All money collected by the police department under this article shall be paid to the director of finance 
under such rules and regulations as he may prescribe, subject to the approval of the town manager and 
shall be deposited by him in the town's general fund. 
(Code 1969, § 5½-28; Ord. No. 146, § 8, 2-19-80; Ord. No. 223, § 8, 10-5-93) 


Sec. 7-34. - Prosecution of violation; fine. 
    In the event of prosecution, a violation of this article shall constitute an offense for which any person 
found in violation shall be fined not more than $100.00. 
(Code 1969, § 5½-29; Ord. No. 146, § 9, 2-19-80; Ord. No. 223, § 9, 10-5-93) 


Chapter 8 - FLOOD AND EROSION CONTROL[1] 
? 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 5; housing, ch. 9. 


Sec. 8-1. - State law adopted. 
    The provisions of C.G.S. §§ 25-84 through 25-94, are hereby adopted. 
(Ord. No. 43, § 1, 12-17-63; Code 1969, § 6-1) 


Sec. 8-2. - Flood and erosion control board. 
    The powers granted by C.G.S. §§ 25-84 through 25-98, inclusive, shall be exercised by the town 
council which shall serve as the flood and erosion control board for the town. 
(Ord. No. 43, § 2, 12-17-63; Code 1969, § 6-2; Ord. No. 207, 4-3-90) 
Cross reference— Boards, commissions, committees and agencies, § 2-86 et seq. 


Chapter 8.5 - HEALTH AND SANITATION 


ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 


Secs. 8.5.1—8.5-25. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE II. - HEALTH DISTRICT 


DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 


Sec. 8.5-26. - Short title of article. 
    The ordinance from which this article is derived shall be known and may be cited as the "Ledge Light 
District Department of Health Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 216, § 1.00, 9-16-92) 


Sec. 8.5-27. - Creation and purpose. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of C.G.S. § 19a-240 et seq., the town hereby unites with the City of 
Groton to form the Ledge Light District Department of Health, hereinafter referred to as the health district. 
It is hereby declared that the purpose of this article is to protect, preserve and improve the public health of 
the citizens of the municipalities of the Ledge Light District Department of Health. 
(Ord. No. 216, § 2.00, 9-16-92) 


Secs. 8.5-28—8.5-40. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 2. - DISTRICT BOARD OF HEALTH[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— District departments of health, C.G.S. § 19a-240 et seq. 


Sec. 8.5-41. - Created to manage affairs of health district. 
    The affairs of the health district shall be managed by a board which shall have all the duties 
exercised or performed immediately prior to the effective date of the creation of this health district by the 
directors of health of the constituent municipalities of the health district. 
(Ord. No. 216, § 3.1, 9-16-92) 


Sec. 8.5-42. - Authority conferred by constituent municipalities and state statutes. 
    The health district board shall exercise all the authority as to public health required of or conferred 
upon the constituent municipalities by law and shall have the powers set forth in C.G.S. § 19a-243. 
(Ord. No. 216, § 3.2, 9-16-92) 


Sec. 8.5-43. - Appointment. 
    The council, board of selectmen or board of burgesses for each constituent municipality shall each 
appoint one person per municipality to be a member of the board. In addition, if the population of any 
municipality exceeds 10,000 inhabitants, as annually estimated by the department of health services, 
such municipality shall be entitled to one additional representative for each additional 10,000 inhabitants 
or part thereof, provided no such municipality shall have more than five representatives on the health 
district board. The board shall initially consist of four members from the town and one member from the 
City of Groton. 
(Ord. No. 216, § 3.3, 9-16-92) 


Sec. 8.5-44. - Term of office. 
    The terms of office for members of the health district board representing the Town of Groton and the 
City of Groton shall be three years, except that, upon the expiration of the appointments in effect at the 
time of the adoption of this section, appointments shall be so made that the member of the board 
appointed by the City of Groton shall serve for three years, two members shall serve for two years, and 
two members shall serve for one year. 
(Ord. No. 216, § 3.4, 9-16-92; Ord. No. 261, 7-6-04) 


Sec. 8.5-45. - Powers and duties of the board. 
    The health district board may make and promulgate reasonable rules and regulations for the 
promotion of general health within the district; such rules and regulations shall not be in conflict with the 
state public health code or any municipal ordinance of each constituent municipality; provided, however, 
that any provision of such rules and regulations which is more strict than the state public health code shall 
not constitute a conflict and the provisions of the rules and regulations shall prevail. No such rule or 
regulation shall be adopted until a public hearing has been held by the board of the proposed rule or 
regulation. Notice of the time, place and purpose of the hearing shall be by publication in a newspaper 
having a substantial circulation in each constituent municipality at least seven days prior to the hearing. 
The powers of the board shall include, but not be limited to the following: to sue and be sued; to make 
and execute contract and other instruments necessary or convenient to the exercise of powers of the 
health district; to make and from time to time amend and repeal bylaws, rules and regulations; to acquire 
real estate; and to have whatever other powers are necessary to properly carry out its powers as an 
independent entity of government; to develop and implement a budget; and to develop and implement 
public health policy for the health district. 
(Ord. No. 216, § 5.1, 9-16-92) 


Sec. 8.5-46. - Meetings; chairperson. 
    The board shall meet at least quarterly and at other times as determined by the chairperson. At the 
board's initial meeting and thereafter at each fall meeting, the board shall elect a chairperson, and the 
health district shall furnish the necessary offices and equipment to enable the board to carry out its duties. 
(Ord. No. 216, § 5.2, 9-16-92) 


Sec. 8.5-47. - Fiscal year; budget. 
    The fiscal year of the health district shall be from July 1 to June 30, and, by April 30 in each year, the 
board shall estimate the amount of money required to pay the costs and expenses of the health district 
during the ensuing fiscal year. Pursuant to C.G.S. § 19a-245, such board shall hold a public hearing on its 
proposed budget, two weeks' notice of which shall be given in a newspaper having a circulation in each 
constituent municipality of such district. From time to time the board shall draw upon the treasurer of each 
town within the district a proportionate share of the expenses of such district, from such funds as may 
have been appropriated by each, to pay the cost of operating the health district, such apportionment to be 
made equitably on a per capita basis, as established by the most recent annual population estimate by 
the department of health services. The health district shall make timely applications to the state 
department of health services for reimbursements for which it is entitled, as set forth in C.G.S. § 19a-245. 
The health district shall provide the department with all budgetary and other information necessary for the 
health district to qualify for any reimbursements or other fundings allowable under state or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 216, § 5.3, 9-16-92) 


Secs. 8.5-48—8.5-60. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 3. - DIRECTOR OF HEALTH 


Sec. 8.5-61. - Appointment. 
    The health district board, after the approval of the commissioner of health services, shall appoint a 
full-time director of health for the health district pursuant to the procedure and qualifications set forth in 
C.G.S. § 19a-242. The board may also appoint an acting full-time director of health to serve in the director 
of health's absence or if a vacancy exists, provided such acting director meets the same qualifications as 
the director of health as set forth in C.G.S. § 19a-242, or such other qualifications as may be approved by 
the commissioner of health services. Upon the appointment of a director of health for the health district, 
the term of office of the present directors of health of each constituent municipality shall terminate. 
(Ord. No. 216, § 4.1, 9-16-92) 


Sec. 8.5-62. - Powers and duties. 
    The director of health shall perform all such duties as are required of directors of health by the 
general statutes or the state public health code. In addition, the director of health shall enforce all 
ordinances of the constituent municipalities within such municipalities as long as such ordinances do not 
conflict with the general statutes or the state public health code; provided, however, that any provision of 
a municipal ordinance which is more strict than the state public health code shall not constitute a conflict 
and the provision of the municipal ordinance shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 216, § 4.2, 9-16-92) 


Sec. 8.5-63. - Removal. 
    The director of health may be removed upon vote of a majority of the members of the health district 
board upon a finding of misconduct, material neglect of duty, or incompetence in the conduct of this office 
in accordance with C.G.S. § 19a-242. 
(Ord. No. 216, § 4.3, 9-16-92) 


Secs. 8.5-64—8.5-80. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE III. - TOBACCO VENDING MACHINES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 226, § 1, adopted Aug. 2, 1994, repealed Ord. No. 188, pertaining to health 
department fees, the provisions of which had been codified herein as §§ 8.5-81—8.5-83 and § 15-55. 
Ord. No. 252, adopted Dec. 4, 2001, did not specifically amend the Code, but its provisions have been 
enacted as new §§ 8.5-81—8.5—84, at the discretion of the editor. 


Sec. 8.5-81. - Findings. 
    The Town of Groton finds: 
(1) ?G.S. §§ 53-344 and 53-344a make it unlawful for any person engaged in the manufacture of 
sale of cigarettes to sell, barter, give or deliver cigarettes to any individual under the age of 18 
years; and 
(2) ?Cigarettes are the most heavily advertised consumer product in the United States and the 
tobacco industry spends more than $8.24 billion on advertising and promotion of cigarettes; and 
(3) ?Connecticut medical costs related to treating smoking related diseases exceeds $1 billion 
every year; and 
(4) ?Tobacco kills more people than AIDS, alcohol, car accidents, murder, suicide, drugs and fire 
combined; and 
(5) ?More than three million young people under the age of 18 consume more than 947 million 
packs of cigarettes annually in the United States, yielding gross sales to the tobacco industry 
each year of approximately $1 billion; and 
(6) ?In Connecticut nearly one of every three high school students and 13 percent of middle school 
children used tobacco within the last 30 days; and 
(7) ?Every year, 12,000 Connecticut children become daily smokers; and 
(8) ?The average start smoking aged in Connecticut is 11 years old; and 
(9) ?Current laws and regulations have proved ineffective and inadequate in preventing the illegal 
purchase of cigarettes by children under the age of 18 years, particularly from cigarette vending 
machines; and 
(10) ?G.S. § 12-289a(h) authorizes a town or municipality to ban or significantly restrict the 
placement of vending machines for cigarettes, tobacco or smokeless tobacco products. 
(Ord. No. 252, § 1, 12-4-01) 


Sec. 8.5-82. - Prohibited. 
    No person shall dispense, or cause to be dispensed, cigarettes, tobacco or smokeless tobacco 
products from vending machines at any location within the town. A vending machine means a machine 
used for the purpose of automatically merchandising packaged cigarettes, tobacco or smokeless tobacco 
products after the proper amount of payment by the purchaser. To the relevant extent, the word "person" 
shall have the meaning set out at section 1-2(a) of the Town of Groton Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 252, § 2, 12-4-01) 


Sec. 8.5-83. - Enforcement. 
    This article shall be enforced by the town manager of the town or his/her designee. 
(Ord. No. 252, § 3, 12-4-01) 


Sec. 8.5-84. - Violation. 
(a) ?Any violation of this article shall be punished by a fine of $100.00. Each day any such violation 
continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b) ?The imposition of such a fine shall not preclude the enforced abatement of any such violation. 
(Ord. No. 252, § 4, 12-4-01) 


Chapter 9 - HOUSING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 5; fire prevention and protection, ch. 7; flood 
and erosion control, ch. 8; public improvements, ch. 12; streets and sidewalks, ch. 13.5; utilities, ch. 15. 
State Law reference— Authority to make rules relating to maintenance of safe and sanitary housing, 
C.G.S. § 7-148(c)(7)(A)(i); tenement and lodging houses, C.G.S. § 19a-356 et seq. 


ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 


Sec. 9-1. - Rental housing code adopted by reference. 
    A rental housing code which establishes minimum standards governing the condition and 
maintenance of dwellings, hereafter known as the "Rental Housing Code of the Town of Groton," is 
hereby adopted and made a part hereof by reference, as fully as if set out at length herein. Copies of 
such code are on file and available for public inspection in the zoning office and the office of the town 
clerk. 
(Code 1969, § 6½-1) 
Charter reference— Authority to adopt codes, rules and regulations by reference, § 4.5.3. 


Sec. 9-2. - Housing site development agency designated. 
    The office of community development, under the supervision of the town manager, is hereby 
designated as the town's housing site development agency to carry out housing and community 
development projects in accordance with community development program grants. 
(Ord. No. 199, § 1, 5-16-89) 
Cross reference— Boards, commissions, committees and agencies, § 2-86 et seq. 


Secs. 9-3—9-30. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE II. - FAIR RENT COMMISSION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Boards, commissions, committees and agencies, § 2-86 et seq. 
State Law reference— Fair rent commissions, C.G.S. § 47a-20. 


Sec. 9-31. - Definitions. 
    Unless otherwise provided by C.G.S. §§ 7-148b through 7-148f or other applicable provisions of 
state law, the following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings 
ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Commission shall mean the fair rent commission of the town. 
    Housing accommodation shall mean any building or structure in the town, including mobile homes 
and mobile home park lots, wholly or in part, containing living quarters occupied for residential purposes, 
with any land or building appurtenant thereto and any services, furniture and facilities supplied in 
connection therewith, except the following: 
(1) ?A hospital, convent, rectory, monastery, asylum, public institution, college or school dormitory 
or any institution operated exclusively for charitable or educational purposes. 
(2) ?Any housing accommodations owned and operated by the United States, the state, the housing 
authority of the town, or by any political subdivision of such governmental entities, or by any 
nonprofit organization receiving subsidy from such governmental entities for the operation of 
such housing accommodations. 
(3) ?Apartments for which the amount of rent paid by the tenant is based on the tenant's income in 
accordance with regulations established by federal or state government. 
(4) ?Housing accommodations exempted by C.G.S. § 7-148b; i.e. housing accommodations rented 
on a seasonal basis where those accommodations are rented for a period or periods 
aggregating not more than 120 days in any one calendar year. 
(5) ?Hotels and motels. 
(6) ?Such other exceptions as may in the future be enacted by amendment to the above state laws. 
    Landlord shall mean any person who leases, subleases, rents or permits the occupancy of any 
housing accommodation in the town, including a person who manages a housing accommodation owned 
by someone else. 
    Rent or rental charges shall mean any consideration, monetary or otherwise, including any bonus, 
benefit or gratuity, demanded or received for the use or occupancy of any housing accommodation, and 
also includes a benefit derived from a decrease in services. 
    Tenant shall mean any person who leases or rents, whether by written or oral lease, any housing 
accommodation in the town as a residence for himself and/or his immediate family. 
(Ord. No. 203, § 1-1, 1-16-90) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 


Sec. 9-32. - Creation; purpose. 
    Pursuant to and in conformity with C.G.S. §§ 7-148b through 7-148f, 47a-20 and 47a-23c(b), there is 
hereby created the fair rent commission for the purpose of controlling and eliminating excessive rental 
charges for housing accommodations within the town, and to carry out the purposes, duties, 
responsibilities and all provisions of the above described sections and any other sections of the statutes, 
as they may be amended from time to time, pertaining to fair rent commissions. 
(Ord. No. 203, § 1-2, 1-16-90) 


Sec. 9-33. - Membership; officers. 
(a) ?The fair rent commission shall consist of five members, all of whom shall be resident electors of the 
town, and shall be composed of one landlord member, one tenant member, and three citizen 
members. Not more than three of the members shall be registered members of the same political 
party. All of the members shall be appointed by the town council. For the purposes of this provision, 
the phrase "citizen member" means a resident elector of the town who is neither a tenant nor a 
landlord. 
(b) ?In addition, the town council shall appoint two resident electors who shall be one landlord and one 
tenant to serve as alternates. Either of the alternates shall act in the place of a regular member who 
is either absent or disqualified from serving. The term of office of the alternates shall be for a period 
of three years, or until their successors have been chosen and qualified. Not more than one of the 
alternate members shall be a registered member of the same political party. 
(c) ?The commission shall elect from its members a chairperson, first vice chairperson and secretary. 
(Ord. No. 203, § 1-3, 1-16-90) 


Sec. 9-34. - Commissioners' terms. 
(a) ?The initial regular members of the fair rent commission shall be appointed for staggered terms. 
Thereafter, regular members shall be appointed for terms of three years. 
(b) ?Appointment and removal of commission members shall be in the manner provided in section 4.5.8 
of the town Charter for appointment and removal of commission members. 
(Ord. No. 203, § 1-4, 1-16-90; Ord. No. 209, 8-7-90) 


Sec. 9-35. - Quorum. 
    A quorum of the fair rent commission for any hearing or meeting shall consist of three members or 
their alternates, who shall be empowered to conduct such hearings and render orders and decisions 
pursuant thereto. 
(Ord. No. 203, § 1-5, 1-16-90) 


Sec. 9-36. - Employment of staff. 
    The community development office will act as staff to keep the commission's records, to handle its 
correspondence, to supervise and direct the administration of this article and generally to perform such 
other functions as may be assigned by the commission. Upon request, assistance from other municipal 
agencies shall be reasonably available to the commission. 
(Ord. No. 203, § 1-6, 1-16-90) 


Sec. 9-37. - Powers. 
    Pursuant to C.G.S. §§ 7-148b through 7-148f, the fair rent commission shall have the following 
powers: 
(1) ?To make such studies and investigations into rentals charged for housing accommodations 
within the town as it deems appropriate to carry out its responsibilities hereunder. 
(2) ?To receive complaints, inquiries and other communications concerning alleged excessive rental 
charges in housing accommodations within the town pursuant to section 9-38. 
(3) ?To conduct hearings on complaints or requests for investigation submitted to it by any tenant or 
any landlord pursuant to section 9-38. For any such hearing, two weeks' written notice by 
registered or certified mail, postage prepaid, shall be given to all parties concerned involved in 
the complaint of the housing accommodations in question. If any notice is returned without 
having been delivered, the commission may arrange for service in the same manner as is 
provided in state law for service of process in a civil action. 
(4) ?To subpoena witnesses, compel their attendance at hearings, compel the production of any 
documents or records relating to any matter before the commission, administer oaths and order 
a housing code inspection if the complaint is based in part on the conditions of the premises. 
(5) ?To dismiss a complaint based on the tenant's failure to pay on time the amount of rent due 
while the case is pending or based on the tenant's failure to fulfill responsibilities described in 
this article or in the rules and regulations established by the commission for the implementation 
of this article. 
(6) ?To determine, after a hearing, whether an existing rental charge with a substantial decrease in 
major services or a proposed increase in a rental charge for any housing accommodation is so 
excessive as to be harsh and unconscionable pursuant to the provisions of section 9-40. 
(7) ?To order a reduction of any excessive rent to an amount the commission considers fair and 
equitable. In its discretion the commission may make the order retroactive to the effective date 
requested by the landlord, however, the commission shall not have the power to waive any rent 
which has become due prior to the filing date of the complaint. Such order shall be in effect for a 
period for one year from its effective date, except as provided under subsection (9) of this 
section or if the commission shall, pursuant to a subsequent petition by the landlord or tenant, 
which may be made by the landlord or tenant at any time, order that the rent be changed. 
(8) ?To continue, review, amend, terminate or suspend all its orders and decisions. 
(9) ?To take action as follows upon noncompliance. 
a. ?If the commission determines after a hearing that a housing accommodation fails to comply 
with any state or town statute or regulation relating to health and safety, the commission 
may order the tenant to pay the fair and equitable rent, as determined by the commission, 
to the commission in accordance with C.G.S. § 7-148d(a). 
b. ?The commission shall hold such rent in an escrow account, as hereinafter provided, until 
the landlord makes such repairs or changes as are required to bring the housing 
accommodation into compliance with such chapters, statutes or regulations. 
c. ?If the landlord shall have corrected such violations after the order reducing the rent and if 
the rent had been reduced solely because of such violations, the landlord may petition the 
commission for the reinstatement of the original rent and for the payment to him of the rent 
held in the escrow account. 
d. ?If the landlord shall have corrected such violations after the order reducing the rent, but the 
rent had not been reduced solely because of such violations, the landlord may petition the 
commission for an order fixing a fair and equitable rent for such housing accommodation in 
light of its condition at the time of the landlord's petition and for the payment to him of the 
rent held in the escrow account. 
e. ?In any case arising under this subsection, upon reasonable determination of the 
commission, the original rent or such fair and equitable rent as determined by the 
commission may be ordered into effect retroactive, at the discretion of the commission, to 
the date of the petition for reinstatement. No such reinstatement shall be effective until 
after a hearing is held by the commission in accordance with the provisions of subsection 
(3) of this section if either the tenant or landlord requests such a hearing. 
(10) ?To establish an escrow account with a local bank or financial institution into which it shall 
deposit all rents or other funds paid to it pursuant to subsection (9) of this section. Such funds 
shall be released to the landlord if he shall be successful in an appeal to the court or if the 
commission shall order such release after a petition is filed in accordance with subsection (9) of 
this section. 
(11) ?To deposit into the escrow account rent paid to the commission by tenants whose landlord 
has refused to accept the rent after the tenant has filed a complaint or a claim of retaliation. 
Such rent shall be withdrawn from the escrow account and paid to the landlord upon written 
request from the landlord. 
(12) ?To carry out the provisions of C.G.S. §§ 47a-20 and 7-148d(b) concerning retaliatory action 
by landlords. 
(13) ?To adopt rules and regulations for the implementation of all sections of this article, to take all 
actions authorized under law to enforce the powers and duties of the commission and to carry 
out the purposes of this article. 
(14) ?The fair rent commission may request that the town attorney, or any suitable person meet with 
the parties, if the parties consent, in a session closed to the public, to attempt to reconcile 
differences between the parties prior to initiating the formal hearing process. Any agreement 
between the parties as a result of such meeting must be in writing signed by the parties and 
witnessed by the conciliator. 
(Ord. No. 203, § 1-7, 1-16-90) 


Sec. 9-38. - Eligibility to file complaint. 
    Any tenant who is notified, either verbally or in writing, of an increase in rent or a substantial 
decrease in major services provided by the landlord may file a written complaint form with the commission 
within 60 days after receiving such notice if the tenant has not already signed a written rental agreement 
or lease agreeing to the amount being requested. If the tenant's delinquency in payment of rent is in 
dispute, and if it is determined after a hearing that the tenant owes back rent, the tenant must pay the full 
amount owed to the commission's escrow account within seven calendar days after the hearing or the 
case shall be dismissed by the commission. This amount shall be withdrawn from the escrow account and 
paid to the landlord upon written request from the landlord. Any landlord shall be eligible to file with the 
commission a written request for determination of a fair rent for any housing accommodation owned by 
the landlord, in the town, except those accommodations exempted in section 9-31. Any landlord or his 
representative shall be eligible to petition the commission for a readjustment of the rent as provided by 
section 9-37. 
(Ord. No. 203, § 1-8, 1-16-90) 


Sec. 9-39. - Excessive rent complaint procedure. 
(a) ?Pending a determination by the fair rent commission, the tenant shall pay to the landlord the lowest 
rent required within 30 days of the date of the complaint for the housing accommodation in question. 
(b) ?All complaints shall be processed in accordance with written rules and regulations established by 
the commission. 
(c) ?All proceedings shall continue regardless of any attempt to evict such tenant, unless such eviction is 
for nonpayment of rent. No sale, assignment or transfer of the housing accommodation in question 
shall be cause for discontinuing any pending proceedings, nor shall it affect the rights, duties and 
obligations of the commission or the parties thereto. 
(Ord. No. 203, § 1-9, 1-16-90) 


Sec. 9-40. - Consideration in determining rental charge to be excessive. 
    In determining whether an existing rental charge with a substantial decrease in major services or a 
proposed increase in a rental charge is so excessive, with due regard to all the circumstances, as to be 
harsh and unconscionable, the fair rent commission shall consider such circumstances stated in C.G.S. § 
7-148c as are applicable to the type of accommodation, including, but not limited to: 
(1) ?The rents charged for the same number of rooms in other housing accommodations in the 
same and in other comparable areas of the town. 
(2) ?The sanitary conditions existing in the housing accommodations in question. 
(3) ?The number of bathtubs or showers, flush water closets, kitchen sinks and lavatory basins 
available to the occupants thereof. 
(4) ?Services, furniture, furnishings and equipment supplied therein. 
(5) ?The size and number of rooms contained therein. 
(6) ?Repairs necessary to make such accommodations reasonably livable for the occupants 
accommodated therein. 
(7) ?The amount of taxes and overhead expenses, including debt service, thereof. 
(8) ?Whether the accommodations are in compliance with the ordinances of the town and the 
general statutes relating to health and safety. 
(9) ?The income of the petitioner and the availability of accommodations. 
(10) ?The availability of utilities. 
(11) ?Damages done to the premises by the tenant, caused by other than ordinary wear and tear. 
(12) ?The amount and frequency of increases in rental charges. 
(13) ?Whether, and the extent to which, the income from an increase in rental charges has been or 
will be reinvested in improvements to the accommodations. 
(Ord. No. 203, § 1-10, 1-16-90) 


Sec. 9-41. - Defense against retaliatory evictions. 
    In any action for summary process, it shall be an affirmative defense that the plaintiff brought such 
action against the tenant solely because a complaint was filed with the commission or because the tenant 
or complainant has taken any other action with reference to a matter covered by this article. 
(Ord. No. 203, § 1-11, 1-16-90) 


Sec. 9-42. - Landlord retaliation. 
(a) ?Pursuant to C.G.S. § 47a-20, it shall be a retaliatory action for a landlord to refuse to renew the 
lease or other rental agreement of any tenant, or to demand an increase in rent from any tenant or 
decrease the services to which any tenant has been entitled, within six months after: 
(1) ?A tenant has in good faith attempted to remedy, by any lawful means any condition constituting 
a violation of any provision of any state statute or regulation or of the housing and health 
ordinances of the town. 
(2) ?Filing a complaint with the fair rent commission alleging excessive rental charges. 
(3) ?Any municipal agency (including the fair rent commission) or official has filed a notice, 
complaint or order regarding such a violation. 
(4) ?The tenant has in good faith requested the landlord to make repairs. 
(5) ?The tenant has in good faith instituted an action pursuant to C.G.S. § 47a-14h to enforce the 
landlord's responsibilities. 
(6) ?The tenant has organized or become a member of a tenant's union. 
(b) ?Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, it shall not be retaliatory action 
where the landlord refuses to renew the tenant's lease or other rental agreement when: 
(1) ?The tenant is using the dwelling unit for an illegal purpose. 
(2) ?The tenant is using the dwelling unit for a purpose which is in violation of the rental agreement. 
(3) ?There is nonpayment of rent by the tenant. 
(4) ?The landlord seeks in good faith to recover possession of the dwelling unit for immediate use 
as his own abode. 
(5) ?The condition complained of was caused by the willful actions of the tenant or another person 
in his household or a person on the premises with his consent. 
(6) ?The landlord seeks to recover possession on the basis of a notice to terminate a periodic 
tenancy, which notice was given to the tenant previous to the tenant's complaint or other action 
defined in subsection (a) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 203, § 1-12, 1-16-90) 


Sec. 9-43. - Eligibility to file claim of retaliation. 
    Any tenant who claims the action of his landlord constitutes retaliatory action under the provisions of 
this article may file a written claim of retaliation with the fair rent commission unless there is evidence that 
the tenant owed back rent. 
(Ord. No. 203, § 1-13, 1-16-90) 


Sec. 9-44. - Procedure for claim of retaliation. 
(a) ?Upon the receipt of any claim of retaliatory action, the fair rent commission staff shall inform the 
landlord of the claim and shall investigate the claim. If the claim is not resolved through conciliation, 
the commission shall convene a hearing within 60 days of the filing of the claim for the purpose of 
determining whether the landlord has engaged in a retaliatory action, and the commission shall 
render its decision within 75 days of the filing of the claim. 
(b) ?Pending determination by the commission, the landlord shall not commence or continue any action 
or proceeding against the tenant to recover possession of the dwelling unit, the landlord shall not 
decrease any services to which the tenant is entitled and the tenant shall continue to pay the amount 
of rent in effect at the time of the claim of retaliatory action. 
(c) ?If after such hearing the fair rent commission finds that the landlord has engaged in a retaliatory 
action in violation of the provisions of this section, the commission may, pursuant to its powers under 
C.G.S. §§ 7-148b through 7-148f and 47a-20, this article and this section, make any of the following 
orders: 
(1) ?That the landlord cease and desist from such conduct. 
(2) ?That the landlord maintain no action or proceeding against the tenant to recover possession of 
the dwelling unit. 
(d) ?Notice of claim of retaliatory action, filed under the provisions of this section, is not deemed to be a 
complaint for the purpose of C.G.S. § 47a-20 or section 9-42. 
(Ord. No. 203, § 1-14, 1-16-90) 


Sec. 9-45. - Continuation of proceedings. 
    If any conciliation process shall be incomplete at the time of the expiration of a lease of any person 
pursuing the process afforded in this article, such lease shall be extended until the conciliation process 
and all other proceedings under this article have terminated. 
(Ord. No. 203, § 1-15, 1-16-90) 


Sec. 9-46. - Right of appeal. 
    Any person aggrieved by any order of the fair rent commission may appeal to the superior court of 
the state, such appeal to be taken within 30 days after the rendering of the order in question. The filing of 
such appeal does not of itself stay enforcement of the commission's decision unless otherwise directed by 
the court. 
(Ord. No. 203, § 1-16, 1-16-90) 


Sec. 9-47. - Penalty for violations. 
    Pursuant to C.G.S. § 7-148f, any person who shall violate any order of rent reduction or rent 
suspension by demanding, accepting or receiving an amount in excess thereof while such order remains 
in effect, and no appeal pursuant to section 9-46 is pending, or violate the provisions of this article, or any 
person who shall refuse to obey any subpoena, order or decision of the commission pursuant thereto, 
shall be fined not less than $25.00 nor more than $100.00 for each offense. If such offense continues for 
more than five days, it shall constitute a new offense for each day it continues to exist thereafter. No 
action shall be taken on any such violation by the prosecuting authorities of the town except upon written 
complaint of the chairperson of the commission after at least a two-thirds vote of approval by the 
members at a meeting of the commission. 
(Ord. No. 203, § 1-17, 1-16-90) 


Secs. 9-48—9-70. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE III. - HOUSING PARTNERSHIP 


Sec. 9-71. - Created. 
    There is hereby created the Groton Housing Partnership, appointed by the chief elected official of the 
town. The partnership shall consist of the following members: 
(1) ?The chief elected official of the town. 
(2) ?Representatives designated by the planning commission, zoning commission, inland wetlands 
agency, housing authority and the community development advisory committee, not to exceed 
five in number. 
(3) ?Representatives of the local business community, such as local bankers, realtors and 
developers, not to exceed three in number. 
(4) ?Representatives of public interest groups, such as housing advocates, members of the clergy, 
members of local civic groups and representatives of local nonprofit corporations, not to exceed 
three in number. 
(5) ?Local urban planning, land use and housing professionals, not to exceed three in number. 
(Ord. No. 197, § 1, 11-15-88) 


Sec. 9-72. - Responsibilities of the town, in order to receive initial designation under the state housing 
partnership program. 
    The responsibilities of the town, in order to receive initial designation under the state housing 
partnership program, shall include the following: 
(1) ?Submit evidence to the commissioner of housing that the housing partnership has been formed 
in accordance with C.G.S. § 8-336(f); and 
(2) ?Submit evidence to the commissioner of housing that sufficient local resources have been 
committed to the housing partnership. 
(Ord. No. 197, § 2, 11-15-88) 


Sec. 9-73. - Duties of the housing partnership, in order to receive development designation under the 
state housing partnership program. 
    The duties of the Groton Housing Partnership, in order to receive development designation under the 
state housing partnership program, shall include the following: 
(1) ?To examine and identify housing needs and opportunities in the community; 
(2) ?To explore the availability of any state, municipal or other land that is suitable for the 
development of affordable housing; 
(3) ?To review applicable zoning regulations to determine whether such regulations restrict the 
development of affordable housing in the community; 
(4) ?To identify any necessary changes to such regulations; 
(5) ?To establish priorities and develop a long-range plan to meet identified housing needs in the 
community consistent with regional housing needs; 
(6) ?To establish procedures for the development of a written proposal to achieve such priorities in 
accordance with such plan; and 
(7) ?To start an activity, development or project designed to create additional affordable housing in 
the town. 
(Ord. No. 197, § 3, 11-15-88) 


Sec. 9-74. - Expenses. 
    No person shall have the right to expend any public funds of the town in carrying out any partnership 
activities authorized by this article without prior approval by the legislative body nor shall any person have 
any right to bind the town by contract, agreement, or otherwise without prior and specific approval of the 
legislative body. 
(Ord. No. 197, § 6, 11-15-88) 


Sec. 9-75. - Conflicting resolutions, orders, rules and regulations suspended. 
    At all times when any orders, rules and regulations made and promulgated pursuant to this article 
shall be in effect, they shall supersede all existing resolutions, orders, rules and regulations insofar as the 
latter may be inconsistent therewith. 
(Ord. No. 197, § 4, 11-15-88) 


Sec. 9-76. - No conflict with state or federal statutes. 
    This article shall not be construed so as to conflict with any state or federal statute, rule or regulation. 
(Ord. No. 197, § 5, 11-15-88) 


Secs. 9-77—9-100. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE IV. - RENTAL HOUSING CODE 


DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 


Sec. 9-101. - Title of article. 
    The ordinance from which this article is derived shall be known and may be cited as the "Rental 
Housing Code of the Town of Groton." 
(Ord. No. 110, § 100, 5-7-73) 


Sec. 9-102. - Legislative finding of fact. 
(a) ?It is hereby found that there exists in the town numerous dwellings which are substandard in one or 
more important features of structure, equipment, maintenance or occupancy; and that such 
conditions adversely affect public health and safety and lead to the continuation, extension and 
aggravation of urban deterioration. 
(b) ?It is hereby further found that adequate protection of the public health, safety and welfare therefor 
requires the establishment and enforcement of minimum housing standards. 
(c) ?It is hereby further found that healthful and sanitary conditions in relation to space, use and location 
generally prevail in single-family dwellings owned and occupied by one family only. Therefore, the 
provisions of this article shall not be applicable to single-family dwellings occupied by the owner and 
his family only. 
(d) ?The enactment and enforcement of this article is hereby declared to be essential to the public 
interest. 
(Ord. No. 110, § 101, 5-7-73) 


Sec. 9-103. - Purposes of article. 
(a) ?It is hereby declared that the purpose of this article is to protect, preserve, and promote the physical 
and mental health and social well-being of the people; to investigate and control incidences of 
communicable diseases; to regulate privately and publicly owned dwellings, let or intended to be let 
for occupancy as dwellings or dwelling units, for the purpose of maintaining adequate sanitation and 
public health; and to protect the safety of the people and to promote the general welfare by 
legislation which shall be applicable to all dwellings now in existence or hereafter constructed. 
(b) ?It is hereby further declared that the purpose of this article is to: 
(1) ?Establish minimum standards for basic equipment and facilities for light, ventilation, heating 
and cooling; for safety from fire and accidents; for the use and location and amount of space for 
human occupancy; and for safe and sanitary maintenance; 
(2) ?Determine the responsibilities of owners, operators and occupants of dwellings; and 
(3) ?Provide for the administration and enforcement thereof. 
(Ord. No. 110, § 102, 5-7-73) 


Sec. 9-104. - Scope of article. 
    Every portion of a building or of any premises used or intended to be let for residential purposes, 
except hotels and motels serving transient guests only, rest homes, convalescent homes and nursing 
homes and mobile homes, shall comply with the provisions of this article, irrespective of when such 
building shall have been constructed, altered or repaired, except as hereinafter provided. This article shall 
be applicable to all areas of the town except in a subdivision having the power to regulate housing. 
(Ord. No. 110, § 103, 5-7-73) 


Sec. 9-105. - Application of building code. 
    Any alterations to buildings or changes of use therein which may be caused directly or indirectly by 
the enforcement of this article shall be done in accordance with applicable sections of the building code of 
the town. 
(Ord. No. 110, § 104, 5-7-73) 


Sec. 9-106. - Conflicts with other ordinances or laws. 
    Where a provision of this article is found to be in conflict with a provision of any zoning, building, fire, 
safety or health ordinance or code of the town, or with state laws or regulations applicable to the town, the 
provision which establishes the higher standards for the promotion and protection of the safety and health 
of the people shall prevail. In any case where a provision of this article is found to be in conflict with a 
provision of any other ordinance or code of the town existing on the effective date of the ordinance from 
which this article derives, which establishes a lower standard for the promotion and protection of the 
safety and health of the people, the provisions of this article shall prevail, and such other ordinances or 
codes are hereby declared to be repealed to the extent that they may be found in conflict with this article. 
(Ord. No. 110, § 105, 5-7-73) 


Sec. 9-107. - Existing remedies. 
    Nothing in this article shall be deemed to abolish or impair existing remedies of the municipality or its 
officers or agencies relating to the removal or demolition of any buildings which are deemed to be 
dangerous, unsafe, or unsanitary. 
(Ord. No. 110, § 106, 5-7-73) 


Sec. 9-108. - Amendments to article. 
    The town council shall have the power to amend this article as defined in sections 4.5.2 and 4.6.1 of 
the town Charter. At least one public hearing, notice of which shall be given at least five days in advance 
by publication of the proposed amendment in a daily newspaper having circulation within the town, shall 
be held by the town council before any amendment to this article shall be passed. 
(Ord. No. 110, § 108, 5-7-73) 


Sec. 9-109. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed 
to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Accessory structure means a detached structure which is not used or not intended to be used for 
living or sleeping by human occupants and which is located on the same premises with a dwelling. 
    Approved means approved by the local or state authority having such administrative jurisdiction. 
    Central heating system means a single system supplying heat to one or more dwelling units or more 
than one rooming unit. 
    Dwelling means any enclosed space which is wholly or partly used or intended to be used for living 
or sleeping by human occupants. 
    Dwelling unit means any room or group of rooms located within a dwelling and forming a single 
habitable unit with facilities which are used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating. 
    Extermination means the control and elimination of insects, rodents or other pests by eliminating 
their harborages, by removing or making inaccessible materials that may serve as their food, by 
poisoning, spraying, fumigating, trapping or by any other recognized and legal pest elimination methods 
approved by the health officer. 
    Family means any number of individuals related by blood, marriage, or adoption, living together as a 
single housekeeping unit, provided that a group of not more than seven persons keeping house together, 
but not necessarily related by blood or marriage, may be considered a family. 
    Garbage means the animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking, 
serving and consumption of food. 
    Guest means any person who shares a dwelling unit in a nonpermanent status for not more than 30 
days. 
    Habitable room means a room or enclosed floor space used or intended to be used for living, 
sleeping, cooking or eating purposes, excluding bathrooms, water closet compartments, laundries, 
furnace rooms, pantries, kitchenettes, foyers or communicating corridors, stairways, closets, storage 
spaces and workshops, hobby and recreation areas in unsealed or uninsulated parts of a structure below 
ground level or in attics. 
    Health officer means the legally designated health authority of the town. 
    Heated water means water heated to a temperature of not less than 120 degrees Fahrenheit. 
    Housing official means the building official of the town who shall be charged with the administration 
and enforcement of this article. 
    Infestation means the presence within a dwelling or other structure in large numbers of insects and 
rodents. 
    Junk motor vehicle means a motor vehicle not displaying proper registration plates and found to be 
abandoned. 
    Kitchen means any room containing any or all of the following equipment, or area of a room within 
three feet of such equipment: sink and/or other devices for dishwashing, stove or other device for 
cooking, refrigerator or other device for cool storage of food. 
    Meaning of certain words. Wherever the words "dwelling," "dwelling unit," "roominghouse," "rooming 
unit," "premises," and "structure" are used in this article, they shall be construed as though they were 
followed by the words "or any part thereof." Words used in the singular include the plural, and the plural 
includes the singular; the masculine gender includes the feminine, and the feminine the masculine. 
    Multifamily dwelling means any dwelling containing more than two dwelling units. 
    Occupant, for the purpose of determining legal responsibility, means the head of the household 
living, sleeping, cooking or eating in, or actually having possession of a dwelling unit or rooming unit, or 
any person over the age of 18 of that household when the head of the household cannot be determined, 
except that in dwelling units a guest will not be considered an occupant; in section 9-180 and for the 
purpose of determining use, occupant shall mean any person over one year of age, living, sleeping, 
cooking or eating in, or actually having possession of a dwelling unit or rooming unit, except that in 
dwelling units a guest will not be considered an occupant. 
    Operator means any person who has charge, care or control of a building, or part thereof, in which 
dwelling units or rooming units are let. 
    Owner means any person who alone or jointly, or severally with others: 
(1) ?Shall have legal title to any dwelling or dwelling unit, with or without accompanying actual 
possession thereof; or 
(2) ?Shall have charge, care or control of any dwelling unit as owner or agent of the owner, or an 
executor, administrator, trustee or guardian of the estate of the owner. Any such person, thus 
representing the actual owner, shall be bound to comply with the provisions of this article and of 
rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto to the same extent as if he were the owner. 
    Person means and includes any individual, firm, corporation, association or partnership. 
    Plumbing means and includes all of the following supplied facilities and equipment: gas pipes, gas 
burning equipment, water pipes, garbage disposal units, waste pipes, water closets, sinks, installed 
dishwashers, lavatories, bathtubs, shower baths, installed clothes washing machines, catch basins, 
drains, vents, and any other similar supplied fixtures, together with all connections to water, sewer, septic 
tank or gas lines. 
    Premises means a platted lot or part thereof or unplatted lot or parcel of land, or plot of land, either 
occupied or unoccupied by any dwelling or nondwelling structure, and includes any such building, 
accessory structure or other structure thereon. 
    Privacy means the ability of a person to carry out an activity commenced without interruption or 
interference, either by sight or sound, by unwanted persons. 
    Refuse means all putrescible and nonputrescible solids, except human wastes, including garbage, 
rubbish and dead animals. 
    Rooming unit means any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit used or intended to 
be used for living and sleeping but not for cooking or eating purposes. 
    Roominghouse means any dwelling or that part of any dwelling containing one or more rooming units 
in which space is occupied by three or more persons who are not members of a single family. 
    Rubbish means nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both: 
(1) ?Combustible wastes such as paper, cardboard, plastic containers, yard clippings and wood; 
and 
(2) ?Noncombustible wastes such as tin cans, glass and crockery. 
    Safety means the condition of being free from danger and hazards which may cause accidents or 
disease. 
    Septic tank means a watertight receptacle which is used for the treatment of sewage and is designed 
and constructed to permit the settling of solids, the digestion of organic matter by detention and the 
discharge of the liquid portion into a leaching field. 
    Single-family dwelling means any dwelling occupied by not more than one family. 
    Space heater means a self-contained, automatically controlled, vented, electrical or gas burning 
appliance of either the circulating type or the radiant type. 
    Supplied means paid, furnished, provided by or under the control of the owner or operator. 
    Vacant means any time before a dwelling unit is let to another even though the dwelling unit may at 
all times be let. 
(Ord. No. 110, §§ 200.1—200.35, 5-7-73; Ord. No. 154, § 1, 11-17-80) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 


Sec. 9-110. - Penalty for violation of article. 
(a) ?Any person who shall violate any provision of this article may, upon conviction, be punished by a 
fine of not more than $50.00, or by imprisonment for not more than 30 days, and each day's failure to 
comply with any such provision shall constitute a separate violation. 
(b) ?In no case, however, shall the total fine exceed three times the cost of repairing the violation, as 
estimated by the housing official. 
(Ord. No. 110, § 906, 5-7-73) 


Sec. 9-111. - Responsibility of owners and occupants. 
(a) ?No owner shall maintain a dwelling or dwelling unit contained therein let to another person for the 
purpose of living therein which does not comply with each of the requirements in this article except 
where and only where failure to comply with that requirement results from the occupant's failure to 
meet his responsibilities as provided in this article. No owner shall let a dwelling or dwelling unit 
contained therein to another person for the purpose of living therein which does not comply with 
each of the requirements in this article, except where and only where failure to comply with that 
requirement results from the person's failure to meet his responsibilities as an occupant as provided 
in this article. No person shall occupy a dwelling or dwelling unit contained therein which does not 
comply with each of the requirements in this article specifically designated as the responsibility of the 
occupant. 
(b) ?Notwithstanding any division, section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase elsewhere in this 
article, damage caused to any dwelling unit by the malicious acts or the wanton negligence of the 
occupant of such dwelling unit or the guests of such occupant shall be the responsibility of such 
occupant. 
(c) ?Notwithstanding any division, section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase elsewhere in this 
article, before a dwelling is let to a new occupant all responsibility for maintaining and repairing the 
dwelling so that it conforms to the provisions of this article becomes the responsibility of the owner. 
(Ord. No. 110, §§ 300.1—300.3, 5-7-73) 


Secs. 9-112—9-125. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 


Sec. 9-126. - Enforcement officer. 
    It shall be the duty and responsibility of the housing official to enforce the provisions of the housing 
code as provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 110, § 900.1, 5-7-73) 


Sec. 9-127. - Inspection of dwellings, dwelling units, rooming units and premises. 
(a) ?The housing official is hereby authorized and directed to make periodic inspections, by and with the 
consent of the owner, occupant or person in charge, to determine the condition of dwellings, dwelling 
units, rooming units and premises within this town for the purpose of determining compliance with 
the provisions of this article. For the purpose of making such inspections, the housing official with 
consent of the owner, occupant or person in charge, is hereby authorized to enter, examine and 
survey, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., all dwellings, dwelling units, rooming units 
and premises, or at such other time mutually satisfactory to and agreed upon by the housing official 
and the owner or occupant of a dwelling, dwelling or rooming unit, or the person in charge thereof. 
Such inspection, examination or survey shall not have for its purpose the undue harassment of the 
owner or occupant, and such inspection, examination or survey shall be made so as to cause the 
least amount of inconvenience to the owner or occupant consistent with an efficient performance of 
the duties of the housing official. To further ensure that the policy of this article, which is to achieve 
compliance through cooperation of owners and occupants, is successfully maintained, it shall be the 
practice of the housing official, whenever practicable, to provide reasonable advance notice to 
owners and occupants of projected blanket inspections of routine nature. 
(b) ?The owner or occupant of each dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit or premises, or the person in 
charge thereof, upon presentation by the housing official of proper identification, shall give the 
housing official free access thereto and to all parts thereof and to the premises on which it is located 
at all reasonable times for the purpose of such inspection, examination and survey. It shall be 
unlawful for any person to impede an inspector or officer authorized under this article in the 
performance of his duties, and every such inspector or officer shall have the right to enter, examine 
and survey all premises, grounds, structures, dwellings, multifamily dwellings or roominghouses and 
every part thereof at all reasonable times upon display of proper identification, and upon reasonable 
notice, which be not less than 24 hours. If any owner, occupant, or other person in charge of a 
dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, or a multifamily dwelling or roominghouse subject to the 
provisions of this article refuses, impedes, inhibits, interferes with, restricts or obstructs entry and 
free access to every part of the structure or premises where inspection authorized by this article is 
sought, the administrative authority may seek, in a court of competent jurisdiction, an order that such 
owner, occupant or other person in charge cease and desist with such interference. 
(Ord. No. 110, § 900.2, 5-7-73) 


Sec. 9-128. - Notice of violation. 
    Whenever the housing official determines that there are reasonable grounds to believe that there has 
been a violation of any provision of this article, he shall give notice of such alleged violation to the person 
responsible therefor, as provided. Such notice shall comply with the following: 
(1) ?Be in writing. 
(2) ?Include a statement of the reason why it is being issued with reference to the specific section of 
the code under violation, together with a copy thereof attached. 
(3) ?Be served upon the owner or his agent, or the occupant, as the case may require, provided 
that such notice shall be deemed to be properly served upon such owner or agent, or upon such 
occupant, if a copy thereof is sent by registered or certified mail to his last known address, or if 
a copy thereof is posted in a conspicuous place in or about the dwelling affected by the notice, 
or if he is served with notice by any other method authorized or required under the laws of the 
state. 
(4) ?Contain an outline of remedial action which, if taken, will effect compliance with the provisions 
of this article and with rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto. 
(5) ?Provide a reasonable and definite amount of time for the completion of corrections of any and 
all violations. The reasonable time allowed to effect repairs shall begin to run the day on which 
the notice of violation is served, unless such person shall have requested a hearing, in which 
case the time allowed shall begin to run on the date of the final decision of the board of appeals. 
(6) ?After the passage of the period of time allowed for the correction of any alleged violation, the 
housing official shall reinspect the dwelling, dwelling unit, or premises described in the notice, 
following the procedure detailed in section 9-127. 
(7) ?If such consent of reinspection is refused, he shall apply for a search warrant describing the 
dwelling, dwelling unit, or premises in question, as well as the specific violations contained in 
the notice of violation. Upon procurement of a duly issued search warrant, the housing official is 
hereby authorized to enter, inspect, examine and survey the described dwelling, dwelling unit, 
or premises for the purpose of determining whether there has been compliance with the notice 
of violation. 
(8) ?If the dwelling, dwelling unit or premises are found upon inspection or reinspection to be in 
compliance with the provisions of this article, a certificate of compliance shall be issued. If the 
corrective action indicated in the notice of violation has not been completed and the dwelling, 
dwelling unit or premises remain in violation of the article or regulations issued pursuant thereto, 
the owner or persons responsible shall be subject to prosecution in accordance with section 9-
139. 
(Ord. No. 110, § 901, 5-7-73; Ord. No. 154, § 2, 11-17-80) 


Sec. 9-129. - Housing code board of appeals—Generally. 
(a) ?Creation; members; terms. There is hereby created a five-member housing code board of appeals 
and three alternates, all of whom shall be electors of the town, and appointed by the town council, 
two members and one alternate initially appointed for three years, two members and one alternate 
for two years, and one member and one alternate for one year, and thereafter each new member 
and alternate to serve for three years or until his successor has been appointed and qualified. 
(b) ?Officers; quorum. The housing code board of appeals shall designate a chairman and secretary 
from among its members. Any combination of four members and alternates shall constitute a quorum 
authorized to hear and act on petitions. All actions taken by the board shall be carried by a majority 
of the members present. 
(c) ?Meetings; hearings. The board shall meet monthly on a date designated by its members to hear any 
appeals that legally may be brought before the board. The board shall render a decision within 15 
days after the hearing. 
(Ord. No. 110, § 902, 5-7-73) 


Sec. 9-130. - Same—Hearings and appeals. 
    Any person aggrieved by a notice of the housing official issued in connection with any inspection, 
examination or survey pursuant to this article, or any rule or regulation pursuant thereto, may request, 
and shall be granted, a hearing on the matter before the housing code board of appeals, provided that 
such person shall file in the office of the housing official a written petition requesting such a hearing within 
15 days after the notice of the housing official was served upon such person. Within ten days of the 
receipt of such petition, the board of appeals shall set a time and place for such hearing and shall give the 
petitioner written notice thereof. Such notice shall be registered or certified mail, return receipt requested. 
At the hearing, the petitioner shall have the opportunity to show cause why the notice should be modified 
or withdrawn. The hearing shall take place within a reasonable time after the receipt of the petition by the 
board of appeals. 
(Ord. No. 110, § 903, 5-7-73) 


Sec. 9-131. - Same—Sustenance, modification or withdrawal of notice of violation. 
    A majority of the board of appeals, after full hearing is had, shall sustain, modify or withdraw the 
notice. Variances from the provisions of this article may be granted where circumstances warrant, and in 
the judgment of the board of appeals, no harm to the public health, welfare and safety will result from 
such variance. Factors to be considered include the following: 
(1) ?Hardship. Hardship may be construed to be the hardship encountered due to the configuration 
of the structure and/or parcel which it occupies. 
(2) ?Pre-existing conditions. Conditions which are primarily structural or geometric, including room 
size, height of ceilings, numbers of windows, etc., in housing existing before the adoption of this 
article. 
(3) ?Area requirements. When required bedroom sizes or room sizes are greater than that found in 
the structure, if the overall area of the abode is adequate. 
(4) ?Evictions restricted. A variance to the housing code shall not be granted where a landlord has 
resorted to eviction rather than comply with the housing code correction order. 
(Ord. No. 110, § 903.1, 5-7-73) 


Sec. 9-132. - Same—Administration of oaths and affirmations at hearings. 
    The board of appeals is hereby authorized to administer oaths and affirmations to witnesses at 
hearings held pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 110, § 903.2, 5-7-73) 


Sec. 9-133. - Same—Hearings reduced to writing. 
    All proceedings at hearings held pursuant to this article, including the findings of fact and decision, 
shall be reduced to writing and shall be a matter of public record, and, as such, shall be recorded and 
certified in the office of the town clerk. 
(Ord. No. 110, § 903.3, 5-7-73) 


Sec. 9-134. - Same—Right of entry. 
    The housing code board of appeals shall have the right of entry at a time mutually agreeable to the 
board and the appellant. 
(Ord. No. 110, § 903.4, 5-7-73) 


Sec. 9-135. - Same—Granting of variance; consultation with health officer or building inspector. 
    In granting or considering a variance of the housing code, the board shall not endanger in any way 
the occupant's or neighbor's health and/or safety. The advice of the health officer or the building 
inspector, or both, shall be heard by the board prior to reaching its decision. 
(Ord. No. 110, § 903.5, 5-7-73) 


Sec. 9-136. - Same—Review of board decision. 
    Any person aggrieved by the decision of the board of appeals may within 30 days of the decision 
seek review thereof in a court of competent jurisdiction, as provided by the laws of this state. 
(Ord. No. 110, § 903.6, 5-7-73) 


Sec. 9-137. - Suspension of permits of roominghouses. 
(a) ?The housing official is hereby authorized, with the consent of the owner, occupant, or person in 
charge, to enter, inspect, examine and survey all roominghouses between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 
5:00 p.m. If any owner, occupant or other person in charge of a rooming unit or roominghouse 
subject to the provisions of this code refuses, impedes, inhibits, interferes with, restricts, or obstructs 
entry and free access to every part of the structure or premises where inspection authorized by this 
article is sought, the administrative authority may seek, in a court of competent jurisdiction, an order 
that such owner, occupant or other person in charge, cease and desist with such interference. 
(b) ?Whenever, upon inspection of any roominghouse, the housing official finds that conditions or 
practices exist which are in violation of any provision of this article, or of any applicable rule or 
regulation adopted pursuant thereto, the housing official shall give notice in writing to the operator of 
such roominghouse, that unless such conditions are corrected within a reasonable time, the 
operator's permit will be suspended. At the end of such period of time, the housing official shall 
reinspect such roominghouse, under the conditions of his first entry, and inspection, as set forth in 
this subsection, and if he determines that such conditions have not been corrected, he shall issue an 
order suspending the operator's permit. 
(Ord. No. 110, § 904, 5-7-73) 


Sec. 9-138. - Termination of order of suspension of roominghouse permit. 
    Any person whose permit to operate a roominghouse has been suspended by order of the housing 
official may petition for, and shall be granted, a hearing on the matter in the manner prescribed by section 
9-130 pertaining hearings. If no such petition is forthcoming within ten days following the day on which a 
permit was suspended, the permit shall be deemed revoked, except that at any time within ten days 
following such suspension, any person whose permit has been suspended, shall have the opportunity to 
demonstrate to the housing official that his roominghouse has been put in compliance with this article, 
and with all regulations pursuant thereto. Where such compliance is demonstrated to the satisfaction of 
the housing official, the suspension of the roominghouse permit shall be terminated. 
(Ord. No. 110, § 904.1, 5-7-73) 


Sec. 9-139. - Prosecution for noncompliance with violation order. 
    In case any violation order is not promptly complied with, the housing official may request the town 
attorney to institute an appropriate action of proceeding at law, or in equity against the person responsible 
for the violation, ordering him to: 
(1) ?Restrain, correct or remove the violation, or refrain from any further execution of work; 
(2) ?Restrain or correct the erection, installation or alteration of such building; 
(3) ?Require the removal of work in violation; 
(4) ?Prevent the occupation or use of the building, structure, or part thereof erected, constructed, 
installed or altered in violation of, or not in compliance with, the provisions of this article, or in 
violation of a plan or specifications under which an approval, permit or certificate was issued; or 
(5) ?Enforce the penalty provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 110, § 905, 5-7-73) 


Sec. 9-140. - Condemnation. 
    The designation of dwellings or dwelling units as unfit for human habitation and the procedure for the 
condemnation and placarding of such dwellings or dwelling units, shall be carried out in compliance with 
the following requirements: 
(1) ?Structures unfit for human habitation. Any dwelling or dwelling unit which shall be found to have 
any of the following defects shall be condemned as unfit for human habitation and shall be so 
designated and placarded by the housing official: 
a. ?One which is so damaged, decayed, dilapidated, unsanitary, unsafe or vermin-infested, 
that it creates a serious hazard to the health or safety of the occupants or of the public. 
b. ?One which lacks illumination, ventilation, or sanitation facilities adequate to protect the 
health or safety of the occupants or of the public as prescribed in the provisions of this 
article. 
c. ?One which because of its general condition or location is unsanitary or otherwise 
dangerous to the health or safety of the occupants or of the public. 
(2) ?Notice. Any dwelling or dwelling unit condemned as unfit for human habitation and so 
designated and placarded by the housing official shall be vacated within a reasonable time as 
ordered by the housing official. 
(3) ?Occupancy of building. No dwelling or dwelling unit which has been condemned and placarded 
as unfit for human habitation shall again be used for human habitation until written approval is 
secured from, and such placard is removed by, the housing official. The housing official shall 
remove such placard whenever the defects upon which the condemnation and placarding action 
were based have been eliminated. 
(4) ?Removal of placard or notice. No person shall deface or remove the placard from any dwelling 
or dwelling unit which has been condemned as unfit for human habitation and placarded as 
such, except as provided in this article. 
(5) ?Hearing. Any person affected by any notice or order relating to the condemning and placarding 
of a dwelling or dwelling unit as unfit for human habitation may request in writing and shall be 
granted a hearing on the matter before the housing code board of appeals under the procedure 
provided by section 9-130. 
(Ord. No. 110, §§ 907—907.5, 5-7-73) 


Secs. 9-141—9-150. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 3. - ENVIRONMENTAL REQUIREMENTS 


Sec. 9-151. - Exterior structures. 
(a) ?Foundations, walls and roofs. Every foundation, exterior wall, roof and all other exterior surfaces 
shall be maintained in a workmanlike state of maintenance and repair and shall be kept in such 
condition to exclude rodents. Skirting must be provided for the prevention of rodent infestation where 
exterior crawl spaces are prevalent. 
(b) ?Foundations. The foundation elements shall adequately support the building at all points. 
(c) ?Exterior walls. Every exterior wall shall be free of holes, breaks, loose or rotting boards or timbers 
and any other conditions which might admit rain or dampness to the interior portions of the walls or 
to the occupied spaces of the building. 
(d) ?Roofs. The roof shall be structurally sound, tight and have no defects which might admit rain; and 
roof drainage shall be adequate to prevent rainwater from causing dampness in the walls or interior 
portion of the building. 
(e) ?Stairs, porches and railings. Every outside stair, every porch and every appurtenance attached 
thereto shall be so constructed as to be safe to use and capable of supporting the loads to which it is 
subjected as required by the building code, and shall be kept in sound condition and good repair. 
Where the building official deems it necessary for safety, every flight of stairs which is more than 
three risers high shall have handrails which shall be located as required by the building code; and 
every porch which is more than three risers high shall have handrails so located and of such design 
as required by the building code. Every handrail and balustrade shall be firmly fastened and shall be 
maintained in good condition. 
(f) ?Windows, doors and hatchways. Every window, exterior door and basement hatchway shall be 
substantially tight and shall be kept in sound condition and repair. Every exterior door, when closed, 
shall fit reasonably well within its frame and every window, door, and frame and basement hatchway 
shall be constructed and maintained so as to prevent the entrance of rodents, rain, winds and 
surface drainage water into the dwelling or multifamily dwelling. 
(g) ?Windows to be glazed. Every window sash shall be fully supplied with glass window panes or an 
approved substitute which are without open cracks or holes. 
(h) ?Windows to be tight. Every window sash shall be in good condition and fit reasonably tight with its 
frame. 
(i) ?Windows to be openable. Every window, other than a fixed window, shall be capable of being easily 
opened and shall be held in position by window hardware. 
(j) ?Door hardware. Every exterior door, door hinge and door latch shall be maintained in good condition. 
(k) ?Exit doors. Every door available as an exit shall be capable of being easily opened from the inside. 
(l) ?Guards for basement windows. Every basement or cellar window used for ventilation and every other 
opening to a basement which might provide an entry for rodents shall be supplied with a screen or 
such other device as will effectively prevent their entrance. 
(m) ?Insect screens. During that portion of each year when the housing official deems it necessary for 
protection against mosquitoes, flies, and other insects, every door opening directly from a dwelling 
unit to outdoor space shall have supplied screens and a self-closing device; and every window or 
other device with openings to outdoor space used for ventilation shall likewise be supplied with 
screens, provided that such screens shall not be required during such period in rooms deemed by 
the housing official to be located high enough in the upper stories of buildings as to be free from 
such insects and in rooms located in areas of the town which are deemed by the housing official to 
have so few insects as to render screens unnecessary. 
(n) ?Painting. All walls, ceilings, exterior woodwork, doors and windows shall be kept free of flaking, 
peeling or loose paint. 
(Ord. No. 110, §§ 400.1—400.14, 5-7-73) 


Sec. 9-152. - Interior structures. 
(a) ?Free from dampness. In every dwelling, multifamily dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit and 
roominghouse, cellars, basements and crawl spaces shall be maintained reasonably free from 
dampness to prevent conditions conducive to decay or deterioration of the structure as required by 
the building code. 
(b) ?Structural members. The supporting structural members of every dwelling and multifamily dwelling 
used for human habitation shall be maintained structurally sound, showing no evidence of 
deterioration which would render them incapable of carrying the imposed loads in accordance with 
the provisions of the building code. 
(c) ?Interior stairs and railings. All interior stairs of every structure used for human habitation shall be 
maintained in sound condition and good repair by replacing treads and risers that evidence 
excessive wear or are broken, warped or loose. Every inside stair shall be so constructed and 
maintained as to be safe to use and capable of supporting a load as required by the provisions of the 
building code. Every stairwell and every flight of stairs which is more than three risers high shall have 
handrails or railings located in accordance with the provisions of the building code. Every handrail or 
railing shall be firmly fastened and must be maintained in good condition. Properly balustraded 
railings capable of bearing normally imposed loads as required by the building code, shall be placed 
on the open portions of stairs, balconies, landings and stairwells. 
(d) ?Bathroom floors. Every toilet and bathroom floor surface shall be constructed and maintained so as 
to permit such floor to be easily kept in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(e) ?Sanitation. The interior of every dwelling and multifamily dwelling used for human habitation shall be 
maintained by occupant in a clean and sanitary condition free from any accumulation of rubbish or 
garbage. Rubbish, garbage and other refuse shall be properly kept inside temporary storage 
facilities. 
(f) ?Insect and rodent harborage. Buildings used for human habitation shall be kept free from insect and 
rodent infestation, and where insects or rodents are found, they shall be promptly exterminated by 
acceptable processes which will not be injurious to human health. After extermination, proper 
precautions shall be taken to prevent reinfestation. 
(g) ?Painting. All walls, ceilings, interior woodwork, doors and windows shall be kept free of flaking, 
peeling or loose paint. Lead base and mercury base paints shall not be used for the painting of 
interior portions of any dwelling units. 
(h) ?Interior walls and ceilings. All interior walls, ceilings, floors and other interior surfaces shall be 
maintained in a workmanlike state of maintenance and repair and shall be free of holes, breaks, 
loose and rotting boards or timbers and any other conditions which might be unsafe or unsanitary. 
(Ord. No. 110, §§ 401.1—401.8, 5-7-73) 


Sec. 9-153. - Exterior property areas. 
    All exterior property areas shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition free from any 
accumulation of rubbish, garbage, refuse or junk motor vehicles. The exterior property areas and all 
structures thereon shall be kept free of all nuisances and any hazards to the safety of occupants, 
pedestrians and other persons utilizing the premises and free of unsanitary conditions. Any of the 
foregoing shall be promptly removed and abated by the owner or operator. In the case of single-family 
dwellings, compost heaps may be maintained. 
(Ord. No. 110, § 402.1, 5-7-73) 


Secs. 9-154—9-164. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 4. - EQUIPMENT AND BASIC FACILITIES 


Sec. 9-165. - Equipment. 
(a) ?Kitchen sink. Every dwelling unit shall have a room or portion of a room in which food may be 
prepared and/or cooked; which shall be equipped with a kitchen sink in good working condition and 
properly connected to a water supply system; which is approved by the appropriate authority; which 
provides an adequate amount of heated and unheated running water under pressure; and which is 
connected to a sewer system or septic tank which is approved by the appropriate authority. 
(b) ?Bathroom facilities. Every dwelling unit shall be equipped with a complete bathroom fixture group 
consisting of a flush water closet, lavatory basin and bathtub or shower in good working condition 
and installed and maintained in a manner prescribed by ordinances, rules and regulations of the 
town. The fixture group shall be properly connected to an approved sewer system or septic tank and 
to an approved hot and cold running water system under pressure, except that the flush water closet 
shall be connected to an approved sewer system or septic tank and to an approved cold running 
water system under pressure. The flush water closet and lavatory basin need not be installed in the 
same room as the bathtub or shower, but the room shall afford privacy to a person within such room. 
(c) ?Heating facilities. Every dwelling or dwelling unit, except houses maintained for summer occupancy 
only, shall be supplied with heating facilities, which are properly installed, are maintained in safe and 
good working condition and are capable of safely and adequately heating all habitable rooms, 
bathrooms and water closet compartments located therein to a temperature of at least 70 degrees 
Fahrenheit at a distance three feet above the floor level when outdoor temperature is ten degrees 
Fahrenheit below zero. 
(d) ?Rubbish storage facilities. Every dwelling and multifamily dwelling unit shall have approved 
containers and covers for the storage of rubbish. 
(e) ?Garbage storage or disposal facilities. Every dwelling or multifamily dwelling and every dwelling unit 
shall have an approved outside garbage can or approved garbage disposal facility which may be an 
adequate mechanical garbage disposal unit, mechanical sink grinder, in each dwelling unit or an 
approved incinerator unit, to be approved by the building official, in the structure for the use of the 
occupants of each dwelling unit. 
(f) ?Means of egress. Every dwelling unit shall have one or more approved means of egress leading to 
safe and open space at ground level, as required by the laws of this state and the town. 
(Ord. No. 110, §§ 500.1—500.6, 5-7-73) 


Sec. 9-166. - Installation and maintenance. 
(a) ?Facilities and equipment. All required equipment and all building space and parts in every dwelling 
and multifamily dwelling shall be constructed and maintained so as to properly and safely perform 
their intended function in accordance with the provisions of the building code. 
(b) ?Continuation of service. No owner, operator or occupant shall cause any service, facility, equipment 
or utility which is required under this article to be removed from or shut off from or discontinued for 
any occupied dwelling let by him, except for temporary interruption as may be necessary while actual 
repairs or alterations are in process or during temporary emergencies when discontinuance of 
service is approved by the housing official. 
(c) ?Plumbing fixtures. In buildings and structures used for human habitation, water lines, plumbing 
fixtures, vents, and drains shall be properly installed, connected and maintained in working condition 
and shall be kept free from obstructions, leaks and defects and capable of performing the function for 
which they are designed. All repairs and installations shall be made in accordance with the 
provisions of the building code of the town. 
(d) ?Plumbing systems. In buildings and structures used for human habitation, every plumbing stack, 
waste and sewer line shall be so installed and maintained as to function properly and shall be kept 
free from obstructions, leaks and defects to prevent structural deterioration or health hazards. All 
repairs and installations shall be made in accordance with the provisions of the building or plumbing 
code of the town. 
(e) ?Heating and cooking equipment. Every space heating, cooking and water heating device, its 
components and accessories shall be properly installed, connected and maintained free from leaks 
and obstructions and shall be capable of performing the function for which it is designed in 
accordance with the provisions of the building code. Either central or space heating facilities may be 
used, but they must meet the requirements of this article and applicable state codes. 
(f) ?Correction of defective system. Where it is found, in the opinion of the housing official, that the 
electrical system in a building constitutes a hazard to the occupants of the building by reason of 
inadequate service, improper fusing, insufficient outlets, improper wiring or installation, deterioration 
or damage or for similar reasons, he shall require the defects to be corrected to eliminate the hazard, 
in accordance with the building code of the town. 
(g) ?Seepage. All rainwater shall be so drained and conveyed from every roof so as not to cause 
dampness in the walls, ceilings or floors of any habitable room or of any bathroom or water closet 
compartment. All exterior wood surfaces shall be adequately protected from water seepage and 
against decay. 
(Ord. No. 110, §§ 501.1—501.7, 5-7-73) 


Secs. 9-167—9-179. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 5. - SPACE, OCCUPANCY, LIGHT, VENTILATION 


Sec. 9-180. - Space and occupancy. 
(a) ?Required space in dwelling unit. Every dwelling unit shall contain a minimal gross floor area equal to 
but not less than 150 square feet for the first occupant and 100 square feet for each additional 
occupant. The floor area shall be calculated on the total area of all habitable rooms. 
(b) ?Required space in sleeping rooms. In every dwelling unit, every room occupied for sleeping 
purposes by one occupant shall have a minimum gross floor area of 70 square feet; and every room 
occupied for sleeping purposes by more than one occupant shall contain at least 50 square feet of 
floor area for each occupant. 
(c) ?Location of bath and second sleeping room. No dwelling or dwelling unit containing two or more 
sleeping rooms shall have such room arrangement that access to a bathroom or water closet 
compartment intended for use by occupants of more than one sleeping room can be had only by 
going through another sleeping room or a bathroom or water closet compartment. 
(d) ?Minimum ceiling heights. At least one-half the floor area of every habitable room shall have a ceiling 
height of no less than seven feet, and the floor area of that part of any room where the ceiling height 
is less than five feet shall not be considered as part of the floor area of the room for the purpose of 
determining the maximum permissible occupancy thereof. 
(e) ?Occupancy of dwelling units below grade. No dwelling unit partially below grade shall be used for 
living purposes unless: 
(1) ?Floors and walls are watertight. 
(2) ?Total openable area and ceiling height are in accordance with this article. 
(3) ?Required minimum window area of every habitable room is entirely above the grade of the 
ground adjoining such window area. 
(f) ?Access limitation of dwelling unit to commercial uses. No habitable room, bathroom or water closet 
compartment which is part of a dwelling unit shall open directly into or shall be used in conjunction 
with a food store, barber or beauty shop, doctor's or dentist's examination or treatment room or 
similar room used for public purposes. 
(Ord. No. 110, §§ 600.1—600.6, 5-7-73) 


Sec. 9-181. - Light and ventilation. 
(a) ?Natural light in habitable room. Every habitable room shall have at least one window or skylight 
facing directly to the outdoors. The minimum aggregate glass area of window for habitable rooms 
shall be not less than one-tenth of the floor area of the room served by them. Whenever walls or 
other portions of structures face a window of any habitable room and such light obstructing 
structures are located less than three feet from the window and extend to a level above that of the 
ceiling of the room, such a window shall not be included as contributing to the required minimum 
total window area. Whenever the only window is a skylight type window in the top of such a room, 
the minimum aggregate glass area of such skylight shall be not less than 3/20 of the total floor area 
of such room. 
(b) ?Light in nonhabitable workspace. Every laundry, furnace room and all similar nonhabitable work 
spaces located in a dwelling or multifamily dwelling shall have one supplied electric light fixture 
available at all times. 
(c) ?Electric outlets required. Where there is electric service available from power lines which are not 
more than 300 feet away from a dwelling, every dwelling unit and all public and common areas shall 
be supplied with electric service, outlets and fixtures which shall be properly installed, shall be 
maintained in good and safe working condition, and shall be connected to the source of electric 
power in a manner prescribed by the ordinances, rules and regulations of the town. The capacity of 
such services and the number of outlets and fixtures shall be as follows: 
(1) ?Every habitable room shall have an electric service and outlets and/or fixtures capable of 
providing at least three watts per square foot of floor area. 
(2) ?Every habitable room shall have at least one floor or wall-type electric convenience outlet for 
each 60 square feet or fraction thereof of floor area, and in no case less than two such outlets. 
(3) ?Every water closet compartment, bathroom, laundry room, furnace room and public hall shall 
contain at least one supplied ceiling or wall-type electric light fixture. 
(d) ?Adequate ventilation. Every habitable room shall have at least one window or skylight which can 
easily be opened, or such other device as will adequately ventilate the room. The total of the 
openable window area is every habitable room shall be equal to at least 45 percent of the minimum 
aggregate glass area of the window or skylight type window, as required, except where there is 
supplied some other device affording adequate ventilation and approved by the housing official. 
(e) ?Ventilation and light in bathroom and water closet. Every bathroom and water closet compartment 
shall comply with the light and ventilation requirements for habitable rooms except that no window 
shall be required where equipped with a ventilation system approved by the housing official. 
(f) ?Convenient switches. For turning on one light in each room or passageway switches shall be located 
so as to permit the area ahead to be lighted. 
(g) ?Light in public halls and stairways. Every public hall and inside stairway shall be adequately lighted 
at all times with an illumination of at least one footcandle of light at the darkest portion of the 
normally traveled stairs and passageways. 
(Ord. No. 110, §§ 601.1—601.7, 5-7-73) 


Secs. 9-182—9-192. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 6. - FIRE SAFETY 


Sec. 9-193. - Heaters and storage of flammables. 
(a) ?Portable electric heaters. Unvented flame space heaters are prohibited. Portable electric heaters, 
approved under the appropriate local or state electrical and/or fire prevention code, are acceptable 
where they meet all other appropriate provisions of this article. 
(b) ?Storage of flammable liquids prohibited. No dwelling, multifamily dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming 
unit shall be located within a building containing any establishment handling, dispensing or storing 
flammable liquids with a flashpoint of 110 degrees Fahrenheit or lower. 
(Ord. No. 110, §§ 700.1, 700.2, 5-7-73) 


Secs. 9-194—9-204. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 7. - ROOMINGHOUSES 


Sec. 9-205. - Requirements. 
(a) ?No person shall operate a roominghouse or shall occupy or let to another for occupancy, any 
rooming unit in any roominghouse except in compliance with the appropriate provisions of this 
article. No owner or other person shall occupy or let to another person any vacant rooming unit 
unless it is clean, sanitary or fit for human occupancy, and is in compliance with all the following 
applicable requirements of the town: 
(1) ?Permit required; application; transferability; expiration. No person shall operate a 
roominghouse unless he holds a valid roominghouse permit, issued by the director of public 
health in the name of the operator and for the specific dwelling or dwelling unit specified therein. 
The operator shall apply to the director of public health for such permit, which shall be issued by 
the director of public health only after he has determined the roominghouse to be in compliance 
with the applicable provisions of this article and with any rules and regulations adopted pursuant 
hereto. This permit shall be displayed in a conspicuous place within the roominghouse at all 
times. No such permit shall be transferable. Every person holding such a permit shall give 
notice in writing to the director of public health within 24 hours after having sold, transferred, 
given away or otherwise disposed of ownership of, interest in or control of any roominghouse. 
Such notice shall include the name and address of the person succeeding to the ownership or 
control of such roominghouse. Every roominghouse permit shall expire at the end of one year 
following its date of issuance, unless sooner suspended or revoked. 
(2) ?Plumbing. At least one flush water closet, lavatory basin and bathtub or shower, properly 
connected to a water and sewer system or septic tank, approved by the health officer and in 
good working condition, shall be supplied for each six persons or fraction thereof residing within 
a roominghouse, including members of the operator's family wherever they share the use of the 
facilities, provided that: 
a. ?In a roominghouse where rooms are let only to males, flush urinals may be substituted for 
not more than one-half the required number of water closets; 
b. ?All such facilities shall be so located within the dwelling as to be reasonably accessible 
from a common hall or passageway to all persons sharing such facilities; 
c. ?Every lavatory basin and bathtub or shower shall be supplied with hot water at all times; 
d. ?No such facilities shall be located in a basement, except by written approval of the director 
of public health; 
e. ?Cooking in a rooming unit shall be prohibited; 
f. ?Communal cooking and dining facilities in a roominghouse shall be prohibited, except as 
approved by the health officer in writing; 
g. ?Rooming unit doors shall have operating locks to ensure privacy. 
(3) ?Linen, towels and bedding. The operator of every roominghouse shall change supplied bed 
linen and towels therein at least once each week and prior to letting of any room to any 
occupant, and shall be responsible for the maintenance of all supplied bedding in a clean and 
sanitary manner. 
(4) ?Sleeping area. Every room occupied for sleeping purposes by one person shall contain at least 
70 square feet of useable floor area, in which there is a ceiling height of no less than five feet 
and where the room width is not less than seven feet and every room occupied for sleeping 
purposes by more than one person shall contain at least 50 square feet of floor space for each 
occupant thereof. 
(5) ?Means of egress. Every rooming unit shall have one or more safe, unobstructed means of 
egress leading to safe and open space at ground level, as required by the laws of this state and 
the town. 
(6) ?Every provision of this article which applies to roominghouses shall also apply to hotels and 
motels, except to the extent that any such provision may be found in conflict with the laws of this 
state or the town. 
(Ord. No. 110, §§ 800.1—800.6, 5-7-73) 


Secs. 9-206—9-215. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE V. - FORT HILL AREA NEIGHBORHOOD REVITALIZATION ZONE STRATEGIC PLAN[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 243, adopted Nov. 27, 2000, enacted new §§ 9-206—9-210. To better fit the 
format of the Code said sections have been renumbered at the discretion of the editor as §§ 9-216—9-
220. 


DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 


Sec. 9-216. - Purposes of article. 
(a) ?It is hereby declared that the purpose of this article is to adopt the Fort Hill Area Neighborhood 
Revitalization Zone Strategic Plan pursuant to C.G.S. § 7-602. 
(b) ?It is hereby further declared that the purpose of this article is to create a Fort Hill Area Neighborhood 
Revitalization Zone Committee. 
(Ord. No. 243, 11-27-00) 


Sec. 9-217. - Scope of article. 
    This article shall be applicable only to the Fort Hill Area Neighborhood as defined by the 
neighborhood revitalization by-laws that are incorporated into the plan. 
(Ord. No. 243, 11-27-00) 


Sec. 9-218. - Amendments to the strategic plan. 
(a) ?Any amendment to the strategic plan made subsequent to the date of enactment of this article shall 
be adopted by the neighborhood revitalization zone committee and the municipality in accordance 
with the procedures set forth in C.G.S. § 7-601(c), (d) and shall be submitted to the secretary of the 
office of policy and management. 
(b) ?After the date of approval of the amendment by the legislative body of the municipality, any report 
required to be made shall include information concerning the amendment. 
(c) ?An amendment to the strategic plan shall be deemed to be a concept or proposal not reflected 
within the scope of the plan as originally adopted by ordinance of the municipality. 
(Ord. No. 243, 11-27-00) 


Sec. 9-219. - Committee. 
(a) ?The Fort Hill Area Neighborhood Revitalization Zone Committee shall consist of no less than seven 
members, up to three of whom may be town staff as ex-officio members. The members shall be 
appointed by the town council. 
(b) ?The membership of this committee shall reflect the composition of the neighborhood and include, 
but not be limited to, tenants and property owners, community organizations, and representatives of 
businesses located in the neighborhood. 
(c) ?The committee shall submit a report on implementation of the strategic plan to the town manager, 
the town council, and the secretary of the office of policy and management at intervals of six months 
in the first year after adoption of the article, and annually thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 243, 11-27-00) 


Sec. 9-220. - Powers. 
(a) ?The Town of Groton Office of Planning and Development shall be the lead agency for coordination 
of the plan with the neighborhood revitalization zone committee. 
(b) ?The neighborhood revitalization zone committee shall implement and oversee the strategic plan as 
previously developed by the neighborhood revitalization zone planning committee. The committee 
shall serve in an advisory capacity to the town in an effort to revitalize the designated area. 
(c) ?The town's role in the neighborhood revitalization zone process may include, but not be limited to, 
the modifications to or adoption of town procedures and/or ordinances to assist the neighborhood 
revitalization zone committee in the implementation of the plan. 
(d) ?The town and the committee shall have the powers set forth in C.G.S. chapter 118, §§ 7-600—7-
608 or as the same may be amended. The enumeration of such powers shall not require the town or 
the committee to exercise any or all of them. 
(Ord. No. 243, 11-27-00) 


Secs. 9-221—9-250. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 2. - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE 


Sec. 9-251. - Purpose and title. 
    An ordinance establishing the minimum regulations governing the conditions and maintenance of all 
property, buildings and structures within the boundaries of the Fort Hill Neighborhood Revitalization Zone 
as described and defined by Code section 9-217; by providing the standards for supplied utilities and 
facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary 
and fit for occupation and use; and the condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human 
occupancy and use; the demolition of such structures; known as the "Property Maintenance Code 2000 
for the Fort Hill Neighborhood Revitalization Zone". 
(Ord. No. 264, § 1, 9-21-04) 


Sec. 9-252. - Legislative findings of fact. 
(a) ?It is hereby found that through the efforts of property owners and residents of the area of the Town 
of Groton known as the Fort Hill Neighborhood Revitalization Zone and of various Town of Groton 
officials and agencies, the condition of many of the residential structures and properties within said 
neighborhood revitalization zone has been markedly improved since the creation of the 
neighborhood revitalization zone committee. But it is also hereby found that despite such efforts, the 
condition of many residential structures and properties within said neighborhood revitalization zone 
remains substandard and that such conditions adversely affect public health and safety and lead to 
the continuation, extension and aggravation of deterioration within said neighborhood revitalization 
zone. 
(b) ?It is further hereby found that adequate protection of the public health, safety and welfare of the 
residents of said neighborhood revitalization zone and of all other residents of the Town of Groton 
therefore requires the establishment and enforcement of certain minimum property maintenance 
standards to be applied within said neighborhood revitalization zone. 
(c) ?It is further hereby found that the deteriorated and blighted structures and properties continue to 
exist within said neighborhood revitalization zone to an extent and a degree not found in other areas 
of the Town of Groton. 
(d) ?It is thereby further found that the enactment and enforcement of a property maintenance code to 
be applied only within the boundaries of the Fort Hill Neighborhood Revitalization Zone is essential to 
the continuation and completion of the rehabilitation and restoration of the structures and properties 
within the zone and to the continued and increasing well being of its residents. 
(Ord. No. 264, § 2, 9-21-04) 


Sec. 9-253. - Authority granted. 
    Pursuant to authority granted the town by the connecticut General Statutes, including without 
limitation by C.G.S. § 7-148(c)(7)(H)(xv), a certain document, copies of which are on file in the office of 
the town clerk of the Town of Groton, being marked and designated as the International Property 
Maintenance Code 2000 as published by the International Code Council, Inc., be and is hereby adopted 
as the property maintenance code of the Fort Hill Homes Neighborhood Revitalization Zone for the 
control of buildings and structures as herein provided; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, 
penalties, conditions and terms of said property maintenance code are hereby referred to, adopted, and 
made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this division, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, 
if any, prescribed in section 9-254 of this division. 
(Ord. No. 264, § 3, 9-21-04) 


Sec. 9-254. - Revisions. 
    The following sections are hereby revised: 
Section 101.1. ?Insert: Town of Groton Fort Hill Homes Area - Neighborhood Revitalization Zone 
(NRZ). 
Section 103.0. ?Insert: Whenever Department of Property Maintenance Inspection is used in the 
Property Maintenance Code and in the ordinance, the Office of Planning and Development 
Services, Inspection Services, shall be inserted. All references to Code Official shall also apply 
to other designated inspectors as shall be necessary for administration of this code, and as 
authorized by the appointing authority. 
Section 103.6. ?Delete. 
Section 106.1. ?Delete existing and change to: 
It shall be unlawful for any person firm or corporation to erect, construct, alter, extend, repair, 
remove, demolish, maintain, fail to maintain, provide, fail to provide, occupy, let to another or 
occupy or permit another person to occupy any premises property, structure or equipment 
regulated by this code, or cause same to be done, contrary to or in conflict with or in violation of 
any of the provisions of this code, or to fail to obey a lawful order of the code official, or to 
remove or deface a placard or notice posted under the provisions of this code. 
Section 106.3. ?Delete existing and change to: 
In case of any unlawful acts, the code official shall institute an appropriate action or proceeding 
at law to exact the penalty provided in Section 106.4. The code official shall ask the 
jurisdiction's legal representative to proceed at law or in equity against the person responsible 
for the violation for the purpose of ordering that person: 
1. ?To restrain, correct or remove the violation or refrain from any further execution of work; 
2. ?To restrain or correct the erection, installation, maintenance, repair or alteration of such 
structure; 
3. ?To require the removal of work in violation; or 
4. ?To prevent the occupancy of the structure that is not in compliance with the provisions of 
this code. 
Section 106.4. ?Delete existing and change to: 
Violation of Penalties. Any person who shall violate a provision of this code, or fail to comply 
therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, shall be prosecuted within the limits provided 
by state or local laws, and the fine will be up to $90.00. Each day that a violation continues after 
due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense. 
110.1. ?Correct spelling: insanitary to unsanitary. 
111.2 ?Delete existing and change to: 
111.2 Membership of Board. The members of the Building Code Board of Appeals shall serve 
as the Board of Appeals for the purpose of this ordinance. 
111.2.1, 111.2.2, 111.2.4 and 111.2.5 Delete. 
111.6. ?Delete existing and change to: 
111.6 Board Decision. The board shall modify or reverse the decision of the code official only by 
a concurring vote of a majority of the total number of members present and voting. 
111.6.1. ?Delete the existing and change to: 
111.6.1. Records and Copies. The decision of the board shall be written or stated in the minutes 
of the board. Written notice of the decision shall be furnished to the appellant and the code 
official. 
111.7. ?Delete. 
Section 302.8. ?Delete: the second sentence in the first (1st) paragraph: "Painting of vehicles is 
prohibited unless conducted inside an approved spray booth". 
    Delete: "Exception: A vehicle of any type is permitted to undergo major overhaul, including body 
work, provided that such work is performed inside a structure or similarly enclosed area designed 
and approved for such purposes." 
Replace deleted exception with the following: 
    Exception: A vehicle is permitted to undergo repairs, excluding body work, provided that such 
work is performed inside a structure approved for such purposes. And provided further that such 
vehicle is owned by the occupant of the premises. The spray painting of vehicles of any kind is not 
permitted anywhere on the premises unless approved and licensed by the State of Connecticut for 
such purposes. 
Section 303.5. ?Add: and skirting, "after all foundation walls". 
Section 303.14. ?Insert: May 1st and October 15th. 
    Delete a portion of the 1st sentence: "and every swinging door shall have a self-closing device 
in good working condition". 
Section 305.3.1. ?Add: Except when the dwelling is rented or leased, then the tenant/occupant shall 
be responsible for the provision of an approved leakproof covered outside garbage container(s). 
Section 402.4. ?New Addition: Lighting. All residential occupancy shall have available lighting at all 
means of egress, including outside stairways to the dwelling. 
Section 602.3. ?Delete: "during the period from [DATE] to [DATE]". 
Section 602.4. ?Delete: "during the period from [DATE] to [DATE]". 
Section 702.2. ?Add: Change International Fire Code to State of Connecticut Fire Code. 
(Ord. No. 264, § 4, 9-21-04; Ord. No. 274, 11-4-09) 


Sec. 9-255. - Adopted. 
    Ordinance Number 264 of the Town of Groton entitled "International Property Maintenance Code 
2000 for the Fort Hill Homes Neighborhood Revitalization Zone" is adopted, and if any other ordinance or 
parts of ordinances are in conflict herewith, the more restrictive provision shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 264, § 5, 9-21-04) 


Sec. 9-256. - Severability. 
    That nothing in this division or in the property maintenance code hereby adopted shall be construed 
to affect any suit or proceeding impending in any court, or any rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any 
cause or causes of action acquired or existing, under any act or ordinance hereby repealed as cited in 
section 9-254 of this division; nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any character be lost, impaired 
or affected by this division. 
(Ord. No. 264, § 6, 9-21-04) 


Chapter 10 - LICENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS BUSINESS REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buses, § 11-81 et seq.; authorized collectors of solid waste, § 13-66 et seq.; private 
collectors of solid waste, § 13-131. 
State Law reference— Licenses, C.G.S. Title 21. 


ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 


Sec. 10-1. - Filing of notice of intent by carnivals, fairs, etc. 
    No carnival, fair or similar public event shall be permitted within the town until and unless a notice of 
intent is filed with the town manager not less than 15 days prior to the first date of such event stating the 
dates, location and sponsor of such event together with such other information as may be reasonably 
required to provide information relating to the health and safety features of such event. 
(Ord. No. 75, 9-18-67; Code 1969, § 4-1) 
Charter reference— Authority to regulate shows, parades, processions and music, § 1.4(28). 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to regulate exhibitions, C.G.S. § 21-6. 


Secs. 10-2—10-30. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE II. - JUNK DEALERS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— Authority to prohibit license and regulate junk dealers, § 1.4(34). 
Cross reference— Solid waste management, ch. 13. 
State Law reference— Junk dealers, C.G.S. § 21-9 et seq. 


Sec. 10-31. - Permit—Required. 
    No person shall engage in the business of a junk dealer, as defined by C.G.S. § 21-9, in the town 
without first having obtained a permit to do so from the chief of police. 
(Ord. of 9-29-41, § 1; Code 1969, § 7-1) 


Sec. 10-32. - Same—Fee; term; separate permit required for each vehicle. 
    The chief of police shall charge a fee as set by the town council from time to time for each permit, 
which when issued shall be effective for a period of one year from its date of issuance. A separate permit 
shall be required of each person so engaged for each term or vehicle used in such business. 
(Ord. of 9-29-41, § 2; Code 1969, § 7-2) 


Sec. 10-33. - Penalty for violation of chapter. 
    Any person who shall engage in the business of junk dealer without complying with the provisions of 
this article, shall be subject to the penalty imposed by C.G.S. § 21-13. 
(Ord. of 9-29-41, § 3; Code 1969, § 7-3) 


Secs. 10-34—10-70. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE III. - PEDDLERS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference— Authority to regulate peddlers, § 1.4(34). 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to regulate hawkers and peddlers, C.G.S. § 21-37. 


Sec. 10-71. - Required for persons over 16. 
    No person over the age of 16, except those exempt from regulation by state law, shall engage in the 
peddling, vending or selling of any provisions, fruits, goods, wares or merchandise upon any of the public 
highways of the town, or from house to house therein, without first having obtained a license from the 
chief of police. 
(Ord. of 2-15-60, § 1; Code 1969, § 9-1) 


Sec. 10-72. - Application; issuance. 
(a) ?Any person desiring a peddler's license shall apply in writing to the chief of police on forms to be 
provided by the town, which shall contain such information as may be reasonably required to identify 
the applicant, and shall also furnish to the chief of police such credentials, including the applicant's 
photograph to be attached to the license, and such evidence of good moral character as may be 
reasonably required by the chief of police. 
(b) ?The chief of police shall issue such a license to the applicant who thus establishes his identity and 
good moral character and who pays to the town the license fee provided for in this article. 
(Ord. of 2-15-60, § 2; Code 1969, § 9-2) 


Sec. 10-73. - Fee; term. 
    The fee for a peddler's license shall be set from time to time by the council. Each license issued 
under this division shall expire on December 31 succeeding the date of its issuance. 
(Ord. of 2-15-60, § 3; Code 1969, § 9-3) 


Sec. 10-74. - Revocation. 
    Any peddler's license may be revoked by the chief of police for any false statement made by the 
applicant in his application for a license or contained in the credentials or evidence furnished by him to 
secure a license, for the violation by the holder thereof of any of the provisions of this Code or other 
ordinances of the town or of any state or federal law or whenever the holder of such license shall in the 
judgment of the chief of police cease to possess the character and qualifications required by this article 
for the issuance of such license. 
(Ord. of 2-15-60, § 5; Code 1969, § 9-4) 


Sec. 10-75. - Records required to be kept by chief of police. 
    It shall be the duty of the chief of police to keep a record of all licenses issued by him under the 
provisions of this article in a book provided for that purpose, giving the number and date of each license, 
the name, age and residence of each person so licensed and the amount of license fee paid. 
(Ord. of 2-15-60, § 4; Code 1969, § 9-5) 


Sec. 10-76. - Performance of chief of police's duties in his absence. 
    The duties imposed on the chief of police by this article shall be performed during his absence by the 
officer then acting in that capacity. 
(Ord. of 2-15-60, § 6; Code 1969, § 9-6) 


Sec. 10-77. - Penalty for violating article. 
    Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall be fined in accordance with C.G.S. § 
21-38. 
(Ord. of 2-15-60, § 7; Code 1969, § 9-7) 


Secs. 10-78—10-100. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE IV. - SOLICITORS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Itinerant vendors, C.G.S. § 21-27 et seq.; municipal authority to require a 
vendor's license, C.G.S. § 21-29. 


Sec. 10-101. - Permit—Required for persons over 16. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person over the age of 16 to solicit orders of purchase for future delivery 
of any goods, wares or merchandise including magazines and other printed matter, from door to door or 
on any street or highway within the town without first obtaining from the chief of police a solicitor's permit 
to do so and paying the chief of police the fee therefor, the amount of which shall be established by the 
town council by resolution from time to time. 
(Ord. of 2-15-60, § 1; Code 1969, § 9-8; Ord. No. 287, § 3, 4-3-18) 


Sec. 10-102. - Same—Application. 
    A person desiring a solicitor's permit shall apply therefor in writing over his signature to the chief of 
police on forms provided by the town, which shall contain the following information: 
(1) ?The name, home address and local address, if any, of the applicant. 
(2) ?A physical description of the applicant, setting forth the applicant's age, height, weight, color of 
hair and eyes. 
(3) ?The name and address of the person for whom or through whom orders are to be solicited or 
filled. 
(4) ?The place or residence and nature of the employment of the applicant during the last preceding 
year. 
(5) ?The nature of the goods, wares and merchandise for which orders are to be solicited. 
(6) ?A statement as to whether the applicant has been arrested or convicted of any crime or 
misdemeanor and if so, what. 
(7) ?Such other credentials and other evidence of identity including a photograph to be attached to 
the permit and good moral conduct of the applicant as may reasonably be required by the chief 
of police. 
(Ord. of 2-15-60, § 2; Code 1969, § 9-9) 


Sec. 10-103. - Same—Issuance; hours solicitation permitted; term. 
    If the chief of police shall determine after reasonable investigation that the applicant is of good moral 
character and proposes to engage in a lawful and legitimate commercial enterprise, he shall then issue 
the solicitor's permit which permit shall authorize the activity described in section 10-101 during the hours 
from 8:30 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. daily for a period of one year from the date of such permit. 
(Ord. of 2-15-60, § 3; Code 1969, § 9-10) 


Sec. 10-104. - Same—Revocation. 
    Any solicitor's permit may be revoked by the chief of police for any false statement made by the 
applicant in his application for a permit or contained in the credentials or evidence furnished by him to 
secure a permit, for violation by the holder thereof of any of the provisions of this Code or other 
ordinances of the town or of any state or federal law or whenever the holder of such permit shall in the 
judgment of the chief of police cease to possess the character and qualifications required by this division 
for the issuance of such permit. 
(Ord. of 2-15-60, § 5; Code 1969, § 9-11) 


Sec. 10-105. - Same—Possession, display. 
    The solicitor's permit shall be carried at all times by the applicant to whom issued when soliciting or 
canvassing in the town and shall be exhibited by any such applicant whenever he shall be requested so 
to do by any police officer or any person solicited. 
(Ord. of 2-15-60, § 4; Code 1969, § 9-12) 


Sec. 10-106. - Performance of chief of police's duties during his absence. 
    The duties imposed in this article on the chief of police shall be performed during his absence by the 
officer then acting in that capacity. 
(Ord. of 2-15-60, § 6; Code 1969, § 9-13) 


Secs. 10-107—10-130. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE V. - ADULT-ORIENTED BUSINESS 


Sec. 10-131. - Short title. 
    This article shall be known as the "adult-oriented business" article for the Town of Groton. 
(Ord. No. 237, § I, 2-3-98) 


Sec. 10-132. - Policy statement. 
    The Town Council of the Town of Groton, Connecticut finds: 
(1) ?Adult-oriented establishments which may be located in the Town of Groton require special 
supervision from the town's health and public safety agencies in order to protect and preserve 
the health, safety and welfare of the patrons of such establishments, as well as the health, 
safety and welfare of the town's citizens. 
(2) ?Statistics and studies performed by a substantial number of cities and towns in the United 
States indicate that: 
a. ?Large numbers of persons frequent such adult-oriented establishments, especially those 
which provide closed booths, cubicles, studios and rooms for the private viewing of so-
called adult motion pictures and/or video tapes and/or live entertainment; and 
b. ?Persons under the age of 18 may be attracted to adult-oriented establishments and seek to 
enter or loiter about them without the knowledge or permission of their parents and 
guardians; and 
c. ?Closed booths, cubicles, studios and rooms within adult-oriented establishments have been 
used by patrons, clients or customers of such adult-oriented establishments for the 
purpose of engaging in certain sexual acts; and 
d. ?Male and female prostitutes have been known to frequent such establishments in order to 
provide sex for hire to the patrons, clients or customers of such establishments within such 
booths, cubicles, studios and rooms; and 
e. ?Doors, curtains, blinds and/or other closures installed in or on the entrances and/or exits of 
such booths, cubicles, studios and rooms which are closed while such booths, cubicles, 
studios and rooms are in use encourage patrons using such booths, cubicles, studios and 
rooms to engage in sexual acts therein with prostitutes, thereby promoting and 
encouraging prostitution and the commission of sexual acts which cause blood, semen and 
urine to be deposited on the floors and/or walls of such booths, cubicles, studios and 
rooms, which deposits could prove detrimental to the health and safety of other persons 
who may come into contact with such deposits; and 
f. ?The reasonable regulation and supervision of such adult-oriented establishments tends to 
discourage such sexual acts and prostitution, and thereby promotes the health, safety and 
welfare of the patrons, clients and customers of such establishments. 
(3) ?The continued unregulated operation of adult-oriented establishments including, without 
limitation, those specifically cited at subsection (2)a. of this section, is and would be detrimental 
to the general welfare, health and safety of the citizens of Groton. 
(4) ?The Constitution and laws of the State of Connecticut grant to the town powers, especially 
police power, to enact reasonable legislation and measures in order to protect the public health, 
safety and welfare. 
(5) ?It is not the intent of the town council, in enacting this article, to deny any person rights to 
speech protected by the United States and/or State Constitutions, nor is it the intent of the town 
council to impose any additional limitations or restrictions on the contents of any communicative 
materials, including sexually oriented films, video tapes, books and/or other materials. Further, 
by enacting this article, the town council does not intend to deny or restrict the rights of any 
adult to obtain and/or view any sexually oriented materials protected by the United States 
and/or State Constitutions, nor does it intend to restrict or deny any constitutionally protected 
rights that distributors or exhibitors of such sexually oriented materials may have to sell, 
distribute or exhibit such materials. 
(Ord. No. 237, § II, 2-3-98) 


Sec. 10-133. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this article, the words and phrases used herein shall have the following meanings, 
unless otherwise clearly indicated by the context (note: the definitions are in alphabetical order, words in 
quotation marks are defined in this section): 
    Adult bookstore means an establishment having any portion of its stock and trade in books, films, 
video cassettes, or magazines and other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their 
emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified 
anatomical areas." This definition shall not apply to any establishment in which such materials are 
concealed so as not to permit the observation of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical 
areas" by the general public. 
    Adult amusement machine includes any amusement machine that is regularly used for presenting 
material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to 
"specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" as defined below, for observation by patrons. 
    Adult entertainment means any exhibition of any motion pictures, videotapes, live performances, 
displays or dances of any type, which has as a significant or substantial portion of such performances any 
actual or simulated performance of "specified sexual activities" or exhibition and viewing of "specified 
anatomical areas." Adult entertainment includes any exhibition of "specified anatomical areas" by 
employees or contractors of any commercial establishment to which the public, patrons or members are 
invited or admitted. 
    Adult mini-motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of less than 50 persons 
regularly used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, 
describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" for observation by 
patrons therein. 
    Adult motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of 50 or more persons 
regularly used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, 
describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" as defined below for 
observation by patrons therein. 
    Adult-oriented establishment shall include, without limitation, "adult bookstores," "adult motion 
picture theaters," "adult mini-motion picture theaters," and commercial establishments containing one or 
more "adult amusement machines". Adult-oriented establishments also means any premises to which the 
public, patrons or members are invited or admitted and which are so physically arranged as to provide 
booths, cubicles, rooms, studios, compartments or stalls separate from the common areas of the 
premises for the purpose of viewing adult entertainment when such establishment is operated or 
maintained for a profit, direct or indirect. Adult-oriented establishments further means any commercial 
establishment which advertises for sale and/or sells male or female undergarments, bathing suits, or 
lingerie and permits the modeling of said undergarments, bathing suits or lingerie on the premises by 
employees or contractors of the establishment. All adult-oriented establishments require a license to 
conduct such business in the Town of Groton. 
    Amusement machine includes any machine which upon the payment of a charge or upon the 
insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate or disk, may be operated by the public for use as a game, 
entertainment or amusement, whether or not registering a score and whether or not electronically 
operated. 
    Employee means any and all persons, including independent contractors, who work in or at or render 
any services directly related to the operation of an adult-oriented establishment. 
    Entertainer means any person who provides entertainment within an adult-oriented establishment as 
defined in this section, whether or not a fee is charged or accepted for entertainment and whether or not 
entertainment is provided as an employee or an independent contractor. 
    Inspector means an employee of the Ledge Light Health District, the building official, any officer of 
the police department, the fire marshal, and any person to whom any of those officials or the town council 
may delegate the duty to perform functions under this article. 
    Minor shall be deemed to refer to a person under the age of 18 years. 
    Operator means any person, partnership or corporation operating, conducting or maintaining an 
adult-oriented establishment. 
    Specified anatomical areas means: 
(1) ?Less than completely and opaquely covered: 
a. ?Human genitals and pubic region; 
b. ?Buttocks; 
c. ?Female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola; and 
(2) ?Human male genitals in a discernable turgid state, even if completely opaquely covered. 
    Specified sexual activities means: 
(1) ?Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal; 
(2) ?Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy. 
(3) ?Fondling or erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breasts. 
(4) ?"Sexual anatomical acts" and "specified sexual activities" as used in this article do not include 
materials depicted in any medical publications or films, in any bona fide educational publications 
or films, any art or photography publications which devote at least 25 percent of the lineage of 
each issue to articles and advertisements dealing with subjects of art or photography, in any 
news periodical which reports or describes current events and which, from time to time, 
publishes photographs of nude or semi-nude persons in connection with the dissemination of 
the news, or in publications or films which describe and report different cultures which, from 
time to time, publish or show photographs or depictions of nude or semi-nude persons when 
describing cultures in which nudity or semi-nudity is indigenous to the population. 
    Town council means the Town Council of the Town of Groton, Connecticut. 
(Ord. No. 237, § III, 2-3-98) 


Sec. 10-134. - Operating requirement. 
(a) ?Each adult-oriented establishment located in the Town of Groton is required to obtain a license. See 
sections 10-135, 10-136, 10-137 and 10-138. 
(b) ?No operator or employee of an adult-oriented establishment shall allow or permit any minor to enter 
into such establishment or to loiter upon the grounds and parking lot of such establishment. 
(c) ?Each adult-oriented establishment shall display prominently a sign in the dimensions of 24 inches by 
24 inches outside each entrance bearing the words "Adult-Oriented Establishment - Persons Under 
18 Not Admitted" in white letters against a red background. 
(d) ?No adult-oriented establishment shall be conducted is such a manner that permits the observation 
of any material depicting specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas from the outside of 
the building that houses the adult-oriented establishment. 
(e) ?Every adult-oriented establishment doing business in the town on and after the effective date of this 
article shall be well lighted at all times and be physically arranged in such a manner that the entire 
interior portion of the booths, cubicles, rooms or stalls, wherein adult entertainment is provided shall 
be clearly visible from the common areas of the premises. Visibility into such booths, cubicles, rooms 
or stalls shall not be blocked or obscured by doors, curtains, partitions, drapes, or any other 
obstruction whatsoever. It shall be unlawful to install or maintain enclosed booths, cubicles, rooms or 
stalls within adult-oriented establishments for the purpose of viewing adult entertainment. 
(f) ?On and after the effective date of this article, the operator of each adult-oriented establishment shall 
be responsible for and shall provide that any room or other area used for the purpose of viewing 
adult entertainment shall be well lighted and readily accessible at all times and shall be continuously 
open to view in its entirety. The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of 
sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access at an illumination 
of not less than one footcandle as measured at the floor level. It shall be the duty of the operator and 
its agents to ensure that the illumination described above is maintained at all times that any patron is 
present on the premises. 
(g) ?Every act or omission by an employee constituting a violation of the provisions of this article shall be 
deemed the act or omission of the operator, or as a result of the operator's negligent failure to 
supervise the employee's conduct, the operator shall be punishable for such act or omission in the 
same manner as if the operator committed the act or caused the omission. 
(h) ?An operator shall be responsible for the conduct of all employees while on the licensed premises, 
and any act or omission of any employee constituting a violation of the provisions of this article shall 
be deemed the act or omission of the operator for purposes of determining whether the operator 
shall be subject to the penalties imposed by this article. 
(i) ?All adult-oriented establishments shall be open to inspection at all reasonable times by inspectors or 
such other persons as the town council may designate. 
(j) ?No adult-oriented establishment shall be permitted on a site that is less than 1000 feet from an 
existing adult-oriented establishment. The 1000 feet shall be the straight horizontal distance from 
any boundary line of a parcel of land upon which building housing an adult-oriented establishment 
exists to any boundary line of a parcel of land on which a proposed building housing an adult-
oriented establishment. 
(k) ?No adult-oriented establishment shall be permitted on a site that is less than 2000 feet from a public 
park, preexisting school, or place of worship meaning to include parish houses and convents. The 
2000 feet shall be the straight horizontal distance from any boundary line of a parcel of land upon 
which the proposed building housing an adult-oriented establishment to any boundary line of a 
parcel of land used as a public park or upon which a building housing a school or place of worship as 
defined herein exists. 
(l) ?The provisions of sections 10-134(j) and (k) shall not be deemed to prohibit any use preexisting the 
enactment of this article. Any preexisting use which shall be discontinued for a period of 30 days 
shall thereafter conform to sections 10-134(j) and (k). 
(Ord. No. 237, § IV, 2-3-98) 


Sec. 10-135. - Application for license. 
(a) ?Any person, partnership or corporation desiring to secure a license shall make application to the 
town clerk. The application shall be filed in triplicate with and dated by the town clerk. A copy of the 
application shall be distributed promptly by the town clerk to the Town of Groton Police Department 
and to the applicant. 
(b) ?The application for a license shall be upon a form provided by the town clerk. An application for a 
license shall list all partners or limited partners of a partnership applicant, and all officers or directors 
of a corporate applicant and all stockholders holding more than five percent of the stock of a 
corporate applicant, or any other person who is interested directly in the ownership or operation of 
the business. The person who is to operate the adult-oriented establishment shall furnish the 
following information under oath: 
(1) ?Name and address, including all aliases; 
(2) ?Written proof that the individual is at least 18 years of age; 
(3) ?All residential addresses of the applicant for the past ten years; 
(4) ?The applicant's height, weight, color of eyes and hair; 
(5) ?The business, occupation or employment of the applicant for ten years immediately preceding 
the date of application; 
(6) ?Whether the applicant previously operated in this or any other county, town, city or state under 
an adult-oriented establishment license or similar business license, whether the applicant has 
ever had such a license revoked or suspended, the reason therefore, and the business entity or 
trade name under which the applicant operated that was subject to the suspension or 
revocation; 
(7) ?All criminal statutes, whether federal or state, or town ordinance violation convictions, forfeiture 
of bond and pleading of nolo contendere on all charges, except minor traffic violations; 
(8) ?Fingerprints and two portrait photographs, at least two inches by two inches, of the applicant. 
(9) ?The address of the adult-oriented establishment to be operated by the applicant; 
(10) ?If the applicant is a corporation, the applicant shall specify the name of the corporation, the 
date and state of incorporation, the name and address of the registered agent and the name 
and address of all shareholders owning more than five percent of the stock in said corporation 
and all officers and directors of the corporation. 
(c) ?Within 75 days of receiving an application for a license the town clerk shall notify the applicant 
whether the application is granted or denied. 
The town clerk shall grant the license upon a favorable recommendation from the police department and 
upon the following circumstances: 
(1) ?The required fees have been paid; 
(2) ?The application conforms in all respects to the provisions of this article; 
(3) ?The applicant has not made a material misrepresentation of fact in the application; 
(4) ?That neither the applicant, if an individual, nor any person financially interested, if a 
corporation, or any of the partners including limited partners, nor the holder of any profit interest, 
nor the manager or other person principally in charge of the operation of the proposed business 
has been convicted of, pleaded nolo contendere, or guilty to any felony or to a misdemeanor 
involving moral turpitude; 
(5) ?The applicant has not had a license similar to the one issued pursuant to the provisions of this 
article issued by another local authority suspended or revoked for cause within the five-year 
period immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application; 
(6) ?The proposed business complies with all applicable laws of the Town of Groton Planning and 
Zoning Commissions; 
(7) ?The applicant, manager or other person principally in charge of the operation of the business is 
at least 18 years of age. 
The town clerk shall deny the application if all of the requirements set forth in subsections (c)(1)—(7) of 
this section have not been met. 
(d) ?Whenever an application is denied, the town clerk shall advise the applicant in writing of the 
reasons for such action. If the applicant requests a hearing within ten days of receipt of notification of 
denial, a public hearing shall be held within ten days thereafter before the town council, as 
hereinafter provided. 
(e) ?Failure or refusal of the applicant to give any information relevant to the investigation of the 
application, or his or her refusal or failure to appear at any reasonable time and place for 
examination under oath regarding said application, or his or her refusal to submit to or cooperate 
with any investigation required by this article shall constitute an admission by the applicant that he or 
she is ineligible for such license and shall be grounds for denial thereof by the town clerk. 
(Ord. No. 237, § V, 2-3-98) 


Sec. 10-136. - Standards for issuance of license. 
(a) ?To receive a license to operate an adult-oriented establishment, an applicant must meet the 
following standards: 
(1) ?If the applicant is an individual: 
a. ?The applicant shall be at least 18 years of age; 
b. ?The applicant shall not have been convicted of or pleaded nolo contendere to a felony or 
any crime involving moral turpitude, prostitution, obscenity or other crime of a sexual 
nature in any jurisdiction within five years immediately preceding the date of the 
application; 
c. ?The applicant shall not have been found to have previously violated this article within five 
years immediately preceding the date of the application; 
d. ?The applicant shall not have been found to have previously violated a substantially similar 
ordinance from another town or have had his/her license to operate such establishment 
revoked within five years immediately preceding the date of this application. 
(2) ?If the applicant is a corporation: 
a. ?All officers, directors and stockholders required to be named under section 10-135(b) shall 
be at least 18 years of age; 
b. ?No officer, director or stockholder required to be named under section 10-135(b) shall have 
been convicted of or pleaded nolo contendere to a felony or crime involving moral 
turpitude, prostitution, obscenity or other crime of a sexual nature in any jurisdiction within 
five years immediately preceding the date of the application; 
c. ?No officer, director, or stockholder required to be named under section 10-135(b) shall 
have been found to have previously violated this article within five years immediately 
preceding the date of the application; 
d. ?No officer, director, or stockholder required to be named under section 10-135(b) shall 
have been found to have previously violated a substantially similar ordinance from another 
town or have had his/her license to operate such establishment revoked within five years 
immediately preceding the date of this application. 
(3) ?If the applicant is a partnership, joint venture, or any other type of organization where two or 
more persons have a financial interest: 
a. ?All persons having a financial interest in the partnership, joint venture or other type of 
organization shall be at least 18 years of age; 
b. ?No persons having a financial interest in the partnership, joint venture or other type of 
organization shall have been convicted of or pleaded nolo contendere, to a felony or any 
crime involving moral turpitude, prostitution, obscenity or other crime of a sexual nature in 
any jurisdiction within five years immediately preceding the date of the application. 
c. ?No person having a financial interest in the partnership, joint venture or other type of 
organization shall have been found to have violated any provision of this article within five 
years immediately preceding the date of the application; 
d. ?No person having a financial interest in the partnership, joint venture or other type of 
organization shall have been found to have previously violated a substantially similar 
ordinance from another town or have had his/her license to operate such establishment 
revoked within five years immediately preceding the date of this application. 
(b) ?No license shall be issued unless the Town of Groton Police Department has investigated the 
applicant's qualifications to be licensed. The results of that investigation shall be filed in writing with 
the town clerk no later than 60 days after the date of the application. 
(Ord. No. 237, § VI, 2-3-98) 


Sec. 10-137. - Fees. 
(a) ?A license fee of $250.00 shall be submitted with the completed application for a license. If the 
application is denied, one-half of the fee shall be returned. 
(Ord. No. 237, § VII, 2-3-98) 


Sec. 10-138. - Renewal of license or permit. 
(a) ?Every license issued pursuant to this article will terminate at the expiration of one year from the date 
of issuance, unless sooner revoked, and must be renewed before operation is allowed in the 
following year. Any operator desiring to renew a license shall make application to the town clerk. The 
application of renewal must be filed not later than 60 days before the license expires. The application 
for renewal shall be filed in triplicate with and dated by the town clerk. A copy of the application for 
renewal shall be distributed promptly by the town clerk to the Town of Groton Police Department and 
to the operator. The application of renewal shall be upon a form provided by the town clerk and shall 
contain such information and data, given under oath or affirmation, as is required for an application 
for a new license. 
(b) ?A license renewal fee of $250.00 shall be submitted with the application for renewal. In addition to 
the renewal fee, a late penalty of $100.00 shall be assessed against the applicant who files for a 
renewal less than 60 days before the license expires. If the application is denied, one-half of the total 
fees collected shall be returned. 
(c) ?If the Town of Groton Police Department is aware of any information bearing on the operator's 
qualifications, that information shall be filed in writing with the town clerk. 
(Ord. No. 237, § VIII, 2-3-98) 


Sec. 10-139. - Revocation of license. 
(a) ?The town council shall revoke a license or permit for any of the following reasons: 
(1) ?Discovery that false or misleading information or data was given on any application or material 
facts were omitted from any application; 
(2) ?The operator or any employee of the operator violates a provision of this article or any rule or 
regulation adopted by the town council pursuant to this article; provided, however, that in the 
case of a first offense by an operator where the conduct was solely that of an employee, the 
penalty shall not exceed a suspension of 30 days if the town council shall find the operator had 
no actual or constructive knowledge of such violation and could not by the exercise of due 
diligence have had such actual or constructive knowledge; 
(3) ?The operator becomes ineligible to obtain a license or permit; 
(4) ?Any cost or fee required to be paid by this article is not paid; 
(5) ?Any intoxicating liquor or cereal malt beverage is served or consumed on the premises of the 
adult-oriented establishment without the appropriate state-issued liquor control commission 
licenses. 
(b) ?The town council, before revoking or suspending any license or permit shall give the operator at 
least ten days written notice of the charges against him, and the opportunity for a public hearing 
before the town council. 
(c) ?The transfer of a license or any interest in a license shall automatically and immediately revoke the 
license. 
(d) ?Any operator whose license is revoked shall not be eligible to receive a license for one year from 
the date of revocation. No location or premises for which a license has been issued shall be used as 
an adult-oriented establishment for six months from the date of revocation of the license. 
(e) ?The town council shall give notice to the town clerk of any revocations or suspensions. 
(Ord. No. 237, § IX, 2-3-98) 


Sec. 10-140. - Violations/penalties. 
(a) ?Any person, partnership or corporation who is found to have violated this article shall be fined a 
definite sum not exceeding $250.00 for each such violation. 
(b) ?Each violation of this chapter shall be considered a separate offense, and any violation continuing 
more than one day of time shall be considered a separate offense for each day of violation. 
(c) ?Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to limit any remedy the town may have for the 
enforcement of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 237, § X, 2-3-98; Ord. No. 287, § 4, 4-3-18) 


Secs. 10-141—10-160. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE VI. - MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS 


Sec. 10-161. - Short title. 
    This article shall be known and may be cited as "massage establishment article" for the Town of 
Groton. 
(Ord. No. 238, § I, 2-3-98) 


Sec. 10-162. - Purpose statement. 
    It is hereby resolved that the business of operating massage establishments as defined herein, is a 
business affecting the public health, safety, and general welfare, and as such necessitates regulation and 
control. 
(Ord. No. 238, § II, 2-3-98) 


Sec. 10-163. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this article, the words and phrases used herein shall have the following meanings, 
unless otherwise clearly indicated by the context (note: the definitions are in alphabetical order): 
    Chief of police shall mean the chief of police, or his/her designee. 
    Director of health shall mean the director of health for the Ledge Light Health District, or his/her 
designee. 
    Employee shall mean any and all persons other than masseurs and masseuses who render any 
service in a massage establishment, but who have no physical contact with customers or clients. 
    Massage shall mean any method of pressure on, friction against or stroking, kneading, rubbing, 
pounding, vibrating or stimulating of the external soft parts of the body with the hands or with the aid of 
any mechanical or electrical apparatus or appliance with or without any such supplementary aids as: 
rubbing alcohol, liniments, antiseptics, oils, powder, creams, lotions, ointments, or other similar 
preparations commonly used in this practice. 
    Massage establishment shall mean any business, the function of which is to engage in or carry on 
massages at that location. 
    Masseur shall refer to a male who engages in the practice of massage for any consideration 
whatsoever. 
    Masseuse shall refer to a female who engages in the practice of massage for any consideration 
whatsoever. 
    Outcall massage service shall mean any business, the function of which is to engage in or carry on 
massages at a location designated by the customer or patron rather than at a massage establishment. 
    Person shall mean any individual, co-partnership, firm, association, joint-stock company, corporation 
or combination of individuals of whatever form or character. 
(Ord. No. 238, § III, 2-3-98) 


Sec. 10-164. - Exceptions. 
    This article shall not apply to any school, hospital, nursing home, sanitarium, clinics, rehabilitation 
facilities, non-profit United Way agencies, barber shops, beauty salons, beauty schools or barber schools 
operating in accordance with the laws of the State of Connecticut, nor to any person holding a valid 
certificate or license to practice the healing arts as defined by C.G.S. § 20-1 et seq. or to practice physical 
therapy as defined by C.G.S. § 20-66 et seq., midwifery as defined by C.G.S. § 20-86a. et seq., nursing 
as defined by C.G.S. § 20-87a. et seq., dentistry as defined by C.G.S. 20-103a. et seq., massage 
therapists as defined by C.G.S. § 20-206a. et seq., optometry as defined by C.G.S § 20-206a. et seq., 
acupuncturists as defined by C.G.S. § 20-206aa. et seq., or athletic training as defined by C.G.S. §§ 19a-
16a. et seq., or to engage in the occupation of barber as defined by C.G.S. § 20-234 et seq. or 
hairdresser or cosmetician as defined by C.G.S. § 20-250 et seq. under the laws of the State of 
Connecticut; provided that the activities of such person are confined to those for which the certificate or 
license is granted, nor shall this article apply to any person lawfully acting under their supervision or 
control, nor shall it prohibit the furnishing of assistance in the case of emergency. 
(Ord. No. 238, § IV, 2-3-98) 


Sec. 10-165. - Promulgation of rules and regulations. 
    The chief of police or the director of health may make and enforce reasonable rules and regulations 
not in conflict with, but to carry out the intent of this article. The chief of police and the director of health 
shall upon making any regulation or rule, file a copy of said rule or regulation with the town clerk, who 
shall keep same in the town hall, in a book provided for such purpose. 
(Ord. No. 238, § V, 2-3-98) 


Sec. 10-166. - Inspections. 
    The chief of police and the director of health, or their designees, shall from time to time, but not less 
than twice a year, make an inspection of each massage establishment in the town for the purposes of 
determining that the provisions of this article are complied with. Such inspections shall be at a reasonable 
time, in a reasonable manner. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to allow such inspection officer 
access to the premises or to hinder such officer in any manner. 
(Ord. No. 238, § VI, 2-3-98) 


Sec. 10-167. - Permit required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, conduct or carry on or permit to be engaged in, 
conducted, or carried on, in or upon any premises in the town, the operation of a massage establishment 
without first having obtained a permit from the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 238, § VII, 2-3-98) 


Sec. 10-168. - Filing of application; filing fee. 
    Each applicant for a permit to maintain, operate or conduct a massage establishment shall file an 
application with the chief of police and pay a filing fee of $125.00, which shall not be refundable. 
(Ord. No. 238, § VIII, 2-3-98) 


Sec. 10-169. - Contents of application; information needed. 
(a) ?The applications for a permit to operate a massage establishment shall be in writing, signed and 
sworn to by the applicant and shall set forth: 
(1) ?The name and address of each applicant; 
(2) ?That the applicant is at least 18 years of age; 
(3) ?The proposed place of business and facilities therein; 
(4) ?The exact nature of the massage to be administered; 
(5) ?Two portrait photographs of the applicant, at least two inches by two inches, and a complete 
set of the applicant's fingerprints. Said fingerprints shall be taken by the chief of police, or 
his/her designee; 
(6) ?Business, occupation or employment history of the applicant for the three years immediately 
preceding the date of the application; 
(7) ?Massage or similar business license history of the applicant; whether such person has 
previously operated in this or other city, town or state, under license; has had such license 
revoked or suspended, the reason therefore, and the business activity or occupation 
subsequent to such action of suspension or revocation; 
(8) ?Any criminal conviction, except minor traffic violations; 
(9) ?Plans for the physical layout of the massage establishment; 
(10) ?A list of all persons having a beneficial financial interest in the massage establishment and the 
amount of each person's interest if ten percent or over. If a corporation holds ten percent or 
more, the names and addresses of the corporate officers; 
(11) ?Appropriate certificates, licenses, etc. showing proper compliance with all applicable rules, 
regulations, ordinances, and statutes including zoning, building and health laws and regulations; 
(12) ?A written statement of operating policies and procedures pertaining to such matters as times 
of operation, accessibility, personnel policies, methods and schedules of cleaning and sanitizing 
and provisions for safety and health of clients and employees; 
(13) ?Such other information as may be necessary in order for the chief of police to make any 
determination required by this article. 
(Ord. No. 238, § IX, 2-3-98) 


Sec. 10-170. - Application; notification of denial. 
    Application for a permit to conduct a massage establishment shall be submitted to the chief of police 
60 days in advance of the opening for operation of the establishment. The application shall be filed in 
triplicate and shall be dated by the chief of police. A copy of the application shall be distributed promptly 
by the chief of police to the town clerk and to the applicant. Any permit issued under these regulations 
shall be valid until the next renewal date unless suspended or revoked. Upon denial of an application of 
an original permit the chief of police shall notify the applicant in writing of such denial by mailing a notice 
to him/her at the address shown on his/her application. 
(Ord. No. 238, § X, 2-3-98) 


Sec. 10-171. - Issuance of permit. 
    The chief of police shall issue a permit to operate a massage establishment within 30 days of the 
receipt of the application upon a favorable recommendation from the police department and upon finding: 
(1) ?All requirements concerning operation and facilities described in this article will be complied 
with as of the effective date of the permit; 
(2) ?Compliance with all other statutes, codes or ordinances including health, zoning, building, fire 
and safety requirements of the Town of Groton and the State of Connecticut as of the effective 
date of the permit; 
(3) ?That the nature of the massage administered will not endanger the health or safety of patrons 
of the massage establishment; 
(4) ?That the applicant or any person directly engaged in the operation or management of the 
massage establishment has not been convicted of any felony, an offense involving the 
unauthorized practice of the healing arts, sexual misconduct with minors, obscenity, keeping or 
residing in a house of ill fame, solicitation of a lewd or unlawful act, prostitution or pandering, 
and has not had a permit to operate a massage establishment suspended or revoked in this 
state or any other state; 
(5) ?That the applicant has furnished authorization to the chief of police to seek information and 
conduct an investigation into the truth of the statements set forth in the application and the 
qualifications of the applicant for the permit. 
(Ord. No. 238, § XI, 2-3-98) 


Sec. 10-172. - Renewal of permits. 
(a) ?A permit to operate a massage establishment shall be valid unless revoked or suspended for one 
year from the date of issuance; 
(b) ?Application for renewal shall be made at least 60 days before expiration and shall be in the form and 
manner as required for the original permit; 
(c) ?Each application for renewal of a permit shall be accompanied by a fee in the amount as provided 
for the original permit; 
(d) ?The chief of police shall renew each permit no later than 30 days before expiration upon making 
findings as required for issuance of the original permit; 
(e) ?If renewal of the permit is denied, the chief of police shall notify the holder of the permit in writing not 
less than 30 days before expiration of the permit including the facts and specific section or sections 
of this article upon which this determination was made. 
(Ord. No. 238, § XII, 2-3-98) 


Sec. 10-173. - Revocation or suspension of permit. 
    Any permit for a massage establishment may be revoked or suspended by the town council on the 
chief of police's recommendation if the applicant is involved in any violations including, but not limited to, 
the following: 
(1) ?Is convicted of any offense involving moral turpitude, obscenity, sexual misconduct, keeping or 
residing in a house of ill fame, solicitation of a lewd or unlawful act, prostitution or pandering, the 
record of conviction being conclusive evidence thereof; 
(2) ?Uses or permits to be used on the premises any narcotic or any controlled drug as defined in 
C.G.S. § 21a-242, to an extent or in a manner that such use is illegal or impairs his/her ability to 
direct the establishment and endangers the client or customer; 
(3) ?Fails to maintain standards prescribed by the state department of health, the Ledge Light 
Health District and the Groton Chief of Police; 
(4) ?Furnishes or makes any misleading or false statement or report in relation to this article; 
(5) ?Refuses to submit to the chief of police any reports or refuses to make available to the chief of 
police any records required by the chief of police in investigating the establishment for purposes 
associated with this article; 
(6) ?Fails or refuses to submit to an investigation or inspection by persons authorized by the Town 
of Groton to conduct fire, building, health or law enforcement related inspections; 
(7) ?Fails to provide or maintain equipment and keep in a safe and sanitary condition the premises 
established for and used by clients and customers pursuant to minimum standards prescribed 
by the Connecticut Department of Health and/or the Ledge Light Health District; 
(8) ?Employs any masseurs or masseuses who do not have the permit required by section 10-174; 
(9) ?Willfully or deliberately violates any of the provisions of this article, or the rules and regulations 
established by the chief of police or the health director pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 238, § XIII, 2-3-98) 


Sec. 10-174. - Masseur or masseuse permit required. 
    No person, including an applicant for a massage establishment permit, shall engage in the practice 
of massage without first having obtained a masseur or masseuse permit from the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 238, § XIV, 2-3-98) 


Sec. 10-175. - Filing of application fee. 
    Each applicant for a masseur or masseuse permit shall file an application with the chief of police and 
pay a filing fee of $25.00, which shall not be refundable. 
(Ord. No. 238, § XV, 2-3-98) 


Sec. 10-176. - Contents of application; information needed. 
    The application for a masseur or masseuse permit shall be in writing, signed, sworn to by the 
applicant, and shall contain the following: 
(1) ?The name and address of the applicant; 
(2) ?Social security number; 
(3) ?Applicant's height, weight, color of hair and eyes, and a full set of applicant's fingerprints 
(fingerprints to be taken by the chief of police or his/her designee); 
(4) ?Written evidence that the applicant is at least 18 years of age; 
(5) ?Business, occupation, or employment history of the applicant for three years immediately 
preceding the date of application; 
(6) ?Whether such person has ever been convicted of any crime within the last ten years except 
minor traffic violations; 
(7) ?Two portrait photographs of the applicant at least two inches by two inches; 
(8) ?A physician's certificate issued by a physician licensed to practice in the State of Connecticut, 
showing that the applicant has been examined and found to be free of contagious or 
communicable disease and showing that the examination was conducted within 30 days prior to 
the submission of the application. Such physical examination shall in addition to any normal 
procedures, consist of a serological examination and a chest x-ray; 
(9) ?Such other information as may be necessary in order for the chief of police to make any 
determination required by this article. 
(Ord. No. 238, § XVI, 2-3-98) 


Sec. 10-177. - Issuance of permit. 
    The chief of police shall issue a masseur or masseuse permit within 30 days after such application 
has been filed upon finding: 
(1) ?That the applicant has complied with the requirements of section 10-176 of this article; 
(2) ?That the applicant has not been convicted of a felony, an offense involving the unauthorized 
practice of the healing arts, sexual misconduct with minors, obscenity, keeping or residing in a 
house of ill-fame, solicitation of a lewd or unlawful act, prostitution or pandering; 
(3) ?The applicant has not had a permit suspended or revoked in this state or any other state; 
(4) ?The applicant has furnished authorization to the chief of police to seek information and conduct 
an investigation into the truth of the statements set forth in the application and the qualifications 
of the applicant for the permit. 
(Ord. No. 238, § XVII, 2-3-98) 


Sec. 10-178. - Notification upon refusal to issue. 
    The chief of police shall notify the applicant in writing of his/her decision to refuse to issue the permit 
and his/her reason(s) therefore. 
(Ord. No. 238, § XVIII, 2-3-98) 


Sec. 10-179. - Renewal of permits. 
(a) ?A masseur or masseuse permit shall be valid for one year from the date of issuance unless 
suspended or revoked; 
(b) ?Application for renewal shall be made at least 60 days before expiration and shall be in the form and 
manner for the original permit; 
(c) ?Each application for a renewal shall be accompanied by a fee in the amount as provided for in the 
original permit and shall be non-refundable; 
(d) ?The chief of police shall renew each permit no later than 30 days before expiration upon making 
findings as are required for issuance of the original permit; 
(e) ?If renewal of the permit is denied, the chief of police shall notify the holder of the permit in writing not 
less than 30 days before expiration of the permit including the facts and specific section or sections 
of this article upon which his/her determination was made. 
(Ord. No. 238, § XIX, 2-3-98) 


Sec. 10-180. - Revocation or suspension of masseur/masseuse permit. 
    Any masseur or masseuse permit may be revoked or suspended by the town council upon the 
recommendation of the chief of police if the permit holder is involved in any violations including, but not 
limited to, any of the following: 
(1) ?Is convicted of any offense involving moral turpitude, obscenity, sexual misconduct, keeping or 
residing in a house of ill-fame, solicitation or a lewd or unlawful act, prostitution or pandering—
the record of conviction being conclusive evidence thereof; 
(2) ?Uses any narcotic or any controlled drug as defined in C.G.S. §§ 21a-240 and 21a-242, or any 
alcoholic beverage to an extent or in a manner that such use is illegal or impairs the permit 
holder's ability to properly perform his/her duties or endangers the customer or client; 
(3) ?Furnishes or makes any misleading or false statement or report in relation to this article; 
(4) ?Refuses to submit to the chief of police any reports or refuses to make available to the chief of 
police any records required by the chief in investigating the permit holder for purpose of this 
article; 
(5) ?Willfully or deliberately violates any of the provisions of this article or the rules and regulations 
established by the chief of police or the health director pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 238, § XX, 2-3-98) 


Sec. 10-181. - Notification of revocation or suspension; hearing. 
(a) ?The town council shall not revoke or suspend any permit issued under this article without notifying 
the holder of the permit, in writing of the facts and of the specific section or sections of this article 
upon which his/her determination was made and of the holder's right to request a hearing before the 
town council and to present evidence or argument on all facts or issues involved. 
(b) ?A request for a hearing under this section shall stay any revocation or suspension until such time as 
a hearing has been held and a decision rendered thereon; provided however that if the town council 
finds that the public health, safety or welfare imperatively requires emergency action and 
incorporates a finding to that effect in his/her notice, the permit may be summarily suspended, 
pending a hearing thereon, which hearing shall be promptly instituted and all facts and issues 
promptly determined. 
(Ord. No. 238, § XXI, 2-3-98) 


Sec. 10-182. - Hearing on denial of permit or renewal. 
(a) ?Any person aggrieved by the denial of a permit to operate a massage establishment or a masseur 
or masseuse permit or by the denial of renewal of such permit may request, in writing, a hearing 
before the town council, at which hearing such person shall be afforded the opportunity to present 
evidence and argument on all facts or issues involved. 
(b) ?The town council shall, upon receiving a request for a hearing under this section, schedule a 
hearing not later than 15 days from the date of actual receipt of the request and shall notify all parties 
of the time and place thereof. 
(c) ?The town council shall render a decision within ten days of the date of a hearing held under 
subsection (b) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 238, § XXII, 2-3-98) 


Sec. 10-183. - Transfer of permit. 
    No permit shall be transferable except with the written consent of the chief of police provided, 
however, that upon the death or incapacity of the permittee the massage establishment may continue in 
business for a reasonable period of time to allow for an orderly transfer of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 238, § XXIII, 2-3-98) 


Sec. 10-184. - Violation and penalty. 
    Every person, except those persons who are specifically exempt by this article, whether acting as 
individuals, owner, employee of the owner, operator or employee of the operator, or acting as a 
participant or worker in any way, who gives a massage or conducts a massage establishment without first 
obtaining a permit and paying a permit fee to the Town of Groton or shall violate any of the provisions of 
this article or of the rules and regulations established by the chief of police or the director of health 
pursuant to this article shall be subject to a fine not to exceed 250.00. Each violation of this chapter shall 
be considered a separate offense, and any violation continuing more than one day of time shall be 
considered a separate offense for each day of violation. Nothing contained in this section shall be 
deemed to limit any remedy the town may have for the enforcement of this article. 
(Ord. No. 238, § XXIV, 2-3-98; Ord. No. 287, § 5, 4-3-18) 


Chapter 11 - MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Authorization of town to regulate and prohibit the operation of vehicles on town 
streets and highways, § 1.4(21). 
Cross reference— Fire zones, § 7-26 et seq.; maintenance of vehicles which transport refuse, § 13-67; 
licensing, registration of refuse vehicles, § 13-81 et seq.; streets and sidewalks, ch. 14. 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate traffic generally, C.G.S. § 7-148(c)(7)(B)(i); authority to 
regulate speed of vehicles, C.G.S. § 7-148(c)(7)(B)(ii); authority restricted, C.G.S. § 14-162. 


ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 


Sec. 11-1. - Definition. 
    The term "motor vehicle" as used in this chapter shall be as defined in the general statutes. 
(Code 1969, § 8-19; Ord. No. 109, § 5, 4-2-73) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 


Secs. 11-2—11-5. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE II. - OFF-HIGHWAY VEHICLE OPERATION 


Sec. 11-6. - Prohibited acts. 
    No person operating any motor vehicle, in any park or upon any other land belonging to the town 
shall: 
(1) ?State motor vehicle laws apply. Fail to comply with all applicable provisions of the state motor 
vehicle traffic laws in regard to equipment and operation of vehicles, together with such 
regulations as are contained in this article and other ordinances. 
(2) ?Enforcement of traffic regulations. Fail to obey all traffic officers and park employees, and such 
persons being hereby authorized and instructed to direct traffic whenever and wherever needed 
in the parks and on the highways, streets or roads immediately adjacent thereto. 
(3) ?Obey traffic signs. Fail to observe carefully all traffic signs indicating speed, direction, caution, 
stopping or parking, and all other signs posted for proper control and to safeguard life and 
property. 
(4) ?Speed of vehicles. Ride or drive a vehicle at a rate of speed exceeding 15 miles an hour, 
except upon such roads as the director of recreation may designate by posted signs for faster 
travel. 
(5) ?Operation confined to roads. Drive any vehicle, except one belonging to the town, on any area 
except the paved park roads or parking areas, or such other areas as may on occasion be 
specifically designated as temporary parking areas by the director of recreation. 
(6) ?Registered vehicles only. Operate any unregistered vehicle, except one belonging to the town. 
(7) ?Licensed operators only. Operate without a valid and proper motor vehicle operator's license. 
(Code 1969, § 8-16; Ord. No. 109, § 1, 4-2-73) 


Sec. 11-7. - Requirements of off-highway travel. 
    Any person operating a motor vehicle on private property shall: 
(1) ?Permission of owner. Have the permission of the owner or occupant of the land to so operate. 
(2) ?Exceptions. Remain within driveways, private roadways, parking areas and/or other areas 
designated by the owner or occupant thereof, which shall be deemed to be operation with the 
requisite permission. 
(Code 1969, § 8-17; Ord. No. 109, § 2, 4-2-73) 


Sec. 11-8. - Violation by minor. 
    No parent or other adult having charge of a minor under the age of 16 shall knowingly allow such 
minor to violate any section of this article. 
(Code 1969, § 8-18; Ord. No. 109, § 3, 4-2-73) 


Sec. 11-9. - Exemption. 
    This article shall in no way be construed to limit the operation of any emergency vehicle on or over 
any town-owned lands, such vehicles being expressly exempted from the provisions of this article. The 
term "emergency vehicle" shall be deemed to include all fire apparatus and official fire cars, police cars 
and trucks, ambulances and water safety and rescue vehicles. 
(Code 1969, § 8-20; Ord. No. 109, § 7, 4-2-73) 


Sec. 11-10. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    Violation of any provision of this article shall be punishable in accordance with section 1-7. 
(Code 1969, § 8-21; Ord. No. 109, § 4, 4-2-73) 


Secs. 11-11—11-55. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE III. - PARKING, STOPPING AND STANDING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Fire zones, § 7-26 et seq. 


Sec. 11-56. - Ticketing of violators; penalties. 
    Whenever any police officer finds any vehicle(s) in violation of any parking regulation or restriction, 
he shall attach to such vehicle(s) a notice to the owner or operator that such vehicle has been parked in 
violation of law. Said notice shall indicate the nature of the violation and the amount of the fine and shall 
instruct such owner/operator how and by when payment of the fine may be made and the consequences 
for failing to pay the fine in full within the time provided by this section. 
(1) ?The amount of the fine shall be $20.00, if payment in full is received at police headquarters 
within 14 days of the date on which such notice was attached to the owner/operator's vehicle. 
The fine shall be $40.00 if payment in full is received at police headquarters after the 14th but 
no later than the 30th day after the notice was placed on the vehicle. Payment may be made 
either in person at the police headquarters or by mail addressed to police headquarters and 
postmarked before the end of the 14 or the end of the 30-day period, as the case may be. The 
police chief may designate other acceptable means of payment from time to time, provided he 
gives prior written notice thereof to the town council. 
(2) ?If such owner/operator does not pay the full amount of the fine before the end of the 30th day 
after the notice was placed on the vehicle, the police department shall cause such 
owner/operator to be prosecuted for such violation in the court having jurisdiction of such 
violations. 
(Ord. No. 39, § 1, 8-26-63; Code 1969, § 8-1; Ord. No. 187, 11-18-86; Ord. No. 287, § 6, 4-3-
18) 


Sec. 11-57. - Removal of vehicle parked in violation of parking regulation; reclaiming of vehicle by owner. 
    Any vehicle found parked in violation of any provision of any parking regulation may, if public 
convenience and necessity so requires, be removed or conveyed by or under the direction of a member 
of the police department by towing the same or by other means to a public garage in the town and such 
removal shall be at the risk of the owner. Before the owner or person in charge of such vehicle shall be 
permitted to remove such vehicle from the custody of the police department, he shall furnish evidence of 
his identity and ownership or right to possession and shall pay to the police department the towing and 
storage charges reasonably incurred in such removal. 
(Ord. No. 39, § 2, 8-26-63; Code 1969, § 8-2) 


Sec. 11-58. - Disposition of money collected under article. 
    All money collected by the police department under this article shall be paid to the director of finance 
under such rules and regulations as he may prescribe, subject to the approval of the town manager and 
shall be deposited by him in the town's general funds. 
(Ord. No. 39, § 3, 8-26-63; Code 1969, § 8-3) 


Sec. 11-59. - Snow removal. 
(a) ?Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the 
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different 
meaning: 
(1) ?Park or parking shall mean the standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, upon a street 
other than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in receiving or discharging 
passengers or wholesale merchandise, or when stopped for any traffic regulations, traffic signs 
or signals. 
(2) ?Street shall mean any public street, public road or public highway in the town. 
(3) ?Vehicle shall mean any device used for conveyance, drawing or other transportation of any 
person or property whether on wheels or runners or otherwise, when on a public street. 
(b) ?Parking prohibited when it will interfere with snow removal; exception. Parking shall be prohibited 
upon the streets of the town at all times when such parking shall interfere with snow plowing or snow 
removal work. Vehicles may park on such streets provided there is a licensed driver behind the 
steering wheel, and provided such vehicle shall be moved from the streets upon the approach of 
machinery or of workmen engaged in the plowing or removal of snow from the streets. 
(Ord. No. 40, §§ 1, 2, 8-26-63; Code 1969, §§ 8-4, 8-5) 


Secs. 11-60—11-80. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE IV. - BUSES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Licenses and miscellaneous business regulations, ch. 10. 


Sec. 11-81. - Bus motor vehicles in livery service. 
(a) ?Legislative finding. The operation of motor vehicles of the bus type in livery service for the purpose 
of conducting commercial tours on any of the enumerated public streets or highways, which streets 
or highways are narrow, without adequate sidewalks, and frequently congested, endangers the 
safety of pedestrians and other travelers on such streets or highways, especially children and the 
elderly, and constitutes a noisome, unreasonable and unnecessary invasion of the property and 
privacy rights of residents and property owners. 
(b) ?Definitions. The term "motor vehicle of the bus type in livery service" means and includes every 
motor vehicle with a seating capacity of ten or more passengers which is used for the transportation 
of passengers for hire with the exceptions noted in C.G.S. § 13b-101. 
(c) ?Acts prohibited. No person shall operate a motor vehicle of the bus type in livery service on any of 
the following public streets or highways: 
Academy Lane 
Bank Street 
Burrows Street 
Clift Street 
Eldridge Street 
Elm Street (Mystic) 
Fort Rachel Place 
Front Street 
Gravel Street 
Grove Avenue 
High Street (Noank) 
High Street, Mystic from Noank Road (Route #215) north to Cow Hill Road/Allyn Street connector 
Library Street 
Military Highway between Grove Avenue and Crystal Lake Road 
Palmer Court (Noank) 
Park Place 
Pearl Street (Mystic) 
Pearl Street (Noank) 
Riverview Avenue (Noank) 
Starr Street 
Ward Avenue 
West Mystic Avenue 
(d) ?Penalty. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be fined not more than $250.00 for 
each offense. 
(Code 1969, § 8-31; Ord. No. 159, §§ 1—4, 5-4-82; Ord. No. 162, § 1, 11-2-82; Ord. No. 166, § 
2, 8-16-83; Ord. No. 222, § 1, 10-5-93; Ord. No. 287, § 7, 4-3-18) 


Sec. 11-82. - Public liability insurance requirements for school bus operators. 
(a) ?The purpose of this section is to set minimum public liability insurance requirements for school bus 
operators doing business for or in the town. A school bus operator is any person in the business of 
supplying transportation by school bus, whether gratuitously or for monetary payment, of pupils to 
and from school or school activities. 
(b) ?All school bus operators doing business for or in the town shall maintain a motor vehicle liability 
policy reflecting liability insurance coverage with a combined single limit of not less than 
$10,000,000.00 for each occurrence involving either bodily injury or property damage. 
(c) ?A certificate of insurance complying with the requirements of this section shall be filed with the town 
clerk on or before July 1 of each year. The certificate must be issued by an insurance company 
licensed to do business in the state. The certificate of insurance shall indicate that the town shall 
receive 30 days' notice prior to any material change or cancellation of the insurance coverage. 
(d) ?Notwithstanding the provisions hereof, the town shall not be liable in any matter or to any person 
whatsoever for the failure of any school bus operator to be in compliance herewith. 
(Code 1969, § 8-32; Ord. No. 178, §§ 1—4, 9-3-85) 


Chapter 12 - PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS[1] 
? 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 241, §§ 1—5, adopted June 15, 1999 repealed in their entirety the provisions of 
§§ 12-1—12-7 which derived from the Ord. of March 5, 1962, §§ 1—7, and the Code of 1969, §§ 12-1—
12-7 and pertained to similar provisions as the current § 12-1 set out herein. 
Charter reference— Authority to assess benefits and damages for public improvements, § 1.4(52). 
Cross reference— Housing, ch. 9; streets and sidewalks, ch. 13.5. 
State Law reference— Assessment of benefits, C.G.S. §§ 7-138—7-145. 


Sec. 12-1. - Generally. 
(a) ?Recovery of costs. Whenever the town council authorizes the construction, reconstruction or 
improvement of a public street or sidewalk, it may recover the costs thereof in whole or in part by 
assessing benefits against the owners of those properties which are specially benefitted by the 
project. 
(b) ?Public hearing. Upon completion of the project, the director of public works shall submit to the town 
council the amount of each benefit assessment the director believes should be charged to each 
benefitted property owner. The town council shall hold a public hearing on such proposed 
assessment at which time owners of properties to be assessed or their agents or representatives 
may be heard. Notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be mailed to such owners at least 
15 days prior to the hearing. Such notice shall include the amounts of the proposed assessments 
and may include a provision for the payment of the assessments in installments over a period of time 
and at a rate of interest which the town council believes is fair and equitable. 
(c) ?Assessed revisions and appeals. Following the public hearing the town council may, without further 
notice or hearing, modify the proposed assessments and levy such benefit assessments as it may 
deem advisable. Notice of the final assessment shall be mailed to each property owner. Any owner 
of assessed property may, within 30 days of such mailing, appeal the amount of such assessment to 
the superior court for the Judicial District of New London. Such appeals shall be taken and heard in 
the same manner as provided by the Connecticut General Statutes for the appeal of sewer benefit 
assessments and the judgment of such court shall be final. 
(d) ?Notification. All notices shall be mailed to the actual owner of the property to be assessed or to the 
owner as shown on the last completed grand list. 
(e) ?Payment. Any assessment of benefits or any installment thereof not paid within 30 days after the 
due date shall be delinquent and shall be subject to interest from such due date at the interest rate 
and in the manner provided by the general statutes for the collection of delinquent property taxes. 
Any unpaid assessment and any interest due thereon shall constitute a lien upon the real estate 
against which the assessment was levied from the date of such levy. Each such lien shall take 
precedence over all other liens and encumbrances, except taxes, and may be continued, recorded, 
released, enforced and collected by the tax collector in the same manner as property tax liens. 
(Ord. No. 241, §§ 1—5, 6-15-99) 
Editor's note— See the editor's note on the title page of this chapter. 


Chapter 13 - SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 239, §§ 1—5, adopted August 18, 1998, repealed in their entirety the provisions 
of former Ch. 13, Solid Waste Management, which encompassed §§ 13-1—13-5, 13-36—13-42, 13-66, 
13-67, 13-81—13-90, 13-101—13-103, 13-116—13-118, 13-131—13-137, 13-161—13-166, which 
pertained to similar issues, and replaced those provisions with the current Ch. 13 (§§ 13-1—13-5), as set 
out herein. For a detailed history of the provisions of former Ch. 13 (§§ 13-1—13-5, 13-36—13-42, 13-66, 
13-67, 13-81—13-90, 13-101—13-103, 13-116—13-118, 13-131—13-137, 13-161—13-166), please refer 
to the Code Comparative Table. 
Charter reference— Authority to regulate the collection and disposal of garbage, trash and waste, § 
1.4(14). 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 5; junk dealers, § 10-31 et seq.; throwing or 
placing waste materials on highways, § 14-1; cleanup of excavations, § 14-62. 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate garbage, trash, rubbish or waste material collection and 
disposal, C.G.S. § 7-148(c)(4)(H); solid waste management, C.G.S. § 22a-207 et seq.; municipal solid 
waste management plan, C.G.S. § 22a-227. 


Sec. 13-1. - Preamble. 
    It is hereby found and declared that the collection, storage, transportation, delivery, processing and 
disposal of solid waste impacts upon the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the Town of Groton 
and that in exercising supervision and control over the administration of solid waste, the town is 
exercising essential and proper government functions. 
(Ord. No. 239, § 1, 8-18-98) 


Sec. 13-2. - Definitions. 
    Commercial unit means all premises, locations, structures or dwellings, public or private, requiring 
solid waste collection within the limits of the geographical area, and utilizing compactor(s) or dumpsters 
for collection of solid waste, but not including premises or locations owned by the state or federal 
government unless the state or federal government requests that services be provided to such premises 
or locations. 
    Geographical area means the area within the Town of Groton excluding therefrom geographical 
areas of the Groton Long Point Association and the City of Groton. 
    Residential unit means any dwelling, location, structure or premises within the limits of the 
geographical area, requiring solid waste collection which does not utilize a compactor or dumpster for 
collection of solid waste, but not including premises or locations owned by the state or federal 
government unless the state or federal government requests that services be provided to such premises 
or locations. 
    Solid waste means all material included within the definition of "solid waste" in C.G.S. § 22a-207(3), 
excluding items which are hazardous waste as defined in C.G.S. § 22a-115(1), biomedical waste as 
defined in C.G.S. § 22a-115(19), radiological materials regulated under C.G.S. Ch. 446a, septage or 
sludges or other residue from a water pollution abatement facility, water supply treatment plant or air 
pollution control facility. 
(Ord. No. 239, § 2, 8-18-98) 


Sec. 13-3. - Creation of a resource recovery authority. 
    Pursuant to C.G.S. §§ 7-273aa—7-273oo, inclusive, there is hereby created a municipal resource 
recovery authority, to be known as the "Town of Groton Resource Recovery Authority", 45 Fort Hill Road, 
Groton, CT 06340. Pursuant to C.G.S. § 7-273aa(b), the town council of the Town of Groton is hereby 
designated to be the resource recovery authority and in such capacity it shall have all those rights, 
powers, and duties set forth in the Connecticut General Statutes relating to municipal recovery 
authorities. 
    The town council, acting in its capacity as the Town of Groton Resource Recovery Authority, shall 
have the power to adopt resolutions, rules and regulations and to set rents, fees, or charges as may be 
necessary to effectuate the purposes of this chapter. Copies of any such resolutions, rules and 
regulations, and the amount of any such rents, fees or charges shall be made available upon request at 
the town hall, which shall constitute the principal office of the authority. 
    The town manager shall be the chief executive officer for the authority and shall have the 
administrative responsibilities on behalf of the Town of Groton Resource Recovery Authority, set forth in 
Section 7.2 of the Charter of the Town of Groton. 
    The town council shall also have the power to designate, within the geographical area one or several 
residential and/or commercial improvement districts, and to enter into contracts, or grant franchises, for 
the provision of solid waste collection, transport and/or disposal services within those districts. 
(Ord. No. 239, § 3, 8-18-98; Ord. No. 282, § 1, 6-26-15) 


Sec. 13-4. - Collection and disposal by the town. 
    Effective January 1, 1999, the removal, transport and/or disposal of solid waste from commercial 
units and from residential units within the geographical area shall be regulated, managed, supervised 
and/or performed by the Town of Groton Resource Recovery Authority or its agent(s) in conformance with 
such rules and regulations as the authority has or shall from time to time adopt. Effective on a date to be 
established by the authority, the removal, transport and/or disposal of solid waste from commercial units 
and from residential units within the geographical area shall be managed, supervised and/or performed 
by the Town of Groton Resource Recovery Authority or its agent(s) in conformance with such rules and 
regulations as the authority has or shall from time to time adopt, and from the date determined by the 
authority for commercial and residential units as aforesaid, all other persons are hereby prohibited from 
removing, transporting and/or disposing of solid waste generated within the geographical area by the 
commercial or residential units, respectively. The authority may, however, provide by regulation an 
exception for generators of solid waste to self-transport and self-dispose of such waste. 
(Ord. No. 239, § 4, 8-18-98; Ord. No. 282, § 2, 6-26-15) 


Sec. 13-5. - Regulations. 
    The authority shall have the power to issue regulations with respect to the exercise of its powers 
hereunder. No such regulations shall take effect until after a public hearing in relation thereto in which 
parties in interest and citizens shall have an opportunity to be heard. Notice of the time and place of such 
hearing shall be published in the form of a legal advertisement in a newspaper having general circulation 
within the Town of Groton at least ten days prior to such hearing. A copy of the proposed regulation shall 
be placed on file with the town clerk at least ten days prior to the hearing thereof. 
(Ord. No. 239, § 5, 8-18-98) 


Chapter 13.5 - STREETS AND SIDEWALKS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Authority to keep open and safe for public use and travel the streets and sidewalks 
of the town, § 1.4(15). 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 5; housing, ch. 9; public improvements, ch. 12. 
State Law reference— Power of town to control the excavation of the highways and streets, C.G.S. § 7-
148(c)(6)(C)(iii); to lay out, construct, etc., streets, sidewalks, etc., C.G.S. § 7-148(c)(6)(C)(i); to provide 
for lighting the streets, etc., C.G.S. § 7-148(c)(4)(F); to provide for the planting, etc., of shade and 
ornamental trees on the streets and public grounds, C.G.S. § 7-148(c)(6)(A)(v); to keep open, etc., the 
streets, sidewalks, etc., C.G.S. § 7-148(c)(6)(C)(ii); to require owners or occupants of land adjacent to any 
sidewalk to remove snow, etc., C.G.S. § 7-148(c)(6)(C)(v); to regulate and prohibit the excavation, etc., of 
sidewalks, etc., C.G.S. § 7-148(c)(6)(C)(iv); to prohibit and regulate the discharge of drains from roofs of 
buildings over or upon the sidewalks, streets, etc., C.G.S. § 7-148(c)(6)(B)(iv); to keep the streets, 
sidewalks and public places free from undue noises and nuisances, etc., C.G.S. § 7-148(c)(7)(F)(i); 
highways and bridges, C.G.S. § 13a-1 et seq. 


ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 


Sec. 13.5-1. - Removal of snow and ice from sidewalks—Generally. 
(a) ?Every person in charge or control of any building or lot of land within the jurisdiction of the town 
fronting or abutting on a paved sidewalk, whether as owner, tenant, occupant, lessee or otherwise, 
shall remove and clear away, or cause to be removed and cleared away, snow and ice from so much 
of such sidewalk as is in front of or abuts on such building or lot of land. 
(b) ?Except as provided in subsection (d) of this section, snow and ice shall be removed from sidewalks 
serving all businesses within the jurisdiction of the town by three business hours after the cessation 
of any fall of snow, sleet or freezing rain or by the beginning of business hours of the next business 
day following such fall, whichever period is shorter. 
(c) ?Except as provided in subsection (d) of this section, snow and ice shall be removed from all other 
sidewalks within the jurisdiction of the town on the same day of the cessation of any fall of snow, 
sleet or freezing rain or within the first six hours of daylight after the cessation of any such fall, 
whichever period is longer. 
(d) ?However, if snow and ice on a sidewalk has become so hard that it cannot be removed without 
likelihood of damage to the sidewalk, the person charged with its removal shall, within the time 
mentioned in subsections (b) and (c) of this section, cause enough sand or other abrasive to be put 
on the sidewalk to make travel thereon reasonably safe; and shall then, as soon thereafter as 
weather permits, cause such sidewalk to be thoroughly cleaned. 
(e) ?Every person in charge or control of any building or lot of land within the jurisdiction of the town 
fronting or abutting on a paved sidewalk, whether as owner, tenant, occupant, lessee or otherwise 
who fails to comply with the requirements of this section shall upon conviction be fined in accordance 
with section 1-7. 
(Code 1969, § 13-1.1; Ord. No. 137, §§ 1—5, 5-15-78) 


Sec. 13.5-2. - Same—Owner's liability. 
(a) ?The owner or person in possession and control of land abutting a public sidewalk shall have the 
same duty of care with respect to the presence of ice or snow on such sidewalk toward the portion of 
the sidewalk abutting his property as the town had prior to May 1, 1984, and shall be liable to 
persons injured in person or property where a breach of such duty is the proximate cause of such 
injury. 
(b) ?No action to recover damages for injury to the person or to property caused by the presence of ice 
or snow on a public sidewalk against a person who owns or is in possession and control of land 
abutting a public sidewalk shall be brought but within two years from the date when the injury is first 
sustained. 
(Code 1969, § 13-1.2; Ord. No. 169, § 3, 5-1-84) 


Sec. 13.5-3. - Same—Town's liability. 
    Notwithstanding the provisions of C.G.S. § 13a-149 or any other general statute or special act, the 
town shall not be liable to any person injured in person or property caused by the presence of ice or snow 
on a public sidewalk unless the town is the owner or person in possession and control of land abutting 
such sidewalk, other than land used as a highway or street, provided the town shall be liable for its 
affirmative acts with respect to such sidewalk. 
(Code 1969, § 13-1.3; Ord. No. 169, § 2, 5-1-84) 
Charter reference— Requiring adjacent landowners to remove snow, etc., from sidewalks, § 
1.4(16). 
State Law reference— Authority to require owner or occupant of land adjacent to sidewalks to 
remove snow and ice, C.G.S. § 7-148(c)(6)(C)(v). 


Secs. 13.5-4—13.5-20. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE II. - CONSTRUCTION, ALTERATION, ETC., OF DRIVEWAYS 


Sec. 13.5-21. - Applicability of article. 
    The provisions of this article shall apply to all parts of the town except the City of Groton. 
(Ord. of 3-6-61, § 11; Code 1969, § 13-11) 


Sec. 13.5-22. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed 
to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Driveway shall mean that part of any approach for motor vehicles to private property that lies 
between the property line and the improved portion of the town street or road. 
    Paving shall mean any kind of hard surfacing including, but not limited to, concrete, bituminous 
concrete, brick, stabilized gravel or crushed stone or combinations of such materials, with the necessary 
base. Paving shall include oiled gravel surfaces if constructed to town standards. 
(Ord. of 3-6-61, § 1; Code 1969, § 13-2) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 


Sec. 13.5-23. - Permit—Required; exception; application; amendment of application or permit; issuance; 
term. 
    Before any person shall lay out, change the grade, construct, pave, reconstruct or alter a driveway, 
or alter drainage facilities related to a driveway, he shall obtain a permit from the department of public 
works, but nothing in the foregoing shall be construed to require a permit for normal driveway 
maintenance work. A written application for the permit shall be filed with the director of public works. The 
application shall include a description of the property, the name of the property owner, the name and 
address of the person who will do the work and the proposed plan for the work, which shall include the 
depth, width and type of surfacing material to be used. No other plan shall be followed except by written 
permission of the director of public works, who may allow amendments to the application or permit which 
do not conflict with this article. The director of public works shall issue the permit if the proposed plan 
meets all of the requirements of this article and if the fee required under this article has been paid, and 
the construction or repair as planned will not create any substantial hazard in the use of the street or 
sidewalk for public travel or drainage, or create any defect. Each permit shall expire six months from the 
date of issuance. 
(Ord. of 3-6-61, § 2; Code 1969, § 13-3) 


Sec. 13.5-24. - Same—Revocation; stopping of work. 
    The director of public works may at any time revoke the driveway construction permit for any 
violation of this article and may require that the work be stopped. 
(Ord. of 3-6-61, § 6; Code 1969, § 13-4) 


Sec. 13.5-25. - Construction standards. 
(a) ?All driveways shall be paved to depth of not less than one inch if bituminous concrete, and six 
inches if concrete, and shall be at least ten feet in width. The driveway may be placed directly on 
compact and well drained soil. Where soil is not well drained, a 12-inch subbase of clean, coarse 
gravel, sand or cinders shall be laid. The driveway, shall slope not more than one-quarter of an inch 
per foot toward the roadway; except, that on streets accepted by the town on or before April 4, 1961, 
the director of public works may approve slopes in excess of the one-quarter of an inch per foot, 
where the best interest of the town will not be adversely affected. The maximum driveway width at 
the curb line shall be 30 feet, except in a commercial or industrial zone where the maximum width at 
curbline shall be 55 feet and the maximum width at street line shall be 45 feet. 
(b) ?If due to deep ditches along the roadway or for any other reason, culvert pipes are required for 
driveways, they shall be furnished and installed at the expense of the permittee. 
(Ord. of 3-6-61, § 3; Ord. No. 51, 6-7-65; Code 1969, § 13-5) 


Sec. 13.5-26. - Grade of sidewalks; level of driveway; curb cuts. 
    The grade of any sidewalk shall not be altered by the work done. The driveway shall be at the same 
level as any existing sidewalk. If curb cuts are required, they shall be at the permittee's expense. 
(Ord. of 3-6-61, § 4; Code 1969, § 13-6) 


Sec. 13.5-27. - Excavations. 
(a) ?Excavations to do work under this article shall be dug so as to occasion the least possible 
inconvenience to the public and to provide for the passage of water along the gutter. All such 
excavations shall have proper barricades at all times and warning lights from one-half hour before 
sunset to one-half hour after sunrise. 
(b) ?In refilling the excavation the earth shall be laid in layers not to exceed six inches in depth and each 
layer tamped thoroughly. Any street, sidewalk or other public property that is affected by the work 
shall be restored to as good condition as it was previous to the excavation. The affected area shall 
be maintained in good repair to the satisfaction of the department of public works for six months after 
refilling. 
(Ord. of 3-6-61, § 5; Code 1969, § 13-7) 


Sec. 13.5-28. - Performance bonds. 
    The permittee under a permit to construct, alter, etc., driveways or his contractor shall furnish to the 
town a performance bond in an amount equal to the estimated cost of the work or $1,000.00, whichever is 
greater. The bond may be a cash bond, deposited with the director of finance or a performance bond with 
an acceptable bonding company as surety. All bonds so deposited will be held until six months after 
satisfactory completion of the work. In the case of a contractor, a continuing bond in the amount at least 
equal to the cost of all outstanding permits may be accepted in lieu of individual bonds for each permit. 
The form of all performance bonds shall be as approved by the town attorney. 
(Ord. of 3-6-61, § 7; Code 1969, § 13-8) 


Sec. 13.5-29. - Inspection and approval of work. 
    The work performed under the provisions of this article shall be inspected by the director of public 
works and he shall enter on the permit a statement of approval of the work when it shall be completed to 
his satisfaction. 
(Ord. of 3-6-61, § 8; Code 1969, § 13-9) 


Sec. 13.5-30. - Compliance with directives of director of public works. 
    The permittee under a permit to construct, alter, etc., a driveway shall comply with all directives of 
the director of public works made necessary by field conditions and if he fails to do so, the director of 
public works is authorized to revoke the permit. 
(Ord. of 3-6-61, § 9; Code 1969, § 13-10) 


Secs. 13.5-31—13.5-50. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE III. - EXCAVATIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— Authority to regulate and prohibit excavations, § 1.4(17). 


Sec. 13.5-51. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed 
to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Director shall mean the director of public works of the town or his authorized agent. 
    Paving shall mean any kind of hard surfacing, including but not limited to, concrete, bituminous 
concrete, brick, stabilized gravel or crushed stone or combinations of such materials. Paving shall include 
oiled gravel surface. 
    Public utility shall mean any private or municipally owned water, gas, telephone, telegraph, electric, 
sewer and railroad company or department thereof. 
    Street shall mean the entire right-of-way of a public street, highway, alley, way, road or easement 
under the jurisdiction of the town. 
(Ord. No. 73, § 1, 7-10-67; Code 1969, § 13-12) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 


Sec. 13.5-52. - Permit—Required; application; issuance generally; term; emergency work. 
(a) ?No pavement shall be opened or cut and no excavation made within the rights-of-way of streets by 
any person without first having obtained a permit for such work from the department of public works. 
The application for a permit shall include a description of the work to be performed, the name of the 
street, the type of pavement to be broken, an estimate of the time required to complete the work, the 
names of the applicant and the contractor who will perform the work and any other pertinent 
information that the director of public works may deem necessary. When all requirements of this 
article have been met, the director of public works shall issue a permit authorizing the work. Each 
permit, unless previously extended or revoked, shall expire six months from date of issue. 
(b) ?The provisions contained in subsection (a) of this section prohibiting the opening or cut of any 
pavement or the making of any excavation without first obtaining a permit for such work, shall not 
apply to emergency work performed by a public utility for the restoration of service due to the 
breakage or failure of water lines, sewers, electric lines or communication facilities, but the 
emergency openings shall be reported to the department of public works within 96 hours after the 
breakage of such pavement or making of such excavation, and at the time of such reporting a permit 
for the work shall be obtained. 
(Ord. No. 73, § 2, 7-10-67; Code 1969, § 13-13) 


Sec. 13.5-53. - Same—Issuance to public utilities and persons doing work for public utilities. 
(a) ?By August 8, 1967, and upon furnishing to the town the insurance required by section 13.5-54, 
public utility companies will be issued permits for work done by their own full time staff forces. Each 
such permit shall be in force until it is revoked by the director of public works for violations of the 
provisions of this article or any other relevant provisions of this Code or other ordinances or 
regulations. However, copies of all work orders for any and all excavations in town maintained 
streets shall be submitted to the office of the director of public works prior to commencement of such 
work except as noted in section 13.5-52. 
(b) ?Private contractors doing work for public utilities must obtain a permit on an individual job basis. 
(Ord. No. 73, § 2, 7-10-67; Code 1969, § 13-14) 


Sec. 13.5-54. - Insurance. 
    Before any permit is issued, the permittee or his contractor shall furnish the town with a certificate of 
insurance indicating that the permittee or contractor and the town jointly and severally are covered by 
public liability insurance written by a company acceptable to the town with limits of at least 
$300,000.00/$1,000,000.00 for bodily injury and $50,000.00 for property damage. Such insurance shall 
include protection against liability arising from completed operations for 12 months after completion of the 
work. 
(Ord. No. 73, § 3, 7-10-67; Code 1969, § 13-15) 


Sec. 13.5-55. - Bond. 
(a) ?The permittee or his contractor, except as noted in this section shall furnish to the town a 
performance bond in an amount equal to the estimated cost of restoring the streets or $1,000.00, 
whichever is greater. The bond may be a cash bond, deposited with the director of finance or a 
performance bond written by a surety company acceptable to the town. All bonds so deposited shall 
continue in force until 12 months after satisfactory completion of the work. 
(b) ?Public utility companies will be excluded from bonding when the work to be done is to be by their 
own full time staff forces. Private contractors doing work for public utilities shall be required to post 
bonds in accordance with the section. 
(Ord. No. 73, § 4, 7-10-67; Code 1969, § 13-16) 


Sec. 13.5-56. - Pavement cuts. 
    All pavement cuts shall be made in a workmanlike manner. Longitudinal cuts shall be made parallel 
to the centerline of the roadway. The ends of the cuts shall be made at right angles to the side lines of the 
cut. Cuts shall be made no larger than is necessary to perform the work efficiently and every reasonable 
effort must be made to prevent damage to adjoining pavement. 
(Ord. No. 73, § 5, 7-10-67; Code 1969, § 13-17) 


Sec. 13.5-57. - Safety requirements. 
    Excavations shall be carried on in a manner which will cause as little inconvenience to the public as 
possible. All excavations shall be properly sheeted, shored or braced as required by the department of 
public works to prevent cave-ins and to protect adjoining property and workmen. Excavations shall be 
properly barricaded at all times and warning lights displayed between one-half hour before sunset to one-
half hour after sunrise. If deemed necessary the director of public works may require continuous 
attendance at any open excavation. 
(Ord. No. 73, § 6, 7-10-67; Code 1969, § 13-18) 


Sec. 13.5-58. - Backfill. 
    All backfill shall be placed in six-inch layers and each layer properly compacted before adding the 
next layer. If the material excavated from the ditch is unsatisfactory material for backfill, the director of 
public works may require the backfill to be made with material approved by him. No stone larger than 
three inches shall be placed in the backfill material at a depth of less than two feet from the finished 
grade. 
(Ord. No. 73, § 7, 7-10-67; Code 1969, § 13-19) 


Sec. 13.5-59. - Base. 
    The base for the road shall be equal to the existing base but shall not be less than 12 inches of well 
graded bank run gravel with maximum aggregate size of three inches. Bituminous concrete binder course 
may be substituted for macadam base in equal depth. No surface shall be placed without first notifying 
the department of public works 24 hours in advance. 
(Ord. No. 73, § 8, 7-10-67; Code 1969, § 13-20) 


Sec. 13.5-60. - Restoration of pavement. 
(a) ?At the time the barricades are removed from around the work area, any pavement broken during the 
course of the work under the permit shall be restored by the permittee either by a temporary or 
permanent restoration. 
(b) ?A temporary restoration may be made with the approval of the director of public works by application 
of one inch of bituminous cold patch over a previously prepared compacted gravel base 12 inches 
thick. The cold patch surface shall be level and smooth. 
(c) ?A permanent restoration may be made by restoring the pavement and base at least to the 
conditions existing previous to the start of work, but in no case with less than two inches of 
bituminous concrete at a width of six inches beyond all sides of the excavation. 
(d) ?If the permittee elects to make a temporary pavement restoration at the time the barricades are 
removed, it shall be replaced prior to the expiration of the permit with a permanent restoration. 
(e) ?The permittee shall be responsible for the maintenance of all temporary restorations of pavement 
and for the maintenance of all permanent restorations of pavement for one year after completion of 
the work. 
(Ord. No. 73, § 9, 7-10-67; Code 1969, § 13-21) 


Sec. 13.5-61. - Openings other than in street pavements. 
    In disturbed areas other than street pavements, the surface shall be restored to a condition at least 
equal to that prior to excavation. Lawn areas shall have a minimum of four inches of loam and shall be 
seeded. 
(Ord. No. 73, § 10, 7-10-67; Code 1969, § 13-22) 


Sec. 13.5-62. - Clean-up. 
(a) ?The permittee shall keep his work area in a clean condition at all times and upon completion of the 
work shall promptly remove all equipment, tools, materials, excess earth or rubbish from the work 
area. 
(b) ?The permittee shall be responsible for seeing to it that all workmen on the job observe sanitary 
requirements. 
(Ord. No. 73, § 11, 7-10-67; Code 1969, § 13-23) 


Sec. 13.5-63. - Field conditions. 
    The permittee shall comply with all directives of the director of public works made necessary by field 
conditions and if he fails to do so, the director of public works is authorized to revoke the permit. 
(Ord. No. 73, § 12, 7-10-67; Code 1969, § 13-24) 


Sec. 13.5-64. - Maintaining passage for public. 
    It shall be the responsibility of the permittee to maintain safe passage for the public at all times 
unless the director of public works authorizes the permittee in writing to close the street or highway to 
public travel. The director of public works may, at his discretion, authorize the closing of a street by the 
permittee when he finds that field conditions make it unreasonably difficult for the permittee to carry out 
the work while maintaining safe passage for the public; provided that the safety and welfare of the public 
will not be jeopardized. Before authorizing any such closing, the director of public works shall consult with 
the chief of police, the appropriate fire chief and such other officials as he deems necessary to help him 
evaluate the effect of any such closing on the safety and welfare of the public. The director of public 
works may limit the hours the permittee may close the street and issue such other directives as he deems 
necessary in the interest of the public. The permittee shall provide uniformed traffic officers for traffic 
control at the excavation, if so directed by the director of public works or the chief of police. Safe and 
adequate ingress and egress to and from abutting property shall be provided for both vehicular and 
pedestrian traffic, except during working hours when construction operations make this impossible. Free 
access shall be provided at all times to fire hydrants. 
(Ord. No. 73, § 13, 7-10-67; Code 1969, § 13-25) 


Sec. 13.5-65. - Inspection. 
(a) ?All work undertaken under the terms of this article shall be subject to inspection at all reasonable 
times by the director of public works. 
(b) ?Upon completion of the project authorized by the permit, the director of public works shall make final 
inspection of the project, and upon approval and acceptance by him, the permittee shall be notified 
of this approval and acceptance, and such approval shall be entered on the permit. If on final 
inspection, the director of public works shall disapprove the project, the permittee shall be 
responsible for adjusting and correcting the project until it shall meet the director of public works' 
approval. 
(Ord. No. 73, § 14, 7-10-67; Code 1969, § 13-26) 


Sec. 13.5-66. - Compliance with article. 
    The permittee shall comply with and all work shall be done in accordance with all provisions of this 
article and all other relevant provisions of this Code or other relevant ordinances and regulations. If this is 
not done, the director of public works is authorized to revoke the permit. 
(Ord. No. 73, § 15, 7-10-67; Code 1969, § 13-27) 


Sec. 13.5-67. - Liability of town. 
    This article shall not be construed as imposing upon the town or any official or employee thereof any 
liability or responsibility for damages to any person injured by the performance of any excavation or 
restoration work for which an excavation permit is issued hereunder; nor shall the town or any official or 
employee thereof be deemed to have assumed any such liability or responsibility by reason of inspections 
authorized hereunder, the issuance of any permit or the approval of any excavation or restoration work. 
(Ord. No. 73, § 16, 7-10-67; Code 1969, § 13-28) 


Sec. 13.5-68. - Revocation of permit or imposition of fine as grounds for denial of future permit. 
    Revocation of the permit or imposition of a fine shall be considered as just cause for denial of future 
permits to such person. 
(Ord. No. 73, § 17, 7-10-67; Code 1969, § 13-29) 


Secs. 13.5-69—13.5-90. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE IV. - NAMING OR RENAMING STREETS 


Sec. 13.5-91. - Definition. 
    For the purposes of this article, the word "street" shall include all highways, ways, roads, courts, 
terraces, drives, alleys and all public rights-of-way maintained by the town or the state or to be 
constructed by either the town or the state. 
(Ord. No. 45, § 1, 3-16-64; Code 1969, § 13-30) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 


Sec. 13.5-92. - Authority of planning commission. 
    The planning commission of the town shall have the authority to name and rename streets in order to 
provide for the proper and orderly development of the town. 
(Ord. No. 45, § 2, 3-16-64; Code 1969, § 13-31) 


Sec. 13.5-93. - Action to be taken at regularly scheduled meeting of planning commission; naming to be 
scheduled on agenda. 
    The planning commission shall name all newly created streets or streets constructed in the town at a 
regularly scheduled meeting of the planning commission. The proposed street naming shall be scheduled 
on the agenda of a regular planning commission meeting. 
(Ord. No. 45, § 3, 3-16-64; Code 1969, § 13-32) 


Sec. 13.5-94. - Public hearing on renaming. 
    Before the planning commission shall rename any street in the town, it shall first hold a public 
hearing with reference to such renaming. A notice of the proposed street renaming shall be advertised in 
a newspaper having a circulation in the town and a notice of the proposed renaming shall be mailed to 
each owner, as disclosed by the last completed grand list of the town, of each parcel of land on the street 
being renamed at least seven days prior to such public hearing. At the public hearing interested citizens 
of the town shall be heard and written communications received and read. 
(Ord. No. 45, § 4, 3-16-64; Code 1969, § 13-33) 


Sec. 13.5-95. - Adoption or rejection of new name by planning commission. 
    Within 60 days after the hearing provided for in section 13.5-94 the planning commission shall either 
adopt or reject the new name proposed by it for such street at such hearing and it may adopt any other 
name for such street. 
(Ord. No. 45, § 5, 3-16-64; Code 1969, § 13-34) 


Sec. 13.5-96. - Veto of street name by representative town meeting. 
    The representative town meeting may, by a two-thirds vote of its total membership, veto any street 
name adopted by the planning commission under section 13.5-95, provided it does so within 30 days of 
the date of the adoption of any street name by the planning commission under such section. 
(Ord. No. 45, § 6, 3-16-64; Code 1969, § 13-35) 


Sec. 13.5-97. - Effective date of new name. 
    Any new street name established pursuant to the powers granted by this article shall become 
effective on a date established by the planning commission; provided, that it shall first have given notice 
by publication in a newspaper having a circulation in the town and by mail to each owner, as disclosed by 
the last completed grand list of the town, of each parcel of land on the street involved of the new street 
name and the effective date of the same. 
(Ord. No. 45, § 7, 3-16-64; Code 1969, § 13-36) 


Sec. 13.5-98. - Notification of name change. 
    Prior to the effective date for the new name of any street, the planning commission shall notify the 
post office, any affected utility companies, the assessor, registrars of voters, director of finance, director of 
public works and such other interested parties as the director of planning shall deem desirable. 
(Ord. No. 45, § 8, 3-16-64; Code 1969, § 13-37) 


Sec. 13.5-99. - Article not to restrict power of planning commission over streets in subdivision plans. 
    Nothing in this article shall be construed to limit, restrict or reduce in any way the power of the 
planning commission over the approval of subdivisions including the names of streets contained in any 
subdivision plan. 
(Ord. No. 45, § 9, 3-16-64; Code 1969, § 13-38) 


Secs. 13.5-100—13.5-120. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE V. - DESIGNATION OF SCENIC ROADS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Designation of scenic roads, C.G.S. § 7-149a. 


Sec. 13.5-121. - Authorization. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of C.G.S. § 7-149a, the council may by resolution passed in accordance 
with this article designate town highways or portions of highways as scenic roads. No state highway or 
portion thereof may be designated as a scenic road under this article. 
(Ord. No. 200, § 1, 5-20-89) 


Sec. 13.5-122. - Criteria for designation. 
    The council shall consider designating as a scenic road only those town roads which are free of 
intensive commercial development and intensive vehicular traffic and meet at least one of the following 
criteria: 
(1) ?It is unpaved. 
(2) ?It is bordered by mature trees or stone walls. 
(3) ?The traveled portion is no more than 20 feet in width. 
(4) ?It offers scenic views. 
(5) ?It blends naturally into the surrounding terrain. 
(6) ?It parallels or crosses over brooks, streams, lakes or ponds. 
(Ord. No. 200, § 2, 5-20-89) 


Sec. 13.5-123. - Public hearing. 
(a) ?When a highway is to be considered for designation as a scenic road, the council shall schedule a 
public hearing on the proposal. Notice of the public hearing shall be given by publishing notice of the 
time, place, and a brief description of the proposed action in a newspaper having general circulation 
in the town no fewer than 15 days before the hearing. The council shall also notify the planning 
commission, and by first class mail the owners of lot frontage abutting the highway or portion of a 
highway of the proposed designation, of the scheduled public hearing no fewer than 15 days prior to 
the hearing. 
(b) ?Following the public hearing, the council shall vote on the proposed resolution. No highway or 
portion of a highway may be designated as a scenic road under this section unless the owners of a 
majority of lot frontage abutting the highway or portion of the highway agree to the designation by 
filing a written statement of approval with the town clerk. The designation shall become effective 
upon such date as the council shall establish. 
(c) ?The scenic road designation may be rescinded by the council, using the same procedures and 
having the written concurrence of the owners of a majority of lot frontage abutting the highway. 
(Ord. No. 200, § 3, 5-20-89) 


Sec. 13.5-124. - Alteration, improvement restricted. 
(a) ?No road which has been designated as a scenic road under this article shall be altered or improved, 
including but not limited to, widening of the right-of-way or of the traveled portion of the highway, 
paving, changes of grade, straightening, removal of stone walls and removal of mature trees, except 
for good cause determined by the council after a public hearing. The council shall state the reasons 
for such future alterations and improvements in its minutes. 
(b) ?Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prohibit a person owning or occupying land abutting a 
scenic road from maintaining and repairing the land which abuts the scenic road if the maintenance 
or repair occurs on land not within the right-of-way, paved or unpaved, of the scenic road. 
(Ord. No. 200, § 4, 5-20-89) 


Chapter 14 - SUBDIVISIONS 


ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 


Secs. 14-1—14-21. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE II. - SITE INSPECTION FEES 


Sec. 14-22. - Evaluation of site or subdivision plans to determine need for inspections. 
    Each site or subdivision plan submitted to the town for final approval will be evaluated by the 
department of public works to determine the need for site/subdivision inspection and an estimate as to 
number of hours required to accomplish the inspection service in a competent, professional manner. No 
charges shall be made for any such inspections requiring less than three hours inspection service in any 
one month. 
(Ord. No. 186, § 1, 10-7-86) 


Sec. 14-23. - Construction schedule; notice of schedule changes. 
    The developer or owner shall supply a detailed construction schedule to the public works 
administration office indicating the starting date and completion date of all phases of site and subdivision 
construction. Notice to the public works administration office shall be given by phone 24 hours in advance 
of any schedule changes. If not notified, the town may charge the developer for the travel time of the 
inspector traveling to and from the site. 
(Ord. No. 186, § 2, 10-7-86) 


Sec. 14-24. - Determination of fee. 
    The inspection fee to be charged shall equal 1.33 times the actual hourly rate of pay of the assigned 
inspector times the number of hours including travel time spent by the inspector inspecting each project 
or site. 
(Ord. No. 186, § 3, 10-7-86) 


Sec. 14-25. - Deposit required. 
    Based on the estimated number of hours required, as determined by section 14-22, and the rate as 
determined by section 14-24, an estimated total fee will be calculated and the developer or owner will be 
required to deposit with the town finance department, prior to the start of any construction on the site, 110 
percent of the estimated inspection fee so determined. 
(Ord. No. 186, § 4, 10-7-86) 


Sec. 14-26. - Provision for additional deposit. 
    The town will draw down against the deposit on a monthly basis until 90 percent of the deposit has 
been used, at which time the developer or owner will be notified and required to deposit sufficient funds to 
complete remaining required inspection service. 
(Ord. No. 186, § 5, 10-7-86) 


Sec. 14-27. - Information to be furnished to developer. 
    The town will submit monthly to the developer an accounting of the charges against the deposit 
including the following information: 
(1) ?Site identification; 
(2) ?Inspector's name; 
(3) ?Inspector's rate of pay; 
(4) ?Hours, day, date spent on inspection; 
(5) ?General statement of what stage of inspection was done on each day. 
(Ord. No. 186, § 6, 10-7-86) 


Sec. 14-28. - Satisfaction of fees prerequisite to issuance of building permit; certificate of occupancy. 
    No building permit, certificate of occupancy or acceptance of any part of the project will be issued if 
the site inspector's fees are not current. 
(Ord. No. 186, § 7, 10-7-86) 


Sec. 14-29. - Relief from section 14-28. 
    The developer or owner may appeal to the town manager for relief from section 14-28. The town 
manager may grant relief based on the best interest of the town. 
(Ord. No. 186, § 8, 10-7-86) 


Sec. 14-30. - Closing of account. 
    Upon acceptance of the subdivision or certification of site completion, the account will be closed out 
and any fund balance will be returned to the developer. 
(Ord. No. 186, § 9, 10-7-86) 


Chapter 14.5 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Taxation, C.G.S. Title 12. 


ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 


Sec. 14.5-1. - Property tax exemption. 
    The property tax exemption authorized by C.G.S. § 12-81(7) through (16), inclusive, revised to 
January 1, 1977, shall be effective as of the date of acquisition of the property to which the exemption 
applies, intending hereby to adopt and to effectuate the provisions of C.G.S. § 12-81b. The town council, 
subject to its rules and the provisions of the Charter of the town, shall reimburse any such tax-exempt 
organization for any tax paid by it for a period subsequent to the date of acquisition and for any tax paid 
by the prior owner for a period subsequent to the date of acquisition and for which such tax-exempt 
organization reimbursed such owner on the transfer of title to such property. 
(Code 1969, § 2-4.3; Ord. No. 136, 5-15-78) 


Sec. 14.5-2. - Authorization to enter tax abatement agreement with Mystic River Homes, Inc. 
    Pursuant to C.G.S. § 8-215, the town manager is authorized to enter into an agreement with Mystic 
River Homes, Inc., a nonprofit corporation organized and existing under the laws of the State of 
Connecticut with a principal place of business in the Town of Groton, County of New London, State of 
Connecticut, for a full abatement of taxes on the land and buildings located in the village of Noank, Town 
of Groton, Connecticut that comprise the 46 units of housing used solely for rental to low or moderate-
income persons or families which were constructed in or around 1978 (the "housing units"). The housing 
units to which this section applies have been given an abatement in the amount of 80 percent pursuant to 
Town of Groton Ordinance No. 107 and the "tax abatement agreement" between the Town of Groton and 
Mystic River Homes, Inc. authorized by resolution of the town council on June 3, 1974. It is the purpose of 
this section to increase the abatement to be applied to said housing units from 80 percent to 100 percent. 
This Ordinance No. 268 shall supersede the provisions of Ordinance No. 107 specifically applicable to 
said housing units. The remaining provisions of Ordinance No. 107 shall remain in full force and effect. 
The 80 percent abatement applicable to said housing units shall continue until the execution of the 
agreement authorized by this section. In no event shall the term of said agreement be longer than the 
term of the existing agreement. This section shall become effective 44 days after publication of notice of 
passage. 
(Ord. No. 204, 2-6-90; Ord. No. 268, 4-3-07) 


Sec. 14.5-3. - Enterprise zone. 
(a) ?Enterprise zone area. A portion of the town, including Census Tract 7025 (primary tract), a portion of 
Census Tract 7027 (secondary tract), and three adjacent areas, as identified by the enterprise zone 
boundary map prepared by the town, approved by the state commissioner of economic development, 
and on file in the office of planning and development services, is hereby designated an enterprise 
zone pursuant to C.G.S. § 32-70, as amended. 
(b) ?Residential and nonmanufacturing facilities. 
(1) ?Residential and commercial property in the enterprise zone which is either newly constructed 
or rehabilitated subsequent to the designation of the zone shall be eligible for deferral of 
assessment increases resulting from such construction or rehabilitation for a seven-year period 
in accordance with the following schedule: 
Year 
Percentage  
of Increase  
Deferred 
First 
100 
Second 
100 
Third 
?50 
Fourth 
?40 
Fifth 
?30 
Sixth 
?20 
Seventh 
?10 
 
The cost of this fixed assessment is not reimbursed by the state. 
(2) ?Assessment deferrals for residential properties shall cease if: 
a. ?For any residential rental property, any dwelling unit in such property is rented to any 
person whose income exceeds 200 percent of the median family income of the 
municipality; 
b. ?For any condominium conversion declared after the designation of the enterprise zone, any 
unit is sold to any person whose income exceeds 200 percent of the median family income 
for the municipality. 
(3) ?In the event of a general revaluation by the town in the year in which such improvement is 
completed, resulting in any increase in the assessment on such property, only that portion of the 
increase resulting from such improvement shall be deferred. In the event of a general 
revaluation in any year after the year in which such improvement is completed, such deferred 
assessment shall be increased or decreased in proportion to the increase or decrease in the 
total assessment on such property as a result of such revaluation. 
(4) ?No improvements of any real property which qualifies as a manufacturing facility under C.G.S § 
32-9p(d) shall be eligible for any fixed assessment deferral pursuant to this section. 
(5) ?In the event that any owner of real or personal property which has qualified for deferral under 
this section fails to pay real or personal property taxes on the property receiving an enterprise 
zone deferral of taxes within 60 calendar days of the date an installment becomes due and 
payable, the deferral shall cease and payment on the entire assessment will be due. 
(6) ?In order to qualify for an assessment deferral under this section, a project consisting of real 
property improvements, rehabilitation or new construction, must be made pursuant to a building 
permit first issued for the project subsequent to the effective date of this section [September 7, 
1995]. The construction or rehabilitation will be determined to have been completed, and an 
assessment deferral will commence, the first full tax year following the issuance of a certificate 
of occupancy. The building owner is responsible for obtaining a certificate of occupancy within a 
reasonable time period following the completion of the project. 
(7) ?Owners of real and personal property must submit to the town affidavits providing such 
information as may be required by the town to determine eligibility under the program as 
provided for in the town enterprise zone guidelines. 
(8) ?Failure of a property owner to maintain the property in accordance with local property codes, 
ordinances, and regulations shall also constitute reason to cease the benefits under this 
section. 
(c) ?Reserved. 
(d) ?Enterprise zone advisory committee. In accordance with C.G.S. § 32-70d, as amended, a 
community enterprise zone board shall be established by separate resolution of the town council. 
(e) ?[Additional tax abatement.] 
(1) ?Per C.G.S. § 32-71(e), the Town of Groton, acting through its town council, in its complete 
discretion, may approve additional tax abatements or deferrals of real property taxes for 
properties within the enterprise zone created by subsection (a) of Ordinance No. 229, on such 
terms and subject to such conditions that the town council deems necessary to achieve the 
purposes of the enterprise zone as manifested in Ordinance No. 229 and in C.G.S. chapter 585, 
including § 32-71(a) through (e). 
(2) ?An applicant for additional tax abatements or deferrals pursuant to this subsection (e) shall 
comply with all Town of Groton requirements for applications for tax abatements and deferrals 
under subsection (b) of this section and under the town's enterprise zone description of tax 
benefits for residential properties and/or enterprise zone guidelines, and shall provide the town 
council such other information in such forms as the town council requests in support of its 
application. 
(3) ?No such additional abatement or deferral shall be effective unless it is set out in a written 
agreement between the town and the taxpayer that is approved by the town council upon the 
recommendation of the town manager, the assessor, the tax collector, and the director of the 
office of planning and development services, and is approved as to form and legal sufficiency by 
the town attorney. Any such agreement, whether for an abatement and/or for a deferral, shall be 
expressly subject to all requirements of C.G.S. § 32-71(b)(2) through (8), inclusive, of 
Ordinance No. 229, and all requirements of C.G.S. § 32-71(b) through (e), inclusive. Any such 
written agreement shall include provisions requiring the taxpayer to provide the town with 
written reports at least annually containing information necessary for the town to determine 
whether the taxpayer has continued to meet all eligibility requirements hereunder. No such 
agreement shall have a term longer than 20 years from the date of the issuance of a certificate 
of occupancy for the improvements upon which it is based, inclusive of any period during which 
the assessments and/or deferrals provided by subsection (b) of this section are in effect. 
(Ord. No. 229, 7-18-95; Ord. No. 285, § 1, 12-20-16) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 229, adopted July 18, 1995, did not specifically amend the Code; 
hence, inclusion of such provisions as § 14.5-3 was at the discretion of the editor. 


Sec. 14.5-4. - Authorization to enter tax abatement agreement with AHEPA 250-III, Inc. 
    Pursuant to C.G.S. § 8-215, the town manager is authorized to enter into an agreement, after review 
by the town attorney, with AHEPA 250-III, Inc., a nonprofit corporation organized and existing under the 
laws of the state for a partial abatement of taxes, as per the agreement, upon land and buildings in the 
town to be used for low to moderate income senior citizens. 
(Ord. No. 230, 9-5-95) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 230, adopted Sept. 5, 1995, did not specifically amend the Code; 
hence, inclusion of such provisions as § 14.5-4 was at the discretion of the editor. 


Sec. 14.5-5. - Handicap accessible vehicles; exemption. 
    The Town of Groton hereby enacts a measure, pursuant to the authority under C.G.S. 12-81c., to 
provide exemption applicable to the assessed value of motor vehicles specially retrofitted to 
accommodate the disability of the motor vehicle owner. The specific terms and conditions shall be 
provided on the claim for exemption form. 
(Ord. No. 240, 3-2-99) 


Sec. 14.5-6. - Tax exemption on commercial fishing apparatus. 
    There shall be exempt from personal property tax all commercial fishing apparatus having a value of 
more than $500.00, in accordance with G.S. § 12-81s, without the annual filing of a personal property 
declaration form. 
(Ord. No. 244, § 1, 12-19-00) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 244, adopted Dec. 19, 2000, did not specifically amend the Code. The 
provisions of said ordinance have been enacted as § 14.5-6 at the discretion of the editor, as set 
out herein. 


Sec. 14.5-7. - Waiver of additional assessment. 
    The assessor for the town is hereby authorized to waive the 25 percent penalty only for those 
personal property tax declarations that were filed on time but due to neglect or mistake were improperly 
signed and/or notarized. This waiver is granted for the reason that the personal property tax declarations 
were received by the town in a timely manner and any defect was due to neglect or mistake by failure to 
sign and/or notarize the personal property tax declaration; the assessor shall provide for the publication of 
the list of all such waivers that are granted by this section. This section shall become effective on the 44th 
day after publication of the notice of passage of the ordinance and shall be applicable to the October 1, 
2000 Grand List and subsequent grand lists. 
(Ord. No. 244, § 1, 12-19-00) 


Sec. 14.5-8. - Veteran's property tax exemption. 
    In accordance with C.G.S. § 12-81f: 
(a) ?Any veteran entitled to an exemption from property tax in accordance with C.G.S. § 12-81(19) 
shall be entitled to an additional exemption of $10,000.00 of such assessed value applied to the 
assessed value of an eligible veteran's property, provided such veteran's qualifying income 
does not exceed the applicable maximum amount as provided under C.G.S. § 12-81l by more 
than $25,000.00 and provided such veteran complies with the claim and application procedures 
set forth in subsections (c) and (d). 
(b) ?Any veteran's surviving spouse entitled to an exemption from property tax in accordance with 
C.G.S. § 12-81(22) shall be entitled to an additional exemption of $10,000.00 of such assessed 
value applied to the assessed value of an eligible surviving spouse's property, provided such 
surviving spouse's qualifying income does not exceed the applicable maximum amount as 
provided under C.G.S. § 12-81l by more than $25,000.00 and provided such veteran's spouse 
complies with the claim and application procedures set forth in subsections (c) and (d) of this 
section. 
(c) ?Any such veteran or spouse submitting a claim for such additional exemption shall be required 
to file an application on a form prepared for such purpose by the assessor, not later than the 
assessment date with respect to which such additional exemption is claimed, provided when an 
applicant has filed for such exemption and received approval for the first time, such applicant 
shall be required to file for such exemption biennially thereafter, subject to the provisions of 
subsection (d) of this section. Each such application shall include a copy of such veteran's or 
spouse's federal income tax return, or in the event such return is not filed such evidence related 
to income as may be required by the assessor, for the tax year of such veteran or spouse 
ending immediately prior to the assessment date with respect to which such additional 
exemption is claimed. 
(d) ?Any person who has submitted an application and been approved in any year for the additional 
exemption under subsection (a) or (b) of this section shall, in the year immediately following 
approval, be presumed to be qualified for such exemption. During the year immediately 
following such approval, the assessor shall notify, in writing, each person presumed to be 
qualified pursuant to this subsection. If any such person has qualifying income in excess of the 
maximum amount allowed under said subsection (a) or (b), such person shall notify the 
assessor on or before the next filing date for such exemption and shall be denied such 
exemption for the assessment year immediately following and for any subsequent year until 
such person has reapplied and again qualified for such exemption. Any person who fails to 
notify the assessor of such disqualification shall make payment to the town in the amount of 
property tax loss related to the exemption improperly taken. 
(Ord. No. 256, § 1, 12-9-03) 


Sec. 14.5-9. - Property tax exemption for totally disabled persons. 
    In accordance with C.G.S. § 12-81i: 
(a) ?Any person who meets the eligibility criteria under C.G.S. § 12-81(55) shall be eligible for an 
exemption from property tax applicable to the assessed value of property up to the amount of 
$1,000.00, provided such person's qualifying income does not exceed the applicable maximum 
amount as provided under C.G.S. § 12-81l and provided the person complies with the claim and 
application procedures set forth in subsection (b). 
(b) ?Any person submitting a claim for the exemption as provided for under subsection (a) of this 
section shall be required to file an application, on a form prepared for such purpose by the 
assessor, not later than the date of the assessment list with respect to which such additional 
exemption is claimed. Each such application shall include a copy of such person's federal 
income tax return, or in the event a return is not filed, such evidence related to income as may 
be required by the assessor for the tax year of such person ending immediately prior to the 
approval of a claim for such additional exemption. The forms filed by the applicant for the state 
homeowners' and renters' programs shall be the form accepted by the assessor. 
(Ord. No. 257, § 12-9-03) 


Secs. 14.5-10—14.5-23. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE II. - TAXING DISTRICTS 


Sec. 14.5-24. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 262, adopted July 6, 2004, repealed § 14.5-24 in its entirety. 
Former § 14.5-24 pertained to the first taxing district and derived from § 2-26 of the Code of 
1969 and Ord. No. 89, adopted October 20, 1969. 


Sec. 14.5-25. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 263, adopted July 6, 2004, repealed § 14.5-25 in its entirety. 
Former § 14.5-25 pertained to the second taxing district and derived from § 2-27 of the Code of 
1969 and Ord. No. 90, adopted October 20, 1969. 


Sec. 14.5-26. - Third taxing district. 
    The following described territory of the town shall comprise a taxing district to be known as the third 
taxing district: 
(1) ?Being a certain parcel of land owned now, or, formerly by Henry Gardiner and being bounded 
on the north by the main railroad line of the Penn Central Railroad Company, on the south by 
Mumford Cove, on the east by the Mumford Cove Subdivision of the Haley Farm Estates, Inc., 
and on the west by the headwaters of Mumford Cove. 
(2) ?All as shown as Parcel D in a map entitled "Fire Districts and Political Subdivisions, 
September, 1968." 
(Code 1969, § 2-28; Ord. No. 91, 10-20-69) 


Chapter 15 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Authority to construct, maintain, etc., sewer and drainage systems, § 1.4(11); to 
provide for lights, § 1.4(12). 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 5; housing, ch. 9. 
State Law reference— Power of town to lay out, construct, etc., sewer and drainage systems and 
sewage disposal plants, C.G.S. § 7-148(c)(6)(b)(i); power of town to contract for the furnishing of water, 
C.G.S. § 7-148(c)(4)(G); power of town to create, etc., all things in the nature of public works and 
improvements, C.G.S. § 7-148(c)(6)(A)(ii); power of town to regulate the laying, etc., of water pipes, 
drains, sewers, etc., in the streets and public places, C.G.S. § 7-148(c)(6)(B)(iii); power of town to 
regulate and prohibit the construction, etc., of sinks, cesspools, C.G.S. § 7-148(c)(7)(C); municipal 
waterworks systems, C.G.S. § 7-234 et seq.; municipal sewerage systems, C.G.S. § 7-245 et seq.; sewer 
districts, C.G.S. § 7-324 et seq.; water resources, C.G.S. § 25-1 et seq.; sewer revenue bonds, C.G.S. §§ 
7-259—7-266. 


ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 


Sec. 15-1. - Adoption of Public Health Code. 
    Sections 19-13B-103a through 19-13B-103f of the state Public Health Code entitled "On-Site 
Sewage Disposal Systems with design flows of 5,000 gallons per day or less and nondischarging toilet 
systems" and any amendments thereto as hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference. 
(Code 1969, § 11-3; Ord. No. 181, 10-15-85) 


Sec. 15-2. - Groton Sewer District created. 
    There is hereby created a taxing district to be known as the Groton Sewer District, the boundaries of 
which are all of the area located within the town, except the area occupied by the City of Groton, for the 
purposes of raising revenue by taxation for a portion of the planning of a sewerage disposal system, the 
repayment to the general fund of the town of payments made from the general fund for such planning, the 
ultimate construction of portions of such system in such district, and for the immediate purpose of 
defraying the expense of building and installing sleeves and the payment of engineering and other 
expenses incidental to the construction of such sleeves. 
(Res. of 5-7-62; Code 1969, § 11-6.1) 


Sec. 15-3. - Sewer assessment adjustments for elderly property owners. 
(a) ?In accordance with C.G.S. § 7-253a, any elderly taxpayer eligible for tax relief under the provisions 
of C.G.S. §§ 12-129b, 12-129n and 12-170a may apply to the Groton Water Pollution Control 
Authority through the town tax assessor for deferment of interest and principal on any sewer benefit 
assessment levied or to be levied by the authority for so long as any such eligible property owner 
owns and resides in property subject to such benefit assessment. 
(b) ?In the event of a transfer of title of property as to which a deferment has been granted in 
accordance with subsection (a) of this section, there shall be due and payable to the date of such 
transfer that amount of principal and interest computed as if an installment payment of assessment 
in accordance with C.G.S. § 7-253 had been in effect as to such assessment provided further that 
any new owner and occupant shall have the right to elect to pay the remaining balance in 
accordance with C.G.S. § 7-253 or pay the entire outstanding balance of principal and interest in full. 
Notwithstanding, any new owner and occupant eligible for relief in accordance with subsection (a) of 
this section may, in turn, apply to the authority for relief under subsection (a) of this section. In no 
event shall interest accrue beyond the date of the last maturity of any bonds or notes issued by the 
town to finance the sewerage system in respect to which the assessment was levied. 
(c) ?Any relief granted in accordance with the provisions of this section shall be subject to annual review 
by the authority. 
(d) ?Application for relief in accordance herewith shall be made to the town tax assessor who shall 
promptly notify the authority of the name of each eligible property owner and the address of the 
property owned and occupied by such owner which qualifies for relief in accordance herewith. 
(e) ?In any case where relief is granted in accordance with this section, the authority shall cause the 
town clerk to record on the land records a certificate signed by the tax collector or treasurer of the 
town setting forth that from the date of such certificate payment of an assessment of benefits 
together with interest for the installation of a sewer system is deferred setting forth the volume and 
page number of the land records wherein the property so affected is described and setting forth the 
names of the owners of such property and the principal amount of the benefit assessment then due 
and assessed against the owner. The property owner shall pay to the town clerk the cost of 
recording such certificate which shall operate as notice of the existence of a lien against such 
property until the deferred assessment together with interest shall have been paid and the town clerk 
shall cancel or remove such certificate within seven calendar days after the lien created thereby shall 
have been satisfied and the assessment together with all interest, fees and charges shall have been 
paid in full in the same manner as provided for in C.G.S. § 7-253. 
(Code 1969, § 11-6.2; Ord. No. 143, §§ 1—5, 9-17-79) 


Secs. 15-4—15-20. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE II. - WATER POLLUTION CONTROL AUTHORITY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Boards, commissions, committees and agencies, § 2-86 et seq. 
State Law reference— Water pollution control authorities, C.G.S. ch. 103. 


Sec. 15-21. - Created; membership; powers, duties, etc., generally. 
    There is hereby created a water pollution control authority consisting of five members which shall 
constitute the sewer authority of the town and which shall have all of the rights, powers, duties and 
obligations conferred and imposed by the general statutes. 
(Ord. of 5-19-58, § 2; Code 1969, § 11-38) 


Sec. 15-22. - Appointment, removal and term of members; vacancies; compensation of members; 
membership of town manager and director of public works. 
    The water pollution control authority shall consist of five members, each of whom shall serve a term 
of three years; except, that those first appointed shall serve staggered terms. Members of the water 
pollution control authority shall be appointed by resolution of the town council, which shall fill all vacancies 
in the sewer authority by resolution. Members shall serve without compensation but may be allowed 
reimbursement for expenses incurred in furtherance of the business of the water pollution control 
authority. The town council may remove any member of the water pollution control authority for cause by 
a vote of five-sevenths of the members of the town council. The town manager and director of public 
works shall be ex-officio members of the water pollution control authority without vote. 
(Ord. of 5-19-58, § 4; Code 1969, § 11-40) 


Secs. 15-23—15-50. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE III. - DISPOSITION OF MATERIAL FROM SEPTIC TANKS AND CESSPOOLS 


Sec. 15-51. - Disposal areas—Designated; use limited to material collected in town. 
    Material from septic tanks and cesspools shall be disposed of within the town only in the area owned 
or controlled by the town and designated as available for such purposes by the director of health. Only 
such material collected from septic tanks and cesspools within the town shall be disposed of in such area. 
(Ord. No. 71, § 1, 2-20-67; Code 1969, § 11-7) 


Sec. 15-52. - Same—Operation, maintenance, etc., by department of public works. 
    The department of public works is hereby directed to prepare, operate and maintain the area 
designated in section 15-51 for the disposal of material from septic tanks and cesspools after consultation 
with the director of health. 
(Ord. No. 71, § 2, 2-20-67; Code 1969, § 11-8) 


Sec. 15-53. - Adoption of rules and regulations by director of health. 
    The director of health is hereby authorized and directed to adopt such rules and regulations as may 
be reasonably required to insure that the disposal of material from septic tanks and cesspools shall be 
done in such manner as will safeguard the public health. 
(Ord. No. 71, § 3, 2-20-67; Code 1969, § 11-9) 


Sec. 15-54. - Article to be in addition to state public health code. 
    The provisions of this article are in addition to and not in derogation of any provision of the state 
public health code nor of any general or special act of the state having to do with the disposal of material 
from septic tanks and cesspools. 
(Ord. No. 71, § 4, 2-20-67; Code 1969, § 11-10) 


Sec. 15-55. - Reserved. 
Note— See editor's note following Ch. 8.5, Art. III. 


Secs. 15-56—15-80. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE IV. - USE OF THE PUBLIC SEWERS 


DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 


Sec. 15-81. - Scope. 
(a) ?This article establishes the procedures for making connections to the public sewer in the town 
district sanitary sewer system. It also establishes specific limits for pollutant discharges which by 
their nature or by their interaction with sewage will be detrimental to the public health, cause damage 
to the public sewer or the water pollution control facility, pollute the waters of the state, or otherwise 
create a public nuisance. 
(b) ?This article is intended to: 
(1) ?Inform the public as to the technical and administrative procedures to be followed in obtaining 
connection to the town sewer district sanitary sewer system. 
(2) ?Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the sanitary sewer system which will interfere with the 
collection or treatment system. 
(3) ?Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the treatment system which will pass through the 
system, inadequately treated, into the waters of the state, or the atmosphere, or otherwise be 
incompatible with the system. 
(4) ?Improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewaters and sludges from the system. 
(Code 1969, § 11-41; Ord. No. 174, § 1.1, 7-16-85) 


Sec. 15-82. - Applicability. 
(a) ?This article shall apply to the town sewer district and to persons outside the town sewer district who 
are users of the public sewer. Except as otherwise provided herein, the director shall implement and 
enforce the provisions of this article. All provisions of this article must be carried out in accordance 
with all applicable federal and state statutes. 
(b) ?Reference to technical specifications of the American Association of Testing Material (ASTM) 
means most current in use and or amended. 
(c) ?Reference to the general statutes means as amended and updated. 
(Code 1969, § 11-42; Ord. No. 174, §§ 1.3—1.6, 7-16-85) 


Sec. 15-83. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed 
to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Act or the act shall mean the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water 
Act, as amended, 33 USC 1251, et seq. 
    Authority shall mean the town water pollution control authority. 
    Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) shall mean the amount of oxygen required by bacteria while 
stabilizing decomposable organic matter under aerobic conditions for five days. The determination of 
BOD shall be performed in accordance with the procedures prescribed in the latest edition of "Standard 
Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater." 
    Building drain shall mean the part of the lowest horizontal piping of a building's plumbing which 
receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and 
conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five feet (1.5 meters) outside the inner face of the building 
wall. 
    Building sewer shall mean the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of 
disposal. It may also be called a house connection. 
    Categorical standards shall mean national categorical pretreatment standards or pretreatment 
standards. 
    Combined sewer shall mean a sewer intended to receive both sewage and stormwater or surface 
water. 
    Commissioner shall mean the commissioner of environmental protection for the state. 
    Compatible pollutant shall mean biochemical oxygen demand, suspended solids; pH and fecal 
coliform bacteria; plus any additional pollutants identified in the water pollution control facility's NPDES 
permit, where the water pollution control facility is designed to treat such pollutants and, in fact, does treat 
such pollutants to the degree required by the NPDES permit. 
    Composite sample shall mean a mixture of aliquot samples obtained at regular intervals over a time 
period. The volume of each aliquot is proportional to the discharge flow rate of the sampling interval. The 
minimum time period of composite sampling shall be four hours. 
    Cooling water shall mean process water in general used for cooling purposes to which the only 
pollutant added is heat and which has such characteristics that it may be discharged to a natural outlet in 
accordance with federal and state laws and regulations. 
    Director shall mean the director of public works or his agent. 
    District shall mean the Town of Groton Sewer District which is the Town of Groton less the City of 
Groton. 
    Domestic sewage shall mean sewage that consists of water and human excretions or other 
waterborne wastes incidental to the occupancy of a residential building or nonresidential building but not 
wastewater from water softening equipment, commercial laundry wastewater, and blowdown from heating 
and cooling equipment. 
    Floatable oil shall mean oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that it will separate by gravity from 
sewage treatment in an approved pretreatment facility. 
    Garbage shall mean the animal or vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking 
or serving of foods. 
    Grab sample shall mean a sample which is taken from a waste stream on a one-time basis with no 
regard to the flow in the waste stream and without consideration of time. 
    Holding tank waste shall mean any waste from holding tanks or vessels such as chemical toilets, 
campers, trailers and septage hauling trucks. 
    Hearing board shall mean a board appointed according to the provisions of section 15-104. 
    Incompatible pollutant shall mean all pollutants other than compatible pollutants as defined in this 
section. 
    Industrial wastewaters shall mean all wastewater from industrial processes, trade, or business and is 
distinct from domestic sewage. 
    National pollution discharge elimination system (NPDES) permit shall mean a permit is issued 
pursuant to section 402 of the Act (33 USC 1342). 
    Natural outlet shall mean any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface 
water or groundwater. 
    pH shall mean the logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentrations. The concentration 
is the weight of hydrogen ions, in grams, per liter of solution. 
    Person shall mean any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, corporation, 
association, joint stock company, trust, estate, government entity or any other legal entity, or their legal 
representatives, agents, or assigns. The masculine gender shall include the feminine, the singular shall 
include the plural where indicated by the context. 
    Pretreatment or treatment shall mean the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of 
pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior 
to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into a water pollution control facility. 
The reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes, except as 
prohibited by 40 CFR 403.6(d).s 
    Properly shredded garbage shall mean the wastes from the preparation, cooking, and dispensing of 
food that has been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow 
conditions normally (1.27 centimeters) in any dimension. 
    Public sewer shall mean a common sanitary sewer controlled by a governmental agency or public 
utility. 
    Sanitary sewer shall mean a sewer which collects and conveys domestic sewage from residences, 
public buildings, commercial establishments, industries, and institutions. A sanitary sewer may also 
collect any convey permitted industrial wastewater and unintentionally admitted groundwater, stormwater, 
and surface water. 
    Septage shall mean the liquids and solids which are removed from a tank used to treat domestic 
sewage. 
    Sewage shall mean human and animal excretions and all domestic and such manufacturing wastes 
as may tend to be detrimental to the public health. 
    Sewage collection system shall mean the structures and equipment required to collect and convey 
sewage to the water pollution control facility. 
    Sewer shall mean a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage. 
    Slug shall mean any sudden or excessive discharge which exceeds permitted levels either in terms 
of pollutant concentration or instantaneous flow rate in such a manner as to adversely affect the sewage 
collection system and/or the water pollution control facility. 
    Soluble oil shall mean oil which is of either mineral or vegetable origin and disperses in water or 
sewage at temperatures zero degrees Celsius and 65 degrees Celsius. For the purpose of this article 
emulsified oil shall be considered as soluble oil. 
    Storm sewer shall mean a sewer which collects and conveys stormwater or groundwater. 
    Suspended solids shall mean the solids matter, measured in mg/l, which may be in suspension, 
floatable, or settlable and is removable by laboratory filtering as prescribed in the latest edition of 
"Standard Methods for Examination of Water and Wastewater." 
    Toxic pollutant shall mean any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as toxic in regulations 
promulgated by the administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency under the provisions of section 
307(a) of the Act or other Acts. 
    User shall mean any person who contributes, causes or permits the contribution of sewage into the 
town sewer district sewer system. 
    Water pollution control facility (WPCF) shall mean an arrangement of devices for the treatment of 
sewage and sludge. 
    Watercourse shall mean a natural or artificial channel for the passage of water either continuously or 
intermittently. 
(Code 1969, § 11-43; Ord. No. 174, §§ 2.1—2.43, 7-16-85) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 


Sec. 15-84. - Penalties. 
(a) ?Any person found to be violating any provision of this article shall be served by the director with 
written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the 
satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall within the period of time stated in such notice, 
permanently cease all violations. 
(b) ?Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit provided for in the above section 
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and on conviction thereof shall be fined in the amount not 
exceeding $100.00 for each violation. Each day in which any such violation shall continue shall be 
deemed a separate offense. 
(c) ?Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable to the authority for any 
expense, loss, or damage occasioned the authority by reason of such violation. 
(d) ?Any person who is found to be in violation of C.G.S. § 22a-430 shall be subject to a monetary 
penalty or forfeiture under C.G.S. § 22a-438. 
(Code 1969, § 11-44; Ord. No. 174, §§ 7.1—7.4, 7-16-85) 


Secs. 15-85—15-100. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION 


Sec. 15-101. - Management of town sanitary sewer system. 
    The town sanitary sewer system is managed by the water pollution control authority. The director of 
public works is an agent of the water pollution control authority and through him the public works 
department carries out the administration of the town sanitary sewer system program. Citizens having 
questions or requiring specific information regarding any aspect of the town sanitary sewer system and its 
programs are encouraged to contact the director. 
(Code 1969, § 11-45; Ord. No. 174, § 1.2, 7-16-85) 


Sec. 15-102. - Annual operations and maintenance budget. 
(a) ?The authority on an annual basis will establish the operation and maintenance budget. 
(b) ?The authority on an annual basis will review the users, user classes and user rates. 
(c) ?The operation and maintenance budget of the water pollution control division will be solely funded 
through user charges as established by the authority. 
(d) ?The authority shall notify all users of pending or proposed rates or charges and hold a public 
hearing in accordance with the town Charter and/or state statutes. 
(Code 1969, § 11-46; Ord. No. 174, § 14.1, 7-16-85) 


Sec. 15-103. - Powers and authority of inspectors. 
(a) ?The director and other duly authorized employees of the district bearing proper credentials and 
identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purpose of inspection, observation, 
measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(b) ?While performing the necessary work in private properties referred to in subsection (a) of this 
section, the director or duly authorized employees of the district shall observe all safety rules 
applicable to the premises established by the user. The user shall be held harmless for injury or 
death to the district employees and the district shall indemnify the user against loss or damage to its 
property by the district employees and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or 
property damage asserted against the user and growing out of the gauging and sampling operations, 
except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the user to maintain safe conditions. 
(c) ?The director and other duly authorized employees of the district bearing proper credentials and 
identification shall be permitted to enter private properties through which the district holds a duly 
negotiated easement for the purposes of repair and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works 
lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on such easement, shall be done 
in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property. 
(Code 1969, § 11-47; Ord. No. 174, §§ 6.1—6.3, 7-16-85) 


Sec. 15-104. - Appeals procedure. 
(a) ?Settlement of differences between the director and sewer user or prospective sewer users on 
matters concerning interpretation and execution of the provision of this article by the director shall be 
referred to the authority. Either the sewer user, prospective user or director may request arbitration 
to be carried out in accordance with the arbitration rules of the American Arbitration Association. The 
cost of the arbitration will be divided equally between the town and the sewer user of prospective 
user. 
(b) ?One member of the hearing board shall be a registered professional engineer, one member shall be 
a practicing sanitary engineer and one member shall be a lawyer or as determined otherwise by the 
American Arbitration Association. 
(Code 1969, § 11-48; Ord. No. 174, § 14.2, 7-16-85) 


Sec. 15-105. - State of emergency policy. 
    Under any state of emergency the director will utilize any source available to him to effectively 
stabilize an emergency situation. 
(1) ?Accidental sewage overflow. 
a. ?The commissioner shall be notified in accordance with the permit. 
b. ?The state health department shall be notified. If during nonworking hours the state police 
shall be notified. 
c. ?The local health department shall be notified. 
d. ?If the discharge might endanger public health, i.e., bathing, shellfishing or drinking water 
supply, the director will notify the public as expeditiously as possible of the situation. 
(2) ?Discharge of toxic waste or other material that causes an upset of the water pollution control 
facility. 
a. ?The commissioner shall be notified in accordance with the permit. 
b. ?The state health department shall be notified. If during nonworking hours, the state police 
shall be notified. 
c. ?The local health department shall be notified. 
d. ?If the discharge might endanger public health, i.e., bathing, shellfishing or drinking water 
supply, the director will notify the public as expeditiously as possible of the situation. 
e. ?Notify the oil cleanup team at the United States naval submarine base. 
(Code 1969, § 11-49; Ord. No. 174, § 14.3, 7-16-85) 


Secs. 15-106—15-120. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 3. - TECHNICAL STANDARDS AND USE REGULATIONS 


Sec. 15-121. - Connection and use requirements. 
(a) ?The owner of each house, building or property used for human occupancy, employment, recreation 
or other purposes situated within the district and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which 
there is now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary sewer of the district may, at the 
option of the authority and at the owner's expense, be required to install a building sewer to connect 
the building drain to the public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this article and applicable 
state statutes within 90 days after date of official notice to do so. Persons in violation of the following 
shall be required to tie into the sewer collection system: violations of local or state health codes or 
when in the opinion of the authority, connection will be in the best interest of the public. 
(b) ?It shall be unlawful for any person to construct or repair any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool 
or other facility intended for the disposal of sewage if public sewers are available. 
(Code 1969, § 11-51; Ord. No. 174, §§ 3.1, 3.2, 7-16-85) 


Sec. 15-122. - Protection of public sewers. 
    No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter, repair 
or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof. 
(Code 1969, § 11-52; Ord. No. 174, § 4.1, 7-16-85) 


Sec. 15-123. - Permit requirements, inspection and rights to inspect. 
    A property owner intending to connect a building drain from his property to the town sanitary sewer 
system shall obtain a permit to connect from the director. Any persons proposing a new discharge into the 
public sewer system which would cause a substantial change in the volume or character of pollutants that 
are being discharged into the public sewer system shall notify the director at least 45 days prior to the 
proposed change or connection. 
(1) ?A person intending to connect a building drain from his property to the public sewer shall first 
obtain a permit to connect from the director. The application shall be made on forms provided 
by the director and it shall be accompanied by a sketch or plan showing the proposed 
installation in sufficient detail to enable the director to determine that the proposed installation 
meets the requirements of this regulation and other applicable specifications, codes and laws. 
The application shall be signed by the owner of the premises to be served and by a qualified 
contractor who has been chosen to perform the work of installing the building sewer. Upon 
approval of the application and plan, a permit shall be issued to have the work performed by the 
stated contractor. If the premises changes ownership before the work is completed, or if another 
contractor is chosen to perform or finish the work, the original permit shall become void, and a 
new permit shall be obtained by the new parties in interest. 
(2) ?A connection to the public sewer will be made only after the building's plumbing has been 
approved by the town building official in order to ensure that minimum standards are met for the 
installation. A house trap and fresh air vent shall be required for the building and all plumbing 
shall be in good working order. No trench containing a building drain or connection to the 
sanitary sewer shall be maintained at a level below the sewer connection before the cap is 
removed and while the connection is being made and until such time as it has been inspected, 
approved and backfilled. The contractor shall notify the director 48 hours before starting any 
work authorized under this permit. 
(3) ?Permits to connect with the town sanitary sewer system may be revoked by the director for 
such cause and at such time as he may deem sufficient, and the authority shall make claim for 
any damages suffered by the authority or the town as a consequence of such revocation or the 
cause thereof. All other parties in interest shall be held to have waived the right to claim 
damages from the town or the authority on account of such revocation. 
(4) ?The permit to connect shall be deemed to expire upon completion and acceptance of work by 
the director, or upon the passage of six calendar months from the date of issuance, whichever 
occurs first. 
(5) ?Existing building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are 
found, on examination and test by the director to meet all requirements of this article. 
(6) ?Street excavation permit from public works department is required. 
(Code 1969, § 11-53; Ord. No. 174, § 4.2, 7-16-85) 


Sec. 15-124. - Implied agreement. 
    In consideration of the granting of the permit to connect, issued by the director, the owner is deemed 
to have agreed to the following: 
(1) ?That he shall be acquainted with and shall abide by these regulations. 
(2) ?Any owner of property who is connected to a public sanitary sewer shall pay all sewer use 
charges which may be established from time to time by the authority. Sewer use charges shall 
be payable as set forth in the sewer use rate schedule currently in force. 
(3) ?All building drains shall be laid from the building served to the town sewer at no cost to the 
town. 
(4) ?Maintenance of all building drains to the point of connection to the town sanitary sewer system 
shall be the responsibility of the property owner. 
(5) ?All connections authorized by these regulations shall be in accordance with all applicable 
codes, laws and regulations of the state and all applicable rules, regulations and ordinances of 
the town. 
(6) ?The owner and contractor jointly shall hold the town harmless against all third party liability for 
damage incurred in the course of the work. 
(7) ?The owner will be liable for payment of sewer use charges upon connection to the town sewer 
system and that such use charge can only be terminated by capping of the sewer lateral outside 
of the structure, or temporary plugging, as stated in section 15-136. Plugging or capping 
requires a permit by the building inspector. Any unoccupied dwelling or structure with a sewer 
connection will continue to be billed at the standard use charge set by the authority. 
(Code 1969, § 11-54; Ord. No. 174, § 4.3, 7-16-85) 


Sec. 15-125. - Technical requirements. 
(a) ?All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights 
so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property 
disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the municipality. 
(b) ?No building sewer shall be constructed within 25 feet of a water supply well. If a building sewer is 
constructed within 25 to 75 feet of a water supply well, it shall be constructed in accordance with all 
applicable guidelines promulgated by the commissioner. 
(c) ?Not more than one building shall be connected with a public sewer through any one drain without an 
approved deviation granted by the director. In case such approval is granted, the drain shall be 
straight from the town sanitary sewer to one of the buildings unless the approved deviation shall 
allow for other construction. 
(d) ?The building sewer shall be cast iron service weight, asbestos cement pipe 2500-pound test, or 
PVC meeting ASTM D3034 for SDR 35, and shall be free from defects which may cause leakage 
either into or out of the pipe. Portland cement mortar joints shall not be permitted. All joints shall be 
made with material approved for the specific piping, and in an approved manner. Cast iron pipe with 
lead joints may be required by the authority where the building sewer is exposed to damage by tree 
roots. If installed in unstable ground, the building sewer shall be of cast iron soil pipe, except if laid 
on a suitable concrete bed or cradle. Piping through foundation wall shall be four-inch extra heavy 
cast iron. Lateral lines shall be six-inch diameter or larger upon approval of the director from the 
property line to a point eight feet outside foundation. 
(e) ?The size and slope of the gravity building sewer shall be subject to the approval of the director, but 
in no event shall the diameter be less than six inches. The slope of such six-inch pipe shall not be 
less than two percent (one-quarter-inch per foot). Where this is impractical, the inspector may 
approve a grade of not less than one percent (one-eighth-inch per foot). Subject to the approval by 
the inspector, pipes larger than six-inch diameter may be laid at a grade less than one percent. The 
building sewer shall be laid at uniform grade and in straight alignment insofar as possible. Changes 
in direction shall be made only with manholes or properly curved pipe and fitting, as approved by the 
director. 
(f) ?All excavations required for the installation of a building sewer shall be open trench work unless 
otherwise approved by the authority. Pipe laying and backfill shall be performed in accordance with 
ASTM specifications D-2321-74 except that no backfill shall be placed until the work has been 
inspected. 
(g) ?All joints and connections shall be properly made in compliance with the recommendations of the 
manufacturer of the products, and shall be so constructed as to prevent any leakage of sewage from 
lines or ground water into the line. If joints or connections are found to be improperly made, they 
shall be pulled apart and remade, and approved by the inspector before backfilling the trench. 
(1) ?Cast iron pipe joints shall be firmly packed with oakum or hemp and filled with molten lead, 
Federal Specifications QQ-C-40 not less than one inch deep. 
(2) ?Lead shall be run in one pouring and shall be caulked tight. 
(3) ?No paint, varnish, or other coatings shall be permitted on the jointing material until after the 
joint has been tested and approved. 
(4) ?A "push-on" type joint will be acceptable as an alternate. 
(5) ?All joints in PVC pipe or between such pipe and metals shall be made with approved 
premolded gasket joints and shall utilize materials have resilient properties shall conform to 
ASTM D3034. 
(h) ?No person shall connect any roof drain downspout, foundation drain, area way drain, basement 
drain, sump pump or other source surface runoff or groundwater, to a building sewer or building 
drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer. 
(i) ?In the construction of household sewer connections, pipe shall be laid on an even tamped foundation 
or coarse sand, fine gravel or three-fourths-inch crushed stone. Where wet or soft conditions prevail 
three-fourths-inch crushed stone shall be used for foundation of all pipe. The backfill shall be 
thoroughly compacted by tamping or other approved methods up to the spring line of the pipe. Care 
must be taken during backfilling that the pipe is not injured or disturbed by stones or other material. 
Backfill material to a foot above the pipe shall be compactible materials, not frozen, and free from 
clods of earth, stones larger than two inches in diameter, organic material, roots, stumps, peat, and 
other unsuitable materials as directed by the inspector. The balance of backfill in trench shall be 
compatible materials, not frozen, and free from stones larger than four inches in their largest 
dimension and other unsuitable material as directed by the inspector. 
(j) ?Where pipe is being laid at depths that may provide insufficient cover, less than three feet, to 
safeguard the pipe properly from physical damage due to superimposed loads, the drain layer shall 
use cast iron pipe, ASA A21.8, 1853 Class 22 or concrete encasement as may be approved by the 
inspector. 
(k) ?No house connection may be constructed less than five feet horizontally from any underground gas, 
electric or telephone service, or less than ten feet from a water service or main, unless approved by 
the appropriate utility company and the director. 
(l) ?The house trap shall be in the basement wherever possible. If located outside, it shall be at least 
three feet below grade and accessible and precautions taken to prevent freezing. One trap shall be 
provided per building unless otherwise approved by the director. 
(m) ?The fresh air vent shall be four inches in diameter, and shall terminate at least one foot above 
grade. The trap cleanout shall not be used as a vent. 
(n) ?Cleanouts are required: 
(1) ?Immediately beyond house trap. 
(2) ?At any change of direction or of grade of 45 degrees or more. 
(3) ?For any run of over 75 feet. 
(o) ?All sewerage originating on the premises shall be connected to the public sewer. No on-site 
sewerage disposal system shall be permitted to remain on the premises after the sewer connection 
is made. All abandoned septic tanks, dry walls, and/or cesspools shall be pumped dry and filled. 
(Code 1969, § 11-55; Ord. No. 174, § 4.4, 7-16-85) 


Sec. 15-126. - Design standard of sanitary sewer system. 
(a) ?Design period. In general, sewer systems shall be designed for projected maximum tributary 
population at present zoning. 
(b) ?Design factor. New sewers shall be designed on the basis of an average daily per capita flow of 
wastewater of not less than 100 gallons per day and a peak flow of not less than four times this rate 
except where otherwise authorized by the director. 
(c) ?Details for design and construction. The following details and specifications shall be applicable for 
all sewer systems coming under this article: 
(1) ?Pipe sizes (house connections): 
a. ?Multiunit, eight inch minimum 
b. ?Single unit, six inch minimum 
(2) ?Materials: 
a. ?Gravity pipelines 15 inches and smaller shall be PVC SDR 25 ASTM D3034. 
b. ?Force mains shall be PVC SDR 16 Class 150. 
c. ?Manholes shall be precast concrete and rubber boat, connection to pipelines and cast iron 
frames and covers on brick risers. 
(3) ?Depth: 
a. ?In general, sewers should be designed deep enough to drain basement fixtures. 
b. ?Sewer in roadways shall be deep enough to pass under water mains with a minimum of 18 
inches vertical separation. 
c. ?Minimum depths of street laterals shall be eight feet, zero inches, unless otherwise 
approved by the director. 
(4) ?Slopes: 
a. ?Minimum slopes for eight-inch sewers shall be 0.4 feet per 100 feet. 
b. ?Minimum slopes for six-inch house connections shall be 1.0 feet per 100 feet. 
c. ?Maximum slopes shall be 12 feet per 100 feet. 
(5) ?Alignment: 
a. ?All sewers shall be laid with straight alignment between manholes. 
b. ?The laser alignment method shall be used to set line and grade of all gravity pipe lines. 
c. ?When a smaller sewer joins a larger one at a manhole the smaller lines shall be laid at a 
grade no lower than the grade which sets the crown of the pipes at the same elevation. 
(6) ?Leakage testing: 
a. ?All gravity pipe lines shall pass an approved air test before acceptance. 
b. ?All pressure lines shall pass an approved water pressure test before acceptance. 
c. ?All manholes shall pass an infiltration or exfiltration test before acceptance. 
(7) ?Protection of water supplies: 
a. ?While no general statement can be made to cover all conditions, it is generally recognized 
that sewers shall be remote from public water supply wells or other water sources and 
structures. 
b. ?Pressure piping will be required where sewers are within acceptable separating distances 
to water supply systems. 
(8) ?Relation to water mains: 
a. ?Horizontal separation. Sewers shall be laid at least ten feet horizontally from any existing or 
proposed water lines. 
b. ?Vertical separation. When sewers must cross under water lines a minimum vertical 
separating distance of 18 inches must be kept between the pipe lines. 
(Code 1969, § 11-56; Ord. No. 174, § 4.5, 7-16-85) 


Sec. 15-127. - Grinder pumps. 
(a) ?Generally. Whenever possible, the public sewer shall be at a depth great enough so that all 
properties that have accessibility to the sewer can be served by gravity. Those buildings which 
cannot be served by gravity or if there are special conditions as determined by the director, the 
director shall provide and maintain a grinder pump unit to such properties. 
(b) ?Notification of installation. The contractor shall notify the building official at least ten days prior to 
installation of pump. This will enable the owner, contractor and building official to process all 
necessary permits and easements. 
(c) ?Granting of easement. An easement for maintenance of the grinder pumps must be granted to the 
authority. 
(d) ?Cost of tie-ins. The authority will bear the cost of electrical tie-in of both inside and outside units by a 
contractor chosen by the director to an electrical service of adequate size. The authority will not 
upgrade the owners electrical system to accept the grinder pump; also at the authority's cost outside 
units will be delivered and placed into a predug hole at the site. 
(e) ?Inside installation. Tank shall be set level on a firm bed, with a minimum head-room over tank of 
three feet, six inches, and in a readily accessible location. House sewer pipe shall be adapted to a 
four-inch PVC socket provided in tank with an approved adapter. Motor breather tube furnished by 
town shall be installed by owner in accordance with installation manual furnished with tank. Tank 
shall be vented with three-inch vent installed within one inch of tank. 
(1) ?Discharge. Tank will come equipped with 1¼-inch brass male pipe thread. Contractor will have 
to adapt with nipple, elbow, union and 1¼-inch shut off valve. These shall be installed so that 
when union is taken apart, the core of pump can be lifted from unit with no obstructions in the 
way. The above- mentioned fittings will be a combination of brass and copper. Pipe from valve 
to foundation wall can be 1¼-inch PVC schedule 40 or 1¼-inch PE 160 pound test with 
approved fittings. Pipe through wall shall be sleeved and caulked so as to be watertight. 
(2) ?Piping from foundation to redundant check valve shall be 1¼-inch PE 160 pound test copper 
tube size water service pipe, laid in one piece without any joints. Four-feet deep minimum to 
prevent from freezing, packed in sand. 
(3) ?Redundant check valve will be supplied by town and shall be installed within 18 inches of 
corporation valve, using 1¼-inch M.P.T. PVC schedule 40 adapter, or 1½-inch to 1¼-inch 
bushing, depending on size of I.P.T. at corporation valve. Wherever possible contractor should 
tie directly into F.P.T. at corporation valve with the above listed fittings. Directly beyond check 
valve will be a short piece of 1¼-inch PVC Schedule 40 within a 1¼-inch F.P.T. adapter; into 
this adapter will be a 1¼-inch M.P.T. Brass Tex adapter within two stainless steel clamps. 
Check valve shall be set level and arrow in direction of flow. 
(f) ?Exterior installation. Contractor will prepare hole to a depth of seven feet, eight inches. The town will 
deliver exterior unit to site. Top of unit shall protrude approximately four inches above grade. House 
sewer line to unit shall be CI or PVC; will be adapted to four-inch PVC socket provided in tank with 
proper fittings. Tanks shall be vented with three-inch vent within one foot of unit. 
(1) ?Discharge. The piping inside manway will be factory installed to a 1¼-inch M.P.T. brass fitting 
through manway. From this fitting use 1¼-inch F.P.T. brass coupling and adapt to coupling with 
a 1¼-inch M.P.T. Brass Tex adapter to 1¼-inch 160 pound P.E. pipe with two stainless steel 
clamps. The connection at corporation valve will be same as interior pump installation. All 
trenching for electrical conduit or direct burial wires will be prepared by homeowners contractor. 
(2) ?Piping from foundation to redundant check valve shall be 1¼-inch PE 160 pound test copper 
tube size water service pipe, laid in one piece without any joints, four-feet deep minimum to 
prevent from freezing, packed in sand. 
(3) ?Redundant check valve will be supplied by town and shall be installed within 18 inches of 
corporation valve, using 1¼-inch M.P.T. PVC schedule 40 adapter, or 1½-inch to 1¼-inch 
bushing, depending on size of F.P.T. as corporation valve. Wherever possible contractor should 
tie directly into F.P.T. of corporation valve with the above listed fitting. Directly beyond clerk 
valve will be a short piece of 1¼-inch PVC Schedule 40 with a 1¼-inch F.P.T. adapter; into this 
adapter will be a 1¼-inch M.P.T. Brass Tex adapter with two stainless steel clamps. Check 
valve shall be set level and arrow in direction of flow. 
(g) ?Electrical. The authority will have an electrician wire the pump at no direct cost to the owner. The 
authority will furnish all materials required to connect to the homeowner's adequate power supply 
(one 240-volt 20-amp circuit and one 120-volt 15-amp circuit), including an alarm light/buzzer for the 
upstairs. If the home does not have this required supply, the owner must arrange for upgrading his 
electrical system before proceeding with grinder-pump installation. This will be the homeowner's 
responsibility. 
(h) ?Test line and fitting in ground. The 1¼-inch P.E. 160 pound line and fittings at corporation valve and 
redundant check valve will be water tested before any backfilling of said line or fittings should occur. 
Corporation valve shall remain closed and line can be tested with pressure from house domestic 
water pressure. The town will furnish an adapter to make this test. 
(i) ?Testing grinder pump. After all controls and pump have been wired to adequate house current, and 
before any house waste line is tied into unit, corporation valve shall be opened, then open gate valve 
in discharge line in pump, fill pump with water until it pumps down and shuts off. Turn off power to 
pump and fill with water to overflow level which will be close to level of inlet line, at this point warning 
light and audible alarm should come on. Turn power to pump on and pump down. If all alarms and 
pump are working properly, waste line and or line from house can be tied into pump inlet socket. 
(j) ?Property owners' liability. It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to make every 
reasonable effort to protect the grinder pump from damage at all times. The property owner's 
responsibility, without limiting other areas, shall include the following: 
(1) ?Proper installation and testing in accordance with the foregoing. 
(2) ?Erection of suitable barrier to prevent grinder pump from being struck by a vehicle or other 
object. 
(3) ?Promptly advising the director of any circumstances or event that may cause damage to the 
grinder pump. 
If in the opinion of the director damage occurs to the grinder pump due to the negligence of the property 
owner, such property owner will be liable in damages to the authority. The director shall notify the 
property owner as to the nature of the negligence of the property owner and the cost of repairs to or 
replacement of the damaged grinder pump. If the property owner and director cannot agree as to the 
negligence or the amount of damages, the director shall refer the matter to the authority and, if 
necessary, arbitration may be had in accordance with section 15-104 of these regulations. 
(Code 1969, § 11-57; Ord. No. 174, § 4.6, 7-16-85) 


Sec. 15-128. - Grease and oil traps. 
    Grease and oil traps are required to assure that large volumes of grease and/or oil do not enter the 
collection system causing adverse effects to its operation and maintenance. 
(1) ?The director may require traps for the following reasons: 
a. ?Any single source which discharges fats, grease and mineral oils in a concentration of 100 
mg/l or more with a flow of 175 gallons/day or more and/or a concentration of floatable 
greases in excess of 20 mg/l with a flow of 35 gallons/day. 
b. ?Any single source discharge with fats, oils, greases and petroleum in a form which will not 
emulsify at 50 degrees Fahrenheit or lower or concentrations of 100 mg/l or more with a 
flow of 175 gallons/day or more. 
c. ?The director may have traps installed no matter what the volume or concentration, if in his 
opinion an apparent problem may be caused in the system by not having one installed. 
(2) ?Installation: 
a. ?The unit will be located at a point not closer than 25 feet from the source of the last 
discharge to the receiving line. No toilet facilities can be located before the inlet to the trap. 
The trap will be so located that cleaning can be easily carried out. 
b. ?The size will be 55 gallons and up as determined by the director depending on the 
concentration of the discharge, volume of the discharge, distance from the source and 
other pertinent factors. 
c. ?Grease trap materials shall be such that it will be impervious to the sewage and other 
corrosive materials that may be discharged into it. It must also be able (with a 200 percent 
factor) to withstand the maximum amount of external pressure placed on it at any one time. 
The inlet and outlet piping and baffling must be approved by the director. Proper provisions 
shall be made for ease of periodic cleaning. 
d. ?The use and design of any sand trap for the removal of grease, oil or petroleum products 
must previously be approved by the state department of environmental protection and the 
director when applicable. 
e. ?The location and design must be submitted to the director for approval in less than 45 days 
in advance of installation. 
f. ?Maintenance shall be the full responsibility of the owner at no cost to the town and shall be 
carried out at intervals as requested by the director. 
(Code 1969, § 11-58; Ord. No. 174, § 4.7, 7-16-85) 


Sec. 15-129. - Discharge limitations. 
(a) ?No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any unpolluted waters such as stormwater, 
groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, or cooling water to any sanitary sewer. 
(b) ?Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically 
designated as combined sewers or storm sewers and discharged to a watercourse in accordance 
with all applicable state and federal laws and regulations. 
(c) ?No users shall contribute or cause to be contributed, directly or indirectly, any pollutant or 
wastewater which will interfere with the operation or performance of the Water Pollution Control 
Facility (WPCF). These general prohibitions apply to all such users of a WPCF whether or not the 
user is subject to national categorical pretreatment standards of any other federal or state 
pretreatment standards or requirements. A user shall not contribute the following substances to any 
WPCF: 
(1) ?Any liquids, solids or gases which by reason of their nature or quantity are, or may be, 
sufficient either alone or by interaction with other substances to cause fire or explosion or be 
injurious in any other way to the WPCF or to the operation of the WPCF. At no time shall two 
consecutive readings on an explosion hazard meter at the point of discharge into the sewage 
collection system (or at any point in the system) be more than five percent nor any single 
reading over ten percent of the lower explosive limit (LEL) of the meter. 
(2) ?Solids or viscous substances which may cause obstruction to the flow in a sewer or other 
interference with the operation of the WPCF, including substances such as, but not limited to, 
grease, garbage with particles greater than one-half inch in any dimension, animal guts or 
tissues, paunch manure, bones, hair, hides or fleshing, entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes, 
cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings, 
rags, spent grains, spent hops, waste paper, wood, plastic, gas, tar, asphalt residues, residues 
from refining or processing of fuel or lubricating oil, mud or glass grinding or polishing wastes. 
(3) ?Any sewage having a pH lower than 6.5 or having any other corrosive property capable of 
causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the WPCF. The upper 
limit of pH for any industrial wastewater discharge shall be established under the dischargers 
state discharge permit, but no higher than 8.5. 
(4) ?Any sewage containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with 
other pollutants, to injure or interfere with any wastewater treatment process, constitute a 
hazard to humans, or animals, or plant life, create a toxic effect in the receiving waters of the 
WPCF, or to exceed the limitation set forth in a "Categorical Pretreatment Standard." A toxic 
pollutant shall include but not be limited to any pollutant identified pursuant to section 307(a) of 
the Act. 
(5) ?Any noxious or malodorous sewage, gases, or solids which either singly or by interaction with 
other sewage are sufficient to prevent entry into the public sewers for their maintenance and 
repair. 
(6) ?Any sewage which, by interaction with other sewage in the public sewer releases obnoxious 
gases, forms suspended solids which interfere with the collection system, or creates a condition 
which may be deleterious to the structures and treatment processes or which may cause 
effluent limitations of the WPCF's NPDES permit to be exceeded. 
(7) ?Any substance which may cause the WPCF's effluent or any other product of the WPCF such 
as residues, sludges, or scums, to be unsuitable for reclamation process where the WPCF is 
pursuing a reuse and reclamation program. In no case shall a substance discharged to the 
WPCF cause the facility to be in noncompliance with sludge use or disposal criteria, guidelines, 
or regulations developed under section 405 of the Act; any criteria, guidelines or regulations 
affecting sludge use or disposal developed pursuant to the Toxic Substances Control Act, or 
state criteria applicable to the sludge management method being used. 
(8) ?Any substance which will cause the WPCF to violate its NPDES permit or the receiving water 
quality standards. 
(9) ?Sewage containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the 
wastewater treatment process employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that 
the water pollution control facility effluent cannot meet the limits stipulated in the district NPDES 
permit. 
(d) ?The following described substances, materials, waters, or waste shall be limited in discharges to 
public sewers to concentration or quantities which will not harm either the sewers, water pollution 
control facility, will not have an adverse effect on the receiving stream, or will not otherwise endanger 
public property or constitute a nuisance. The commissioner may set lower limitations if more severe 
limitations are necessary to meet the water quality standards of the receiving stream. The limitations 
or restrictions on materials or characteristics of sewage discharged to the public sewer are as 
follows: 
(1) ?Sewage having a temperature higher than 150 degrees Fahrenheit (65 degrees Celsius). 
(2) ?Sewage containing fat, wax, grease, petroleum, or mineral oil, whether emulsified or not, in 
excess of 100 mg/l with floatable oil not to exceed 20 mg/l or containing substances which may 
solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32 and 150 degrees Fahrenheit (zero and 
65 degrees Celsius). 
(3) ?Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. Garbage grinders may be connected to 
sanitary sewers from homes, hotels, institutions, restaurants, hospitals, catering establishments, 
or similar places where garbage originates from the preparation of food in kitchens for the 
purpose of consumption on the premises or when served by caterers. 
(4) ?Any sewage containing odor-producing substances exceeding limits which may be established 
by the commissioner and/or director. 
(5) ?Any radioactive wastes or isotopes or such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits 
established by the commissioner in compliance with all applicable state and federal regulations. 
(6) ?Materials which exert or cause: 
a. ?Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not limited to sodium 
chloride and sodium sulfate). 
b. ?Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning 
solutions). 
c. ?Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine demand in such quantities as to 
constitute a significant load on the water pollution control facility. 
d. ?Unusual volume of flow or concentrations of waste constitution a "slug." 
(7) ?Overflow from holding tanks or other receptacles storing organic wastes. 
(8) ?Sewage with all concentration of pollutants in excess of the following limits: 
Pollutant: 
Concentration:  
Parts per  
million  
(mg/l) 
Arsenic as A;sub§\sub; 
0.05 
Barium as B a 
5.0 
Boron as B o 
5.0 
Cyanides as CN (amenable) 
0.1 
Fluoride as F 
20.0 
Chromium (total) 
1.0 
Chromium (Cr+6) 
0.1 
Magnesium as Mg 
100 
Manganese as Mn 
5.0 
Copper as CU 
1.0 
Zinc as Zn 
1.0 
Cadmium 
0.1 
Lead 
0.1 
Tin 
2.0 
Silver 
0.1 
Mercury 
0.01 
Nickel 
1.0 
 
Note:?All metals are to be measured as total metals. 
(e) ?In accordance with C.G.S. § 22a-430 a permit from the commission of environmental protection and 
approval by the director is required prior to the initiation of a discharge of any of the following 
wastewaters to a public sewer: 
(1) ?Industrial wastewater of any quantity. 
(2) ?Domestic sewage in excess of 5,000 gallons per day through any individual building sewer to a 
public sewer. 
A potential discharger after receiving approval by the director must submit a permit application to the 
department of environmental protection not later than 90 days prior to the anticipated date of initiation of 
the proposed discharge. 
(f) ?If any sewage is discharged or is proposed to be discharged to the public sewers which contains the 
substances or possesses the characteristics enumerated in subsection (d) of this section, and which 
in the judgment of the commissioner or director may have a deleterious effect upon the wastewater 
facilities, processes, equipment, or receiving waters, or which otherwise may create a hazard to life 
or constitute a public nuisance, the commissioner may in accordance with C.G.S. § 22a-430(b): 
(1) ?Reject the discharge of the wastes. 
(2) ?Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers. 
(3) ?Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge. 
If the commissioner permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the decision and installation 
of the equipment shall be subject to review and approval of the commissioner and director subject to the 
requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances and laws. 
(g) ?The director shall have the right to reject the discharge of any wastes; or, require more stringent 
effluent limitations than required by the user's C.G.S. § 25-54i [22a-430] permit, the decisions of the 
commissioner notwithstanding. 
(h) ?Grease, oil and gross particle separators shall be provided when in the opinion of the commissioner 
and/or director they are necessary for the proper handling in subsection (d)(2) of this section, or any 
flammable wastes, sands, or other harmful substances; except that such separators shall not be 
required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All separators shall be of a type and capacity 
approved by the commissioner and director and shall be located as to be readily and easily 
accessible for cleaning and inspection. In the maintaining of these separators, the owner shall be 
responsible for the proper removal and disposal by appropriate means of the captured material and 
shall maintain records of the dates, and means of disposal which are subject to review by the 
commissioner and director. Any removal and hauling of the collected materials shall be performed by 
a waste disposal firm which possesses a valid permit from the commissioner and director under 
C.G.S. § 25-54h [22a-429]. 
(i) ?Where pretreatment of flow-equalizing facilities are provided or required for any sewage, they shall 
be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his expense. 
(j) ?When required by the commissioner and/or director, the owner of any property serviced by a building 
sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable structure together with such necessary meters 
and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observations, sampling, and 
measurement of the wastes. Such structure, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located 
and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the commissioner and/or director. 
The sampling structure shall be located at a point along the industrial waste stream where a 
representative sample of the industrial wastewater may be obtained prior to its being diluted by 
domestic sewage in the building sewer. The structure shall be installed by the owner at his expense 
and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times. 
(k) ?All industries discharging into a public sewer shall perform such monitoring of their discharge as 
required by the commission in any state discharge permit issued pursuant to C.G.S. § 25-54i [22a-
430], including, but not limited to, installation, use, and maintenance of monitoring equipment, 
keeping records and reporting the results to the commissioner. Such records shall be made available 
upon request to the commissioner or the director. 
(l) ?All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of sewage to which reference is made 
in this article shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of "Standard Methods for 
Examination of Water and Wastewater," published by the American Public Health Association. 
Sampling methods, location, times, durations, and frequencies are to be determined on any 
individual basis subject to the stipulations and general conditions of the discharger's state discharge 
permit. 
(m) ?No statement contained in this article shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or 
arrangement between the district and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual 
strength or character may be accepted by the district for treatment provided that such agreements do 
not contravene any requirements of existing state or federal regulations and are compatible with any 
user charge and industrial cost recovery system in effect. 
(n) ?Upon the promulgation of the federal categorical pretreatment standard for a particular industrial 
subcategory, the federal standard, if more stringent than limitations imposed under this article for 
sources in that subcategory, shall supersede the limitations imposed under this article. 
(o) ?No user shall increase the use of process water in an attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or 
complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in 
the federal categorical pretreatment standards, or in any specific pollutant limitations which may be 
developed by the commissioner. 
(p) ?Each user shall provide protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other 
substances regulated by this article. Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials 
shall be provided and maintained at the owner or user's cost and expense. The commissioner may 
require that plans showing facilities and operating procedures be submitted for review and approval 
prior to construction of the facilities. 
(1) ?Immediately after an accidental discharge, the user must notify the director. 
(2) ?Within five days following the accidental discharge, the user shall submit to the director and the 
commissioner, a detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge and the measures 
to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve 
the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of 
damage to the WPCF, fish kills, aquatic plants, or any damage to persons or property; nor shall 
such notification relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties, or other liability which may be 
imposed by this article or other applicable law. 
(3) ?A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place 
advising employees whom to call in an event of a dangerous discharge. Employers shall ensure 
that all employees are advised of the emergency notification procedure. 
(Code 1969, § 11-59; Ord. No. 174, §§ 5.1—5.16, 7-16-85) 


Sec. 15-130. - Discharge of septic tank materials. 
    Septic tank materials, for purposes of these regulations, includes only wastewaters derived by 
pumping or draining septic tanks, cesspools, and other wastewater storage and treatment tanks and 
basins appurtenant to dwellings and commercial establishments which contain only domestic wastes. 
Materials derived from pumping or draining industrial wastewater storage and treatment tanks or basins 
shall not be accepted in the sewerage system by the authority. 
(Code 1969, § 11-60; Ord. No. 174, § 9.0, 7-16-85) 


Sec. 15-131. - Fees. 
    Fees charged for residential, commercial and industrial users of the sewer system shall be those 
fees passed by resolution of the authority and caused to be filed by the town clerk's office. 
(Code 1969, § 11-61; Ord. No. 174, § 10.0, 7-16-85) 


Sec. 15-132. - Method of determining sewer use charge. 
    The method that is used to calculate the sewer use charge is: 
C u 
= 
( 
C t  
_____ 
V t 
) 
V u × V;sub \sub; 
 
V;sub \sub; 
= 
Infiltration factor. 
C u 
= 
User charge. 
C t 
= 
Total operation, maintenance and administration budget. 
V t 
= 
Total annual volume. 
V u 
= 
Volume contribution from user. 
 
(1) ?Residential rate: Average residential water usage cubic foot times cost cubic feet treated 
divided by 12 equals monthly flat rate charged billed quarterly. 
(2) ?Commercial rate. Cost per cubic foot times water usage (from water or sewage flow meter or 
estimate) with a minimum monthly charge. 
(Code 1969, § 11-62; Ord. No. 174, § 1.01, 7-16-85) 


Sec. 15-133. - Use charge for sewage with above average pollutant concentration. 
(a) ?Any customer who discharges sewage into the town sewage system which has particulates which 
exceed any of the following parameters will be subjected to high pollutant concentration usage 
charge: 

Mg/l 
Biochemical oxygen demand ..... 
200 
Chemical oxygen demand ..... 
400 
Suspended solids ..... 
200 
 
(b) ?Calculation of user charge for sewage with above average pollutant concentration. 
Use charge per unit volume: 
[ ?? 
2  
_____ 
5 
+ 
1  
_____ 
5 
( 
A;sub§\sub;  
_____ 
A m 
) 
+ 
1  
_____ 
5 
( 
B;sub§\sub;  
_____ 
B m 
) 
+ 
1  
_____ 
5 
( 
C;sub§\sub;  
_____ 
C m 
) 
] 
E c 
 
A;sub§\sub; 
= 
A BOD of over 200 mg/l being discharged over a period of more than one hour or any 
volume over 20,000 gallons in a 24-hour period or any volume of sewage with a 
concentration over 400 mg/l. If less than 200 mg/l use 200 mg/l. 
B;sub§\sub; 
= 
A COD of over 400 being discharged over a period of more than one hour or any volume 
over 20,000 gallons in a 24-hour period or any volume of sewage with a concentration 
over 800 mg/l. If less than 400 mg/l use 400 mg/l. 
C;sub§\sub; 
= 
A suspended solids of over 200 mg/l being discharged over a period of more than one 
hour or any volume over 20,000 gallons in a 24-hour period or any volume of sewage 
with a concentration over 400 mg/l. If less than 200 mg/l use 200 mg/l. 
? 2 / 5 ? = Volume factor 
A m 
= 
Maximum allowable BOD without a high pollutant use charge—200 mg/l. 
B m 
= 
Maximum allowable COD without a high pollutant use charge—400 mg/l. 
C m 
= 
Maximum allowable suspended solids without a high pollutant use charge—200 mg/l. 
E c 
= 
Cost per unit volume for domestic sewage. 
 
(c) ?The formula is based on the treatment system's operation and maintenance cost breakdown, as 
follows: 
Flow, 40 percent; BOD, 20 percent; COD, 20 percent; and SS, 20 percent. 
(Code 1969, § 11-63; Ord. No. 174, § 10.2, 7-16-85) 
_____


Sec. 15-134. - Sewage flow measurements for commercial billing. 
(a) ?Any commercial unit without a water meter should have a meter installed on the water line or in the 
sewer line at no cost to the authority. If the business does not do so, the director will estimate its bill. 
(b) ?Any commercial unit that has a water meter but considers that only a small amount of that water 
goes into the sanitary collection system, should install a meter on its sanitary facilities or sewer line. 
If the business does not do so, the director will bill the business on its full water usage. 
(c) ?Any commercial unit that has no water meter, but has a grinder pump, should install a "Running 
Time Meter" on the grinder pump. If the business does not do so, the director will estimate the bill. 
(d) ?Any commercial unit that has a water meter which services the business and residential units will be 
billed as follows: The residential units will be charged at the monthly per unit rate in effect at the time; 
the commercial rate will be the monthly water usage in cubic feet minus the number of residential 
units times an average monthly factor determined by the director. 
(e) ?Any commercial complex which has more than one commercial unit that receives its water from one 
meter will be billed as follows: The cubic feet of water used times the rate per cubic foot with a 
minimum charge of the number of commercial units on a meter times the per unit minimum charge in 
effect. 
(f) ?All meters and their point of installation must be approved by the director or any readings from these 
meters will not be held valid. 
(g) ?All meters will be sealed and read by the director. 
(Code 1969, § 11-64; Ord. No. 174, §§ 11.1—11.7, 7-16-85) 


Sec. 15-135. - Temporary discontinuation of sewer service. 
    A residential unit may have its sewer use charge deleted for a period of not less than six months nor 
more than 12 months by having its sewer plugged by the director as long as a Mystic-type sewer trap is 
easily accessible at the residential rate. 
(Code 1969, § 11-65; Ord. No. 174, § 12.0, 7-16-85) 


Sec. 15-136. - Plugging. 
(a) ?Installation and removal. The plug will be installed by the director in the housetrap so as to cause 
that no sewage may leave the residential unit and enter the system. The capping of the housetrap 
will be locked wired so that the plug cannot be removed without breaking the wire. If the wire is not in 
its original position when the plug is removed, a penalty as described in section 15-84 will be levied. 
Anyone requesting a cap be installed or removed, must contact the building inspector at least ten 
working days in advance. 
(b) ?Fees. Fees which may be imposed under this article are subject to the following: 
(1) ?The sewer use charge will be deleted starting at the end of the quarter that the unit was 
plugged. 
(2) ?The sewer use charge will be resumed as of the first of the month that the plug is removed. 
(3) ?If the plug is tampered with or removed previous to a six-month period, all deleted charges will 
become due and payable. 
(4) ?If the plug is not removed after 12 months, the billing will resume. 
(5) ?There will be capping charge of equal to one month's sewer charge. 
(c) ?Inspection. The director may inspect the plug at his discretion at any reasonable time. 
(Code 1969, § 11-66; Ord. No. 174, §§ 12.1—12.3, 7-16-85) 


Sec. 15-137. - Holding tank discharge receiving areas (marinas). 
(a) ?Receiving area and sewer connections. The laying of sewer, installation of gas traps, fresh air 
vents, and cleanouts shall be done in accordance with "The Town of Groton Water Pollution Control 
Authority Regulation." 
(1) ?The receiving structure must be constructed of concrete with approved wire mesh 
reinforcement and be at least two feet above grade and six inches below the grade. The 
structure will be at least four square feet or circular with sloped interior sides at a slope 
approved by the director. 
(2) ?The collector pipe shall be located in the center of the receiving structure; not to protrude over 
one-half inch above the face on the bottom. This pipe shall be 1½ inches in diameter with the 
proper fitting so that connection to the equipment for the removal of waste from boats can be 
properly attached. This piping must be outfitted with an approved secure cap and anchors for 
locking of the cap. The 1½-inch pipe shall be of a length approved by the director and terminate 
into a six-inch cast iron pipe with approved gas traps and ventilation system. 
(b) ?Use of receiving area. Upon the application for a permit, the permittee shall sign a statement of 
liability that only material that would benefit from the treatment facility be discharged and that if 
introduction is made into the system of toxic or undesirable material, the permittee will be held liable. 
(c) ?Discharge into a holding tank receiving area determination of volume for sewer use charge. The 
director may estimate the flow or the property owner may install an approved RTM (running time 
meter) on all equipment that is used to pump sewage to the discharge receiving area. This 
equipment must have a discharge rating which is or can be converted to gallons or cubic feet of 
sewage. Sewage can only enter through an approved pumping unit not by gravity. All regulations of 
the authority apply as well. 
(Code 1969, § 11-67; Ord. No. 174, §§ 13.1—13.3, 7-16-85) 
Editor's note— Exhibit A, receiving structure diagram, has not been set out herein but is 
available for public inspection at the office of the town clerk. 


Sec. 15-138. - Sewer usage billing. 
    The director, through the water pollution control division administrative section, shall bill all users of 
the district sewer system. 
(1) ?Billing will start upon receipt of the proper permit signed by the chairperson of the authority. 
Accounts approved on the first through the 14th of the month will be billed for that complete 
month. Accounts approved on the 15th through the end of the month will be billed for one-half a 
month. 
(2) ?Residential bills are billed quarterly on a flat rate on a per month basis. 
(3) ?Commercial bills will be billed on a monthly basis on water usage from information obtained for 
the previous month, quarter or bi-annual readings. 
(4) ?Grinder pump accounts will be credited an amount as authorized by the authority on a per 
grinder pump basis monthly to help offset the homeowner's electrical cost. 
(5) ?Interest shall be levied on all payments not received by the first of the following quarter for 
residential, and commercial interest will be levied on payments received after 30 days of billing 
date, at an interest rate approved by the tax collector. 
(6) ?Interest shall not be charged on payments received the first business day of the month that an 
account becomes delinquent. 
(7) ?The director may adjust any sewer usage bill that is in error. 
(Code 1969, § 11-68; Ord. No. 174, § 14.4, 7-16-85) 


Chapter 15.5 - VEGETATION 


ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 


Secs. 15.5-1—15.5-30. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE II. - TREES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 228, adopted June 4, 1995, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, 
inclusion of §§ I—VIII of such ordinance as Ch. 15.5, Art. II, §§ 15.5-31—15.5-38 was at the discretion of 
the editor. 


Sec. 15.5-31. - Title. 
    This article shall be known and may be cited as the municipal tree ordinance of the town. 
(Ord. No. 228, § I, 6-4-95) 


Sec. 15.5-32. - Purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this article to promote and protect the public health, safety and general welfare by 
providing for the regulation of the planting, maintenance and removal of trees, shrubs and other plants 
within the town. 
(Ord. No. 228, § II, 6-4-95) 


Sec. 15.5-33. - Definitions. 
    [The following words, terms or phrases, as used in this article, shall have their given meanings;] 
    Public area. These words shall include all public highways, parks and other lands owned by or 
leased to or under the control of the town. 
    Trees and shrubs. These words shall include all woody vegetation presently or hereafter planted in 
any public area or private premises. 
    Person. An individual, corporation, including a public utility company, partnership and association. 
(Ord. No. 228, § III, 6-4-95) 


Sec. 15.5-34. - Authority. 
    This article is enacted pursuant to the provisions of C.G.S. §§ 7-148(b), 7-148(c)(6)(A)(v), 7-
148(c)(7)(B), and 7-148(c)(7)(H)(x), and section 1.4.13, section 1.4.29, and section 1.4.35 of the town 
Charter. 
(Ord. No. 228, § IV, 6-4-95) 


Sec. 15.5-35. - Tree warden. 
(a) ?The tree warden shall be appointed by the town council for a term of one year and until a successor 
is appointed and qualified. The tree warden shall be a licensed arborist or professionally certified 
through the Tree Wardens Association or International Society of Agriculture and shall have all 
powers, duties and authorities ascribed to tree wardens in C.G.S. §§ 23-58, 23-59, 23-60 and 23-65, 
as the same may be amended, and in this article, including the power to appoint deputy tree 
wardens. 
(b) ?The tree warden shall have full power and authority over all trees and shrubs located within public 
areas and, to the extent provided herein, on private property. 
(Ord. No. 228, § V, 6-4-95) 


Sec. 15.5-36. - Permits. 
    No person may perform any of the following acts without first obtaining a permit issued by the tree 
warden: 
(1) ?Plant, spray, fertilize, preserve, prune, remove, cut above ground or otherwise disturb any tree 
on any public area; 
(2) ?Place on any public area, either above or below ground level, a container for trees or shrubs; 
(3) ?Damage, cut, tap, carve or transplant any tree or shrub located on any public area; 
(4) ?Attach any rope, wire, nail, sign, poster or any other manmade object to any tree or shrub 
located on any public area; 
(5) ?Cause damage to the root zone of any tree or shrub located on any public area by digging a 
tunnel or trench, moving or storage of construction vehicles, materials or equipment, or 
changing of the grade within the drip line. 
(Ord. No. 228, § VI, 6-4-95) 


Sec. 15.5-37. - Abatement of nuisance. 
(a) ?Any tree or shrub or part thereof growing upon private or public property, (1) which is interfering with 
the use of any public area, (2) which is infected with an infectious plant disease, (3) or which 
endangers the life, health or safety of persons or property outside of the host private property is 
declared a public nuisance. 
(b) ?The tree warden, or his/her designee, shall have the authority to enter onto private property (prior 
notice required) whereon there is located a tree, shrub, plant or plant part that is suspected to be a 
public nuisance. 
(c) ?If the tree warden shall determine with reasonable certainty, upon inspection or examination, any 
nuisance tree or shrub as herein defined exists in or upon any public area in the town, he/she shall 
immediately cause it to be treated, trimmed, removed or otherwise abated in such a manner as to 
destroy or prevent the spread of the nuisance. The manner in which the nuisance shall be abated 
shall be determined by the tree warden. 
(d) ?If the tree warden shall determine with reasonable certainty upon inspection or examination that any 
nuisance shrub or tree as herein defined exists in or upon any private premises, he/she in writing 
shall notify the owner or tenant having charge of such premises. Within 30 days after the issuance of 
such notice, such person shall cause the treatment, trimming or removal and destruction of such 
nuisance tree or shrub as directed by the written notice. No damage shall be awarded the owner for 
the destruction of trees or shrubs destroyed pursuant to this article. In case the owner or tenant 
having charge of such premises shall refuse or neglect to comply with the terms of the written notice 
within 30 days after receiving it, the tree warden shall cause the removal, treatment or trimming of 
such nuisance tree or shrub. The expense thereof shall be charged to the owner of such premises of 
which such tree or shrub is located and, with respect to the cost for removing, treatment or trimming 
that portion interfering with the public area or public way, shall become a lien on the property upon 
recordation of notice thereof on the town land records. 
(Ord. No. 228, § VII, 6-4-95) 


Sec. 15.5-38. - Tree advisory board. 
(a) ?The town conservation commission shall function as the tree advisory board. 
(b) ?The duty of the tree advisory board is to ensure that the intent and provisions of this article are 
carried out to the fullest extent possible. The board may give notice and consultation on (1) the 
amendment of this article, and (2) establishment of educational and informational programs such as 
Arbor Day, Earth Day, or any other events that promote the protection of trees within the community. 
(Ord. No. 228, § VIII, 6-4-95) 


Chapter 16 - WATERWAYS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Harbors and rivers, C.G.S. §§ 15-1—15-26a; boating, C.G.S. § 15-121 et seq. 


ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 


Secs. 16-1—16-30. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE II. - HARBOR MANAGEMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Ordinances and special regulations re boating, C.G.S. § 15-136. 


Sec. 16-31. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings 
ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Anchoring means to secure a vessel temporarily to the bottom of a waterbody by dropping an anchor 
or other ground tackle from a vessel. 
    Berth means berthing space for a single vessel alongside a pier, finger float, or other structure. 
    Channel means any water areas officially marked and maintained to permit unobstructed movements 
of vessels. 
    Commercial mooring means the rental or lease of a mooring. 
    Commercial vessel means any vessel used or engaged for any type of commercial venture. 
    Distress means a state of disability or a present or obviously imminent danger which if unduly 
prolonged could endanger life or property. 
    Emergency means a state of imminent or proximate danger to life or property in which time is of the 
essence. 
    Fairway means any locally designated and/or maintained water areas reserved for unobstructed 
movement of vessels. 
    Harbor facility means any area or structure providing private or public access to the water. 
    Harbor management act means the legislation contained within C.G.S. §§ 22a-113k—22a-113t and 
as may be amended. 
    Harbor management commission means the local municipal commission established under and 
carrying out the responsibilities authorized by the state harbor management act. 
    Harbormaster means an official appointed in accordance with the general statutes. 
    Marine facilities means any and all facilities of a harbor either publicly or privately owned affecting 
the use and operations of vessels located within the area of jurisdiction. 
    Moor means to secure a vessel to a mooring. 
    Mooring means a place where vessels are secured to the bottom of a waterbody by mooring tackle 
for longterm use. 
    Mooring buoy means that which marks a mooring. 
    Mooring tackle means the hardware and cordage used to secure a vessel at a mooring. 
    Open water means an area reserved and designated on the water use plan where moorings and 
structures will be restricted to preserve the area for navigation, natural resources, and public recreational 
purposes. 
    Public area means all areas of any harbor except those areas under specific lease to private persons 
or firms, or owned privately. 
    Shore means that part of the land in immediate contact with a body of water, including the area 
between high and low water lines. 
    Shall and may. Shall is mandatory; may is permissive. 
    State means the State of Connecticut. 
    Structure means docks, piers, pilings, breakwaters, groins, and seawalls. 
    Transient anchorage means any area reserved and designated on the water use plan for the 
exclusive shortterm use of commercial and recreational vessels. 
    Underway means the condition of a vessel not at anchor, without moorings, and not made fast to the 
shore nor aground. 
    Vessel means every description of watercraft, other than a seaplane on water, used or capable of 
being used as a means of transportation on water. 
(Ord. No. 215, art. IV, 8-4-92) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 


Sec. 16-32. - Applicability of article. 
    The provisions of this article and any rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto shall be 
applicable, and shall govern the use of harbor waters and facilities under the jurisdiction of the town 
harbor management commission, pursuant to the town harbor management plan, Noank sector. The 
harbor management commission may from time to time amend the rules and regulations contained in this 
article. 
(Ord. No. 215, art. I, § 1, 8-4-92) 


Sec. 16-33. - Liability of town. 
    The town harbor management commission, commissioners, and harbormaster shall not by adoption 
or administration of these regulations assume any risk of personal injury and damage or loss to property 
on account of accident, fire, theft, storm, vandalism or acts of God. 
(Ord. No. 215, art. II, § 1, 8-4-92) 


Sec. 16-34. - Enforcement of article. 
(a) ?The harbormaster or deputy harbormaster shall have the authority to carry out harbor management 
directives and enforce all provisions of the harbor management plan, including this article. The 
harbormaster or deputy harbormaster may cite any alleged violators of this article. 
(b) ?The harbor management commission shall review and make recommendations regarding all 
applications for permits or approvals for all floats, structures, and other marine facilities within 
harbors under its jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 215, art. I, § 3, 8-4-92) 


Sec. 16-35. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    Any violation of this article shall be a municipal infraction and is punishable by a fine not to exceed 
$100.00 or by imprisonment for not more than six months, and shall be imposed for each violation 
pursuant to this article, as provided under C.G.S. § 7-148(c). Each day of violation shall be considered a 
separate offense and subject to separate citations. A fine not to exceed $100.00 shall be imposed for 
each offense. Fines levied under the provisions of this article shall be collected and deposited into the 
Groton of a greater penalty as provided for under federal statutes or the laws of the state. 
(Ord. No. 215, art. I, § 4, 8-4-92) 


Sec. 16-36. - Fees incidental to recovery, movement and storage. 
    Charges may be imposed by the harbormaster for recovery and/or movement of vessels whenever a 
vessel is moved, impounded, or held as a result of violations of this article. 
(Ord. No. 215, art. II, § 14, 8-4-92) 


Sec. 16-37. - Harbor management fund. 
    A harbor management fund is hereby created to receive and expend monies for harbor management 
purposes determined by the harbor management commission. All revenues generated by the following 
shall be deposited into the fund: 
(1) ?Mooring permits; 
(2) ?Fines levied under the provisions of this article; 
(3) ?Fifty percent of the boating registration fee that is returned to the town; and 
(4) ?Other fees generated. 
Funds shall be disbursed for purposes directly associated with the management of harbors and 
implementation of the Noank Sector Harbor Management Plan. Monies from this fund may be allocated to 
the harbormaster or deputy harbormaster for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of the Noank Sector 
Harbor Management Plan and/or the harbor management ordinance. The harbor management fund shall 
be established, budgeted, and administered in a manner consistent with the town Charter. 
(Ord. No. 215, art. I, § 5, 8-4-92) 


Sec. 16-38. - Water use plan map. 
    Proposed uses, structures, and activities within the harbor shall be consistent with the adopted water 
use plan map. The water use plan map may be amended by the harbor management commission in 
accordance with the procedure for harbor management plan modifications in the state harbor 
management act. 
(Ord. No. 215, art. I, § 6, 8-4-92) 


Sec. 16-39. - Noise abatement. 
    No persons shall operate, occupy or leave a vessel in such manner as to constitute an audible 
nuisance. This prohibition includes, but is not limited to, operating a motor boat without an adequate 
muffler as provided under C.G.S. § 15-129, loud offensive or obscene language or behavior, and playing 
radios, musical instruments or other noise-producing devices so loudly as to constitute a nuisance. No 
person shall leave a vessel without securing all halyards and other noise-producing objects in such 
manner as will effectively prevent the production of noise under all reasonably foreseeable conditions. 
(Ord. No. 215, art. II, § 15, 8-4-92) 


Sec. 16-40. - Unseaworthy vessels prohibited in harbor. 
    A person shall not moor or berth or permit to be moored or berthed in the harbor a vessel which is 
unseaworthy, in a badly deteriorated condition, which is likely to sink or to damage docks, wharves, floats 
or other vessels or which may become a menace to navigation, except in cases of emergency. 
(Ord. No. 215, art. II, § 13, 8-4-92) 


Sec. 16-41. - Abandoned vessels. 
    When a vessel has been abandoned in the harbor, the harbormaster may take custody and control 
of such vessel in accordance with C.G.S. § 15-140c and remove it, store it or otherwise dispose of it, all 
at the expense and sole risk of the vessel owner. Reasonable notice of such disposal shall be publicly 
given. 
(Ord. No. 215, art. II, § 11, 8-4-92) 
State Law reference— Removal of vessels, C.G.S. § 15-9. 


Sec. 16-42. - Mooring or berthing. 
    A person having charge of any vessel shall not make it fast or secure it to any dock, jetty, 
breakwater, bulkhead, wharf, pier, or mooring without the consent of the owner thereof except in an 
emergency, in which case such person shall forthwith report the emergency to the harbormaster and 
thereafter act in accordance with the harbormaster's instructions. 
(Ord. No. 215, art. II, § 12, 8-4-92) 


Sec. 16-43. - Placement of private and commercial moorings. 
    It shall be prohibited to place any mooring in the waters of the harbor without a permit from the 
harbormaster. No vessel moored or anchored shall extend beyond the mooring area into any designated 
channels, fairways, turning basins, or transient anchorages. Unpermitted moorings may be removed by 
the harbormaster, subject to the following: owner thereof shall be notified if possible. If not possible, 
equipment shall be treated as lost items. 
(Ord. No. 215, art. III, § 1, 8-4-92) 


Sec. 16-44. - Allocation of mooring locations. 
(a) ?The harbor management commission shall establish and post in a public place a mooring allocation 
procedure and priority list. 
(b) ?As provided in section 16-45(b), available moorings shall be offered to the senior applicant on the 
mooring list, subject to the constraints contained in these rules and regulations. If the available 
mooring location is not suitable to accommodate the senior applicant's vessel or specific needs, it 
shall be offered to the next senior qualified applicant. The senior applicant shall retain his place on 
the waiting list in this case. The harbormaster shall continue efforts to provide a suitable mooring 
location for the senior applicant. If the senior applicant refuses a mooring location which is suitable 
for his vessel in the opinion of the harbormaster, that person shall be moved to the bottom of the 
waiting list. In order to obtain the most effective utilization of existing mooring facilities, lists of 
applicants will be maintained according to the length and draft of their vessels. These lists will be 
available for public inspection during regular office hours at the office of the town clerk. In the 
allocation of mooring locations, owners of existing moorings shall be deemed the senior applicant for 
the nearest designated mooring location. 
(c) ?As demand requires, up to 15 percent of the mooring locations within designated commercial areas 
shall be made available to private individuals. Applications for mooring locations within established 
commercial areas shall be made to the harbormaster by April 1 of a given calendar year. The 
harbormaster shall assign these moorings in accordance with the allocation procedures indicated in 
this section considering boat size and draft, water conditions and mooring access, and be placed in 
accordance with established mooring space and specification for that area. This 15 percent shall 
include pre-existing private moorings within commercial areas. This also allows the resetting of 
affected commercial moorings within designated commercial areas subject to harbormaster 
approval, but the total number of commercial moorings shall not be increased. 
(d) ?The owner of private shorefront property shall have the right, upon application to the harbormaster 
for a mooring permit for a mooring location, to place a mooring for his own use within close proximity 
of his property. 
(Ord. No. 215, art. III, § 3, 8-4-92) 


Sec. 16-45. - Mooring records. 
(a) ?The harbormaster shall maintain a record of each mooring, its location, and the owner's name, 
home and business address, telephone number, date mooring was set, and name, length, draft 
registration number or documentation number, and type of boat to be attached thereto. Commercial 
operators shall maintain the required data as to owner and vessel and make such data available to 
the harbormaster. 
(b) ?The harbormaster shall maintain in a public place a waiting list for mooring locations which shall be 
updated periodically. 
(Ord. No. 215, art. III, § 2, 8-4-92) 


Sec. 16-46. - Secure berthing, mooring and anchoring of vessels. 
    All vessels anchored, moored or berthed within the jurisdiction of the harbor management 
commission shall be tied, moored, anchored, or otherwise secured with proper care and equipment as 
required to prevent breakaway or damage to vessels or property. It shall be the responsibility of the owner 
of the vessel, and where applicable, marine facility operator, to ensure that the vessel is properly secured 
and to provide for periodic inspection, maintenance, and replacement of such equipment at reasonable 
intervals as determined by the harbormaster. 
(Ord. No. 215, art. III, § 10, 8-4-92) 


Sec. 16-47. - Mooring specifications and inspection. 
    The harbor management commission shall provide specifications for mooring tackle and procedures 
for periodic inspection of the tackle. 
(Ord. No. 215, art. III, § 11, 8-4-92) 


Sec. 16-48. - Storm precautions. 
    Owners may and should, without penalty, add reasonable scope, weights, or extra anchors in 
anticipation of storm conditions. Prompt return to usual mooring provisions shall be effected with seven 
days after such storm. 
(Ord. No. 215, art. III, § 12, 8-4-92) 


Sec. 16-49. - Marine toilets. 
    The provisions of C.G.S. §§ 15-170—15-175, inclusive, shall be strictly enforced with respect to 
marine toilets. 
(Ord. No. 215, art. II, § 7, 8-4-92) 


Sec. 16-50. - Vessel speed. 
    Vessel speed shall be strictly enforced in accordance with the provisions of C.G.S. § 15-16. In 
addition to the above referenced standards, no vessel shall move at greater than six miles per hour when 
located within 200 feet of a moored vessel. 
(Ord. No. 215, art. II, § 2, 8-4-92) 


Sec. 16-51. - Discharge of refuse. 
    The provisions of C.G.S. § 22a-250, inclusive, shall be strictly enforced with respect to the discharge 
of refuse. 
(Ord. No. 215, art. II, § 6, 8-4-92) 


Sec. 16-52. - Obstruction of channels, fairways, and berthing space. 
(a) ?No vessel shall be moored, anchored, or berthed so as to interfere with the free and unobstructed 
use of the channels, fairways or berthing spaces. 
(b) ?No fixed commercial fishing gear shall be permitted in channels or fairways in accordance with 
Department of Environmental Protection regulation 26-142-3a(d). 
(Ord. No. 215, art. II, § 3, 8-4-92) 


Sec. 16-53. - Swimming. 
    Swimming is prohibited in all designated channels and fairways. Use of designated swimming areas, 
established by Department of Environmental Protection permit, may be restricted by the harbor 
management commission. 
(Ord. No. 215, art. II, § 4, 8-4-92) 


Sec. 16-54. - Waterskiing. 
    Waterskiing is prohibited in all designated channels, fairways, turning basins, and anchorages, as 
shown on Figure 9, Water Use Plan of the Noank Sector Harbor Management Plan. 
(Ord. No. 215, art. II, § 5, 8-4-92) 
Editor's note— The Noank Sector Harbor Management Plan is not printed herein but is 
available in the town offices. 


Sec. 16-55. - Lost and found property. 
    The finder of lost property within the harbor shall deliver or report its identity and location to the town 
police. 
(Ord. No. 215, art. II, § 8, 8-4-92) 


Sec. 16-56. - Signs, erection and maintenance. 
    The harbormaster may place and maintain, or cause to be placed and maintained, either on land or 
water, such signs, notices, signals, buoys or control devices in accordance with regulations established 
by the commissioner of environmental protection (under C.G.S. § 15-121) and in accordance with federal 
statutes and regulations to carry out the provisions of this article or to secure public safety and the orderly 
and efficient use of a harbor or marine facility. 
(Ord. No. 215, art. II, § 10, 8-4-92) 


Sec. 16-57. - Launch service signal. 
    A "T" flag or radio is recommended. No person shall use an audible signal to call a launch, except 
when fog obstructs vision to the shore. 
(Ord. No. 215, art. II, § 9, 8-4-92) 


CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 1969 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1969 Code, as updated 
through July 7, 1987, which are included herein. Sections of the 1969 Code, as supplemented, 
not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and 
permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table 
immediately following this table. 
1969 Code  
Section 
Section?  
this Code 
1-1, 1-2 
1-1, 1-2 
1-3 
1-6 
1-4, 1-5 
1-4, 1-5 
1-6 
1-3 
1-7 
1-7 
2-1 
2-181 
2-2—2-4 
2-2—2-4 
2-4.1 
2-5 
2-4.2 
6-2 
2-4.3 
14.5-1 
2-26—2-28 
14.5-24—14.5-26 
2-39—2-43 
2-191—2-195 
2-53 
2-111 
2-71—2-76 
2-126—2-131 
2-96—2-100 
2-161—2-165 
2-121 
15-55 
3½-1—3½-3 
4-1—4-3 
4-1 
10-1 
5-4 
5-1 
5-6 
5-2 
5½-21—5½-29 
7-26—7-34 
6-1, 6-2 
8-1, 8-2 
6½-1 
9-1 
7-1—7-3 
10-31—10-33 
8-1—8-3 
11-56—11-58 
8-4, 8-5 
11-59 
8-16—8-18 
11-6—11-8 
8-19 
11-1 
8-20, 8-21 
11-9, 11-10 
8-31, 8-32 
11-81, 11-82 
9-1—9-7 
10-71—10-77 
9-8—9-13 
10-101—10-106 
10-24—10-29 
13-161—13-166 
11-3 
15-1 
11-6.1, 11-6.2 
15-2, 15-3 
11-7—11-10 
15-51—15-54 
11-38 
15-21 
11-40 
15-22 
11-41—11-44 
15-81—15-84 
11-45—11-49 
15-101—15-105 
11-51—11-68 
15-121—15-138 
12-1—12-7 
12-1—12-7 
13-1.1—13-1.3 
13.5-1—13.5-3 
13-2—13-10 
13.5-22—13.5-30 
13-11 
13.5-21 
13-12—13-29 
13.5-51—13.5-68 
13-30—13-38 
13.5-91—13.5-99 
 


CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the 1969 Code, 
as updated through July 7, 1987, which are included herein. Ordinances adopted prior to such 
date were incorporated into the 1969 Code, as supplemented. Ordinances adopted since July 7, 
1987, and not listed herein, have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and 
permanent nature. 
Ordinance  
Number 
?Date 
Section 
?Section  
this Code 

?9-29-41(Ord.) 
1—3 
10-31—10-33 

?9-26-49(Ord.) 

2-2 

?6-14-56(Ord.) 
1 
2-3 

?4-21-58(Ord.) 
2 
13-161 


3, 4 
13-162 


5—8 
13-163—13-166 

?5-19-58(Ord.) 
2 
15-21 


4 
15-22 

?7-20-59(Ord.) 

2-181 

?2-15-60(Ord.) 
1 
10-71 



10-101 


2 
10-72 



10-102 


3 
10-73 



10-103 


4 
10-75 



10-105 


5 
10-74 



10-104 


6 
10-76 



10-106 


7 
10-77 

?3-?6-61(Ord.) 
1, 2 
13.5-22, 13.5-23 


3—5 
13.5-25—13.5-27 


6 
13.5-24 


7—9 
13.5-28—13.5-30 


11 
13.5-21 

10-23-61(Ord.) 
1—3 
2-146—2-148 

?3-?5-62(Ord.) 
1—7 
12-1—12-7 

?5-?7-62(Res.) 

15-2 
35 
?2-18-63 

2-148 
38 
?8-21-63 
4 
2-4 
39 
?8-26-63 
1—3 
11-56—11-58 
40 
?8-26-63 
1, 2 
11-59 
43 
12-17-63 
1, 2 
8-1, 8-2 
45 
?3-16-64 
1—9 
13.5-91—13.5-99 
51 
?6-?7-65 

13.5-25 
71 
?2-20-67 
1—4 
15-51—15-54 
73 
?7-10-67 
1 
13.5-51 


2 
13.5-52, 13.5-53 


3—17 
13.5-54—13.5-68 
75 
?9-18-67 

10-1 
89 
10-20-69 

14.5-24 
90 
10-20-69 

14.5-25 
91 
10-20-69 

14.5-26 
101 
?4-12-72 

2-5 
104 
?7-17-72 

6-2 
105 
10-?2-72 

6-1 
109 
?4-?2-73 
1—3 
11-6—11-8 


4 
11-10 


5 
11-1 


7 
11-9 
110 
?5-?7-73 
100—106 
9-101—9-107 


108 
9-108 


200.1—200.35 
9-109 


300.1—300.3 
9-111 


400.1—400.14 
9-151 


401.1—401.8 
9-152 


402.1 
9-153 


500.1—500.6 
9-165 


501.1—501.7 
9-166 


600.1—600.6 
9-180 


601.1—601.7 
9-181 


700.1, 700.2 
9-193 


800.1—800.6 
9-205 


900.1, 900.2 
9-126, 9-127 


901—903 
9-128—9-130 


903.1—903.6 
9-131—9-136 


904 
9-137 


904.1 
9-138 


905 
9-139 


906 
9-110 


907—907.5 
9-140 
112 
10-?1-73 

2-111 
117 
10-21-74 

4-1 
120 
12-?2-74 
1—3 
5-1 
121 
?1-?6-75 
1—3 
2-192—2-194 


4 
2-191 


5 
2-195 
125 
?6-16-75 

2-111 
135 
?5-15-78 

4-2 
136 
?5-15-78 

14.5-1 
137 
?5-15-78 
1—5 
13.5-1 
139 
12-18-78 
1, 2 
2-126, 2-127 


4—6 
2-129—2-131 
143 
?9-17-79 
1—5 
15-3 
139 
12-18-79 
3 
2-128 
146 
?2-19-80 
1—9 
7-26—7-34 
147 
?4-?7-80 
1—3 
4-3 
152 
?8-?4-80 
1—3 
5-2 
153 
10-20-80 
1—3 
2-43—2-45 
154 
11-17-80 
1 
9-109 


2 
9-128 
155 
11-17-80 
1—3 
5-2 
159 
?5-?4-82 
1—4 
11-81 
162 
11-?2-82 
1 
11-81 
163 
?2-15-83 

2-148 
166 
?8-16-83 
2 
11-81 
169 
?5-?1-84 
2 
13.5-3 


3 
13.5-2 
173 
?7-16-85 
1—5 
2-161—2-165 
174 
?7-16-85 
1.1 
15-81 


1.01 
15-132 


1.2 
15-101 


1.3—1.6 
15-82 


2.1—2.43 
15-83 


3.1, 3.2 
15-121 


4.1—4.7 
15-122—15-128 


5.1—5.16 
15-129 


6.1—6.3 
15-103 


7.1—7.4 
15-84 


9.0 
15-130 


10.0 
15-131 


10.2 
15-133 


11.1—11.7 
15-134 


12.0 
15-135 


12.1—12.3 
15-136 


13.1—13.3 
15-137 


14.1 
15-102 


14.2, 14.3 
15-104, 15-105 


14.4 
15-138 
178 
?9-?3-85 
1—4 
11-82 
179 
?9-17-85 

2-1 
180 
10-?1-85 

2-161 
181 
10-15-85 

15-1 
186 
10-?7-86 
1—9 
14-22—14-30 
187 
11-18-86 

11-56 
188 
?3-17-87 
1—3 
8.5-81—8.5-83 



15-55 
190 
?7-?7-87 
1 
5-1 
192 
?4-?5-88 
1—16 
2-61—2-76 
194 
?4-19-88 

2-86 
196 
10-?4-88 
7 
2-67 
197 
11-15-88 
1—3 
9-71—9-73 


4, 5 
9-75, 9-76 


6 
9-74 
199 
?5-16-89 
1 
9-2 
200 
?5-20-89 
1—4 
13.5-121—13.5-124 
203 
?1-16-90 
1-1—1-17 
9-31—9-47 
204 
?2-?6-90 

14.5-2 
205 
?3-?6-90 
1.1, 1.2 
13-1, 13-2 


2.1 
13-66 


2.2(A)—2.2(J) 
13-81—13-90 


2.3 
13-67 


2.4 
13-4, 13-5 


3.1, 3.2 
13-3 


4.1—4.3 
13-101—13-103 


5.1—5.3 
13-116—13-118 


6.1—6.7 
13-131—13-137 


7.1—7.7 
13-36—13-42 
207 
?4-?3-90 

8-2 
209 
?8-?7-90 

9-34 
211 
10-15-91 
1 
2-6 
212 
?2-18-92 
1 
6-1 
213 
?3-?8-92 
1 
2-96 
214 
?6-?2-92 
1 
2-7 
215 
?8-?4-92 
art. I, § 1 
16-32 


art. I, § 3, 
16-34, 16-35 


art. I, § 4 



art. I, § 5, 
16-37, 16-38 


art. I, § 6 



art. II, § 1 
16-33 


art. II, § 2 
16-50 


art. II, § 3— 
16-52—16-54 


art. II, § 5 



art. II, § 6 
16-51 


art. II, § 7 
16-49 


art. II, § 8 
16-55 


art. II, § 9 
16-57 


art. II, § 10 
16-56 


art. II, § 11, 
16-41, 16-42 


art. II, § 12 



art. II, § 13 
16-40 


art. II, § 14 
16-36 


art. II, § 15 
16-39 


art. III, § 1 
16-43 


art. III, § 2, 
16-45 


art. III, § 3 



art. III, § 10— 
16-46—16-48 


art. III, § 12 



art. IV 
16-31 
216 
?9-16-92 
1.00 
8.5-26 


2.00 
8.5-27 


3.1—3.4 
8.5-41—8.5-44 


4.1—4.3 
8.5-61—8.5-63 


5.1—5.3 
8.5-45—8.5-47 
217 
?3-?2-93 
1 
6-1 
221 
10-?5-93 

2-148 
222 
10-?5-93 
1 
11-81(c) 
223 
10-?5-93 
1—9 
7-26—7-34 
224 
?5-17-94 
1—6 
Adopting ord., pg. ix 
226 
?8-?2-94 
1       Rpld 
8.5-81—8.5-83, 



15-55 
228 
?6-?4-94 
I—VIII 
15.5-31—15.5-38 
229 
?7-18-95 

14.5-3 
230 
?9-?5-95 

14.5-4 
236 
10-?7-97 
1 
5-1 
237 
?2-?3-98 
I—X       Added 
10-131—10-140 
238 
?2-?3-98 
I—XXIV       Added 
10-161—10-184 
239 
?8-18-98 
1—5       Rpld 
13-1—13-5, 



13-36—13-42, 



13-66, 13-67, 



13-81—13-90, 



13-101—13-103, 



13-116—13-118, 



13-131—13-137, 



13-161—13-166 


      Added 
13-1—13-5 
240 
?3-?2-99 
      Added 
14.5-5 
241 
?6-15-99 
1—5       Rpld 
12-1—12-7 


      Added 
12-1 
243 
11-27-00 
      Added 
9-216—9-220 
244 
12-19-00 

14.5-6 
245 
12-19-00 
1       Added 
14.5-7 
252 
12-?4-01 
1—4       Added 
8.5-81—8.5-84 
253 
12-?4-01 
      Added 
2-196 
254 
?7-?2-02 
1 
6-1 
256 
12-?9-03 
1       Added 
14.5-8 
257 
12-?9-03 
1       Added 
14.5-9 
261 
?7-?6-04 

8.5-44 
262 
?7-?6-04 
      Rpld 
14.5-24 
263 
?7-?6-04 
      Rpld 
14.5-25 
264 
?9-21-04 
1—6       Added 
9-251—9-256 
266 
11-?1-05 
1—7       Added 
4-4 
267 
?1-29-07 
1—5 
2-86 
268 
?4-?3-07 

14.5-2 
274 
11-?4-09 

9-254 
278 
?3-12-13 

6-1 
281 
?8-20-13 
1—10       Added 
5-3 
282 
?6-26-15 
1 
13-3 


2 
13-4 
285 
12-20-16 
1       Added 
14.5-3(e) 
287 
?4-?3-18 
1 
1-7 


2 
7-31 


3 
10-101 


4 
10-140 


5 
10-184 


6 
11-56 


7 
11-81 
289 
?8-?7-18 
      Added 
4-5 
290 
?10-2-18 
I—VII       Added 
2-77—2-83 
292 
?1-?2-19 

5-3 
 


STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following 
the text, of references to the General Statutes of Connecticut, Revision of 1958. 
C.G.S.  
Section 
Section?  
this Code 
1-1 
1-2 
1-82a 
2-83 
1-82a(e) 
2-83 
4-124-1(b) 
2-96 
4-124i—4-124p 
2-96 
4-177 
2-83 
7-113 
2-6 
7-131a 
Char. § 6.4.1 
7-136 
2-146, 2-147 
7-138—7-145 
Ch. 12 
7-147a et seq. 
Ch. 2, Art. V, Div. 8 
7-147a—7-147k 
2-194, 2-195 
7-147c 
2-192 
7-148(b) 
15.5-34 
7-148(c) 
16-35 
7-148(c)(4)(B) 
Ch. 7 
7-148(c)(4)(F) 
Ch. 13.5 
7-148(c)(4)(G) 
Ch. 15 
7-148(c)(4)(H) 
Ch. 13 
7-148(c)(6)(A)(ii) 
Ch. 15 
7-148(c)(6)(A)(v) 
Ch. 13.5 

15.5-34 
7-148(c)(6)(B)(iii) 
Ch. 15 
7-148(c)(6)(B)(iv)—  
7-148(c)(6)(C)(v) 
Ch. 13.5 
7-148(c)(6)(C)(v) 
13.5-3 
7-148(c)(6)(C)(ii) 
Ch. 13.5 
7-148(c)(6)(C)(iii) 
Ch. 13.5 
7-148(c)(6)(b)(i) 
Ch. 15 
7-148(c)(7)(A)(i) 
Ch. 9 
7-148(c)(7)(A)(ii) 
Ch. 5 
7-148(c)(7)(B) 
15.5-34 
7-148(c)(7)(B)(i) 
Ch. 11 
7-148(c)(7)(B)(ii) 
Ch. 11 
7-148(c)(7)(C) 
Ch. 15 
7-148(c)(7)(F)(i) 
Ch. 13.5 
7-148(c)(7)(H)(x) 
15.5-34 
7-148(c)(7)(H)(xv) 
5-3 

9-253 
7-148(c)(10)(A) 
1-7 
7-148(c)(10)(B) 
2-83 
7-148aa 
5-3 
7-148b 
9-31 
7-148b—7-148f 
9-31 

9-32 

9-37 

9-44 
7-148c 
9-40 
7-148d(a) 
9-37 
7-148d(b) 
9-37 
7-148f 
9-47 
7-148ii 
5-3 
7-148o(b) 
5-3 
7-149a 
Ch. 13.5, Art. V 

13.5-121 
7-152 
5-3 
7-152c 
5-3 
7-152c(e) 
5-3 
7-152c(f) 
5-3 
7-152c(g) 
5-3 
7-234 et seq. 
Ch. 15 
7-245 et seq. 
Ch. 15 
7-253 
15-3 
7-253a 
15-3 
7-259—7-266 
Ch. 15 
7-273aa—7-273oo 
13-3 
7-324 et seq. 
Ch. 15 
7-359—7-368 
2-1 
7-407 et seq. 
Ch. 2, Art. IV 
ch. 118, 7-600—7-608       9-220 
7-601(c) 
9-218 
7-601(d) 
9-218 
7-602 
9-216 
8-1c 
2-86 
8-215 
14.5-2 

14.5-4 
8-336(f) 
9-72 
tit. 9 
Ch. 6 
9-601a(b)(9) 
2-79 
9-601a(b)(11) 
2-79 
tit. 12 
Ch. 14.5 
12-81(7)—(16) 
14.5-1 
12-81(19) 
14.5-8 
12-81(22) 
14.5-8 
12-81(55) 
14.5-9 
12-81b 
14.5-1 
12-81c 
14.5-5 
12-81f 
14.5-8 
12-81i 
12.5-9 
12-81l 
14.5-8 

14.5-9 
12-81s 
14.5-6 
12-129b 
15-3 
12-129n 
15-3 
12-170a 
15-3 
12-289a(h) 
8.5-81 
13a-1 et seq. 
Ch. 13.5 
13a-149 
13.5-3 
13b-101 
11-81 
14-162 
Ch. 11 
15-1—15-26a 
Ch. 16 
15-9 
16-41 
15-16 
16-50 
15-121 
16-56 
15-121 et seq. 
Ch. 16 
15-129 
16-39 
15-136 
Ch. 16, Art. II 
15-140c 
16-41 
15-170—15-175 
16-49 
19a-16a et seq. 
10-164 
19a-240 et seq. 
Ch. 8.5, Art. II,  
Div. 2 

8.5-27 
19a-242 
8.5-61 

8.5-63 
19a-243 
8.5-42 
19a-245 
8.5-47 
19a-356 et seq. 
Ch. 9 
20-1 et seq. 
10-164 
20-66 et seq. 
10-164 
20-86a et seq. 
10-164 
20-87a et seq. 
10-164 
20-103a et seq. 
10-164 
20-206a et seq. 
10-164 
20-206aa et seq. 
10-164 
20-234 et seq. 
10-164 
20-250 et seq. 
10-164 
tit. 21 
Ch. 10 
21-6 
10-1 
21-9 
10-31 
21-9 et seq. 
Ch. 10, Art. II 
21-13 
10-33 
21-27 et seq. 
Ch. 10, Art. IV 
21-29 
Ch. 10, Art. IV 
21-37 
Ch. 10, Art. III 
21-38 
10-77 
21a-240 
10-180 
21a-242 
10-173, 10-180 
22-3(b) 
5-3 
22a-2a 
2-164 
22a-28 et seq. 
2-111 
22a-42 et seq. 
Ch. 2, Art. V, Div. 3 
22a-113k et seq. 
Ch. 2, Art. V, Div. 6 
22a-113k—22a-113t 
16-31 
22a-113m—22a-113o 
2-164 
22a-113p 
2-165 
22a-115(1) 
13-2 
22a-115(19) 
13-2 
22a-207 et seq. 
Ch. 13, 13-2 
22a-227 
Ch. 13 
22a-250 
16-51 
22a-430 
15-84 

15-129 
22a-430(b) 
15-129 
22a-438 
15-84 
23-58 
15.5-35 
23-59 
15.5-35 
23-60 
15.5-35 
23-65 
15.5-35 
25-1 et seq. 
Ch. 15 
25-54h 
15-129 
25-54i 
15-129 
25-84—25-94 
8-1 
25-84—25-98 
8-2 
26-257a 
Ch. 2, Art. V, Div. 4 

2-126 
26-257a(b) 
2-131 
29-253 
Ch. 5 
29-291 et seq. 
Ch. 7 
29-293 
Ch. 7, Art. II 
30-1 
4-4 
30-1(3) 
4-3 
30-14—30-62a 
Ch. 4 
30-15—30-17 
Ch. 4 
30-21 
Ch. 4 
30-22 
Ch. 4 
30-26 
Ch. 4 
30-36 
Ch. 4 
30-38 
Ch. 4 
30-39 
Ch. 4 
30-41 
Ch. 4 
30-43 
Ch. 4 
30-52 
Ch. 4 
30-55—30-59 
Ch. 4 
30-74 
Ch. 4 
30-86 
Ch. 4 
30-90a 
4-4 
30-91 
Ch. 4 
30-91(c) 
4-1 
32-9p(d) 
14.5-3 
32-70 
14.5-3 
32-70d 
14.5-3 
45-88 
2-45 

2-62 
47a-14h 
9-42 
47a-20 
Ch. 9, Art. II 

9-32 

9-37 

9-42 

9-44 
47a-23c(b) 
9-32 
50-10—50-14 
2-5 
53-344 
8.5-81 
53-344a 
8.5-81 
ch. 103 
Ch. 15, Art. II 
ch. 446a 
13-2 

ZONING
REGULATIONS
TOWN OF GROTON, CT
Effective - October 1, 2019
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 1
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 2
PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
i
Table of Contents
How to Use these Regulations.......................................................................................... viii
SECTION 1: PURPOSE, AUTHORITY & APPLICATION .....................................................................1-1
1.1 Purpose..............................................................................................................................1-1
1.2 Authority...........................................................................................................................1-1
1.3 Provisions and requirements..............................................................................................1-1
SECTION 2: DEFINITIONS............................................................................................................2-1
2.1 General Definitions.............................................................................................................2-2
2.2 Flood Protection Definitions..............................................................................................2-32
SECTION 3: ZONING DIST RICTS & MAP........................................................................................3-1
3.1 Zoning Districts....................................................................................................................3-1
3.2 Residential Districts.............................................................................................................3-2
3.2-1 Residential (R) Districts, R-7 and R-12.................................................................................. 3-3
3.2-2 Residential Single Unit (RS) Districts, RS-12 and RS-20......................................................... 3-5
3.2-3 Rural Residential (RU) Districts, RU-20, RU-40, and RU-80.................................................. 3-7
3.2-4 Residential Multi-Unit (RM)............................................................................................... 3-10
3.3 Commercial & Mixed-Use Districts.....................................................................................3-12
3.3-1 Commercial Districts.......................................................................................................... 3-13
3.3-2 Mixed-Use Districts............................................................................................................ 3-19
3.4 Industrial Districts..............................................................................................................3-29
3.4-1 Industrial, General (IG)....................................................................................................... 3-30
3.4-2 Industrial, Mixed-Use (IM).................................................................................................. 3-31
3.5 Green Districts..................................................................................................................3-32
3.5-1 Green, Recreation (GR)....................................................................................................... 3-33
3.5-2 Green, Conservation (GC)................................................................................................... 3-34
3.6 Zoning Map........................................................................................................................3-35
3.7 Extent of Districts...............................................................................................................3-35
3.8 District Boundaries............................................................................................................3-35
3.9 Lot Lying in More than One District....................................................................................3-35
SECTION 4: DIST RICT REG ULATIONS ............................................................................................4-1
4.1 Table of Permitted Uses.......................................................................................................4-1
4.2 Dimensional, Building, and Lot Standards..........................................................................4-16
4.2-1 Introduction........................................................................................................................ 4-16
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019
PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
ii
4.2-2 Town-Wide Standards........................................................................................................ 4-18
4.2-3 Residential Density Calculations......................................................................................... 4-22
SECTION 5: USE STAN DARDS.......................................................................................................5-1
5.1 Conditional Uses..................................................................................................................5-1
5.1-1 Accessory Uses..................................................................................................................... 5-1
5.1-2 Agricultural, Animal & Natural Resources............................................................................ 5-7
5.1-3 Cultural, Recreation & Entertainment................................................................................ 5-14
5.1-4 Day Care............................................................................................................................. 5-20
5.1-5 Health Facilities.................................................................................................................. 5-22
5.1-6 Industrial............................................................................................................................ 5-23
5.1-7 Lodging............................................................................................................................... 5-25
5.1-8 Residential.......................................................................................................................... 5-26
5.1-9 Restaurant/Drinking Establishment.................................................................................... 5-39
5.1-10 Retail................................................................................................................................ 5-40
5.1-11 Services............................................................................................................................ 5-41
5.1-12 Transportation, Communication & Utilities...................................................................... 5-44
5.1-13 Vehicle & Heavy Equipment............................................................................................. 5-46
5.1-14 Standards For Non-Residential Uses In The Ru Zoning Districts....................................... 5-48
SECTION 6: SPECIAL DIST RICTS AND DEVELO PMENT OPTIONS....................................................6-1
6.1 Coastal Area Management (CAM) Boundary........................................................................6-1
6.1-1 Applicability.......................................................................................................................... 6-1
6.1-2 Coastal Site Plan................................................................................................................... 6-1
6.1-3 Coastal Resource Setback..................................................................................................... 6-1
6.2 Historic/Institutional Reuse.................................................................................................6-2
6.2-1 Purpose................................................................................................................................ 6-2
6.2-2 Applicability.......................................................................................................................... 6-2
6.2-3 Reuse Options...................................................................................................................... 6-2
6.2-4 Evaluation Criteria................................................................................................................ 6-2
6.3 Open Space Subdivisions.....................................................................................................6-3
6.3-1 Purpose................................................................................................................................ 6-3
6.3-2 Land Area............................................................................................................................. 6-3
6.3-3 Permitted Dwelling Units...................................................................................................... 6-3
6.3-4 Permitted Uses..................................................................................................................... 6-3
6.3-5 Minimum Lot Area............................................................................................................... 6-3
6.3-6 Dimensional and Building Requirements............................................................................. 6-4
6.3-7 Open Space Lands................................................................................................................ 6-5
6.3-8 Utilities................................................................................................................................. 6-5
6.3-9 Design Requirements........................................................................................................... 6-5
6.3-10 Common Area Maintenance.............................................................................................. 6-6
6.3-11 Zoning Map........................................................................................................................ 6-6
6.4 Water Resource Protection District......................................................................................6-7
6.4-1 Statement of Intent.............................................................................................................. 6-7
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 1
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 2
PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
iii
6.4-2 Establishment of District...................................................................................................... 6-7
6.4-3 Divided Lots and Determination of Applicability.................................................................. 6-7
6.4-4 Use Regulations.................................................................................................................... 6-8
6.4-5 Erosion and Sediment Control Performance Standards..................................................... 6-15
6.4-6 Stormwater Management.................................................................................................. 6-15
6.4-7 Site Design.......................................................................................................................... 6-17
6.4-8 Hazardous Materials........................................................................................................... 6-20
6.4-9 Conditions for Specific Uses............................................................................................... 6-23
6.4-10 Nonconforming Uses........................................................................................................ 6-26
SECTION 7: SPECIAL REG ULATIONS .............................................................................................7-1
7.1 Erosion and Sediment (E&S) Control Plan.............................................................................7-1
7.1-1 Applicability.......................................................................................................................... 7-1
7.1-2 Minor Erosion Control Plan.................................................................................................. 7-1
7.1-3 Erosion and Sediment Control Plan for Certification............................................................ 7-1
7.1-4 E&S Plan Certification........................................................................................................... 7-3
7.1-5 Construction Project Inspection........................................................................................... 7-3
7.1-6 Bonding................................................................................................................................ 7-3
7.2 Flood Protection Regulations...............................................................................................7-4
7.2-1 Purpose, Conflicts and Limitations....................................................................................... 7-4
7.2-2 Identification of Areas.......................................................................................................... 7-4
7.2-3 Flood Hazard Areas............................................................................................................... 7-5
7.2-4 Flood Hazard Areas - A Zones............................................................................................... 7-7
7.2-5 Flood Hazard Areas – AE..................................................................................................... 7-10
7.2-6 Floodway............................................................................................................................ 7-11
7.2-7 Coastal High Hazard Zones................................................................................................. 7-11
7.2-8 Specific Situation Variances................................................................................................ 7-13
7.3 Stormwater Management Plan and Low Impact Development...........................................7-14
7.3-1 Applicability........................................................................................................................ 7-14
7.3-2 Site Design.......................................................................................................................... 7-14
7.3-3 Stormwater Management Plan.......................................................................................... 7-14
7.4 Environmental Performance Standards..............................................................................7-16
7.4-1 Applicability........................................................................................................................ 7-16
7.4-2 General Standard................................................................................................................ 7-16
7.4-3 Standards for Dangerous and Objectionable Elements...................................................... 7-16
SECTION 8: SITE STAN DARDS.......................................................................................... 8-1
8.1 Landscaping, Screening and Buffer Areas................................................................. 8-1
8.1-1 Purpose..................................................................................................................... 8-1
8.1-2 Applicability.............................................................................................................. 8-1
8.1-3 General Requirements for Landscaping and Screening............................................8-1
8.1-4 Front Landscape Areas.............................................................................................8-3
8.1-5 Landscaped Parking and Vehicle Accessway Areas...................................................8-4
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019
PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
iv
8.1-6 Buffer Area................................................................................................................ 8-5
8.1-7 Design and Screening for Solid Waste Enclosures, Service Areas, Mechanical Equipment,
and Utilities......................................................................................................................... 8-6
8.2 Off-Street Parking and Loading, Bike Parking............................................................ 8-7
8.2-1 Applicability.............................................................................................................. 8-7
8.2-2 Obligation................................................................................................................. 8-7
8.2-3 Determination of Compliance..................................................................................8-8
8.2-4 Parking Spaces.......................................................................................................... 8-8
8.2-5 Interpretation of Required Parking Spaces.............................................................8-12
8.2-6 Parking and Loading Requirements in the MDD.....................................................8-13
8.2-7 Shared Parking........................................................................................................ 8-14
8.2-8 Phased Parking Development.................................................................................8-16
8.2-9 Minimum Area/Materials.......................................................................................8-17
8.2-10 Parking for People with Disabilities......................................................................8-17
8.2-11 Pedestrian Safety..................................................................................................8-18
8.2-12 Entrance and Exit Driveways.................................................................................8-18
8.2-13 Marking................................................................................................................ 8-19
8.2-14 Surfacing and Drainage.........................................................................................8-19
8.2-15 Lighting................................................................................................................. 8-19
8.2-16 Truck Loading Space.............................................................................................8-19
8.2-17 Bicycle Parking...................................................................................................... 8-20
8.3 Sidewalks............................................................................................................... 8-20
8.3-1 Applicability............................................................................................................ 8-20
8.3-2 Frontage Sidewalks.................................................................................................8-21
8.3-3 Extension of Sidewalks...........................................................................................8-21
8.3-4 Internal Sidewalks................................................................................................... 8-22
8.3-5 Options for Frontage Sidewalks..............................................................................8-23
8.4 Sign Regulations..................................................................................................... 8-24
8.4-1 Purpose and Declaration........................................................................................8-24
8.4-2 General Requirements............................................................................................8-24
8.4-3 Sign Prohibitions..................................................................................................... 8-26
8.4-4 Non-Conforming Signs............................................................................................8-26
8.4-5 Signs Permitted in All Districts................................................................................8-27
8.4-6 Signs Permitted in Residential Districts..................................................................8-27
8.4-7 Signs Permitted in Non-Residential Districts..........................................................8-29
8.4-8 Signs Permitted in Green Districts..........................................................................8-35
8.4-9 Waterfront Wall Signs in WW Zone........................................................................8-36
8.4-10 Special Large Commercial Building Signage Provisions........................................8-36
8.5 Outdoor Lighting.................................................................................................... 8-37
8.5-1 Purpose................................................................................................................... 8-37
8.5-2 Applicability............................................................................................................ 8-37
8.5-3 Standards................................................................................................................ 8-38
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 1
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 2
PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
v
8.6 Hazardous Materials.............................................................................................. 8-39
8.6-1 Hazardous Materials – Incidental...........................................................................8-39
8.6-2 Hazardous Materials – Non-Incidental...................................................................8-39
SECTION 9: PROCEDURES , ADMINIST RATION , AND ENFORCEMENT................................ 9-1
9.1 General Procedures.................................................................................................. 9-1
9.1-1 Intent........................................................................................................................ 9-1
9.1-2 Application Submittal Requirements: General.........................................................9-1
9.1-3 Professional Responsibilities for Plans and Design...................................................9-2
9.1-4 Receipt of Applications.............................................................................................9-3
9.1-5 Incomplete Applications...........................................................................................9-3
9.1-6 Sequence of Public Hearings....................................................................................9-3
9.1-7 Consultations............................................................................................................ 9-3
9.1-8 Public Notice............................................................................................................. 9-4
9.1-9 Applications, Notifications, and Referrals to other Agencies....................................9-5
9.1-10 Time Periods for Acting on Applications and Appeals............................................9-6
9.1-11 Action Documentation............................................................................................9-7
9.1-12 Bonding Requirements...........................................................................................9-7
9.1-13 Certificate of Site Plan Compliance and Certificate of Occupancy.........................9-9
9.2 Zoning Authority, Enforcement, and Permit............................................................. 9-9
9.2-1 Authority.................................................................................................................. 9-9
9.2-2 Zoning Permit and Certificate of Zoning Compliance.............................................9-10
9.3 Zoning Amendments.............................................................................................. 9-11
9.3-1 Authority................................................................................................................9-11
9.3-2 Applications............................................................................................................9-12
9.3-3 Public Hearing and Notification..............................................................................9-13
9.3-4 Exemptions.............................................................................................................9-13
9.3-5 Referrals..................................................................................................................9-13
9.3-6 Protest of Proposed Amendment...........................................................................9-13
9.3-7 Effective Date of Amendments/Re-application......................................................9-13
9.4 Special Permit........................................................................................................ 9-14
9.4-1 Purpose and Authority...........................................................................................9-14
9.4-2 Special Permit Procedures......................................................................................9-14
9.4-3 Applications............................................................................................................ 9-14
9.4-4 Referrals of Application and Notification:...............................................................9-16
9.4-5 Planning and Zoning Commission Action...............................................................9-16
9.4-6 Special Permit Criteria............................................................................................9-17
9.4-7 Revocation.............................................................................................................. 9-18
9.4-8 Amendments or Modifications...............................................................................9-18
9.4-9 Time Period and Expiration....................................................................................9-19
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019
PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
vi
9.5 Site Plan and Coastal Site Plan............................................................................... 9-19
9.5-1 Purpose and Authority...........................................................................................9-19
9.5-2 Site Plan Procedure................................................................................................9-20
9.5-3 Contents of Site Plan APPLICATION........................................................................9-22
9.5-4 Site Plan Objectives................................................................................................9-25
9.5-5 Coastal Site Plan Review.........................................................................................9-26
9.6 Zoning Board of Appeals........................................................................................ 9-28
9.6-1 Purpose and Authority...........................................................................................9-28
9.6-2 Applications and Procedures..................................................................................9-30
9.6-3 Hearings.................................................................................................................. 9-30
9.6-4 Referrals and Notifications.....................................................................................9-31
9.6-5 Decision of the Board and Post Decision Action.....................................................9-31
9.7 Non-Conforming Lots, Non-Conforming Uses of Land, Non-Conforming Structures, and
Non-Conforming Uses of Structures and Premises........................................................ 9-32
9.7-1 Intent......................................................................................................................9-32
9.7-2 Non-Conforming Lots.............................................................................................9-32
9.7-3 Non-Conforming Uses of Land................................................................................9-33
9.7-4 Non-Conforming Use of Structures........................................................................9-33
9.7-5 Non-Conforming Structures...................................................................................9-34
9.7-6 Repairs and Maintenance.......................................................................................9-35
SECTION 10: SEPARABILITY, REPEALE R AND VALIDITY................................................... 10-1
10.1 Separability.......................................................................................................... 10-1
10.2 Repealer.............................................................................................................. 10-1
10.3 Effective Date....................................................................................................... 10-1
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 1
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 2
PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
vii
Index ................................................................................................................................ 1
List of Amendments and Dates........................................................................................ 13
APPENDICIES................................................................................................................... 14
Appendix A: WRPD Appendices....................................................................................... 15
Appendix A.1: Connectitcut Guidelines For Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Measures...... 15
Appendix A.2: New Hampshire Stormwater Manual, BMP Pollutant Removal Efficiencies
(Appendix E) ............................................................................................... 16
Appendix A.3: 2004 Connecticut Stormwater Quality Manual, Ch. 8: Selection Criteria For
Stormwater Treatment Practices................................................................. 21
Appendix A.4: Spill Information........................................................................................... 37
Appendix A.5: Materials Management Plan........................................................................ 41
Appendix B: Mixed Use Town Center (MTC) Design Guidelines........................................ 50
Appendix C: Mixed Use Village Center (MVC) Design Guidelines...................................... 77
Appendix D: Lighting Design Guidelines......................................................................... 113
Appendix E: Two-Unit Dwelling Design Guidelines......................................................... 118
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019
PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
viii
HOW TO USE THESE REGULATIONS
a. Content Organization and Page Layout Article tabs link to the
first page of each article.
The colored tab behind
the section name and
number indicates the
section in which the
current page is located.
Pages are numbered
sequentially within
each Section
Link to How
to Use These
Regulations
Link to
Table of
Contents
Link to
Table of Uses
Link to Developmental
Standards Table
Link to
Zoning Map
Graphics, figures, and
tables illustrate concepts
or clarify regulations
Any bold, colored,
paragraph text indicates
there is a link to the
Section mentioned
Link to
Definitions
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 1
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 2
PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
ix
HOW TO USE THESE REGULATIONS
b. Symbols and User Notes
The following symbols are used throughout the Zoning Regulations:
? indicates the term is defined in Article 2, Definitions. (Note: Not every defined term is designated
with a ? symbol. Consult Definitions, for a list of all defined terms.)
c. Reading the Regulations
Rules have been established to assist with interpreting
the regulations. Below are some rules to keep in mind
when reading this document:
• Sometimes there may be general and specific
regulations that pertain to one particular aspect
of site design. In such instances, the specific
regulations must be followed.
• Discrepancies between text and an illustration
(including its caption) may occur. In the case of
such discrepancies, the text is considered the
accurate source of information.
• The use of the words will, shall, and must
carry significant meaning. Will, shall, and must
regulations must be followed. Requirements that
use the words may and should are discretionary,
meaning that the requirement is at the discretion
of the Planning and Zoning Commission or Zoning
Board of Appeals.
• If a term is not listed in Section 2, it will carry the
meaning customarily assigned to it.
• Conjunctions are often used and must be read
accurately:
?? AND indicates that all connected items,
conditions, provisions or events shall apply.
?? OR indicates that the connected items,
conditions, provisions or events may apply
singly or in any combination.
?? EITHER…OR indicates that the connected
items, conditions, provisions or events shall
apply singly, but not in combination.
? Digital User Note:
What is a link?
A link allows for quick reference to a relevant section.
By ‘clicking’ a link, the user is taken directly to a page
in the regulations or another reference document.
The user may return to the original page by clicking
the ‘previous view’ button in Adobe Acrobat Reader.
? If you have Adobe Acrobat Reader and you do
not see the ‘previous view’ button on your screen,
you can add it by turning on your ‘page navigation
toolbar’. For assistance, refer to the ‘Help’ menu in
your version of Acrobat Reader.
What information is linked?
Any color text is linked to either another page within
the Zoning Regulations, a separate Town ordinance
or document, or an external website.
In addition, several other features of the document
are linked to allow users to navigate through the
ordinance. Click on any of the following features to
quickly locate another section:
Section tabs located on the side of
each page are linked to the first page
of each Section.
Icons located at the bottom of each
page are linked to the ‘How to Use
These Regulations’ section, the main
Table of Contents, the Zoning Map, etc.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019
PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
x
HOW TO USE THESE REGULATIONS
d. Typical Steps for Development
1. Locate the parcel on the ZONING MAP to determine to which district the
property is designated.
• If the Development is within a SPECIAL DIST RICT or OVERLAY go to the
relevant portion of Section 6 Special Districts and Development Options
to understand the specific development provisions within the overlay and
how the zoning district applies (e.g., Coastal Area Management (CAM),
Water Resource Protection District).
2. Review DIST RICTS to understand the character and intent of the district.
3. Review USES to determine the permitted uses by district, understand use
Categories, and find applicable conditions or requirements for the uses in
specific districts.
4. Review DIMENSIONAL, BUILDING, and LOT STAN DARDS to determine the
requirements for placement of a building on a lot.
5. Review SPECIAL REG ULATIONS for location in a Flood Zone and for
development requirements for Erosion and Sediment Control and Stormwater
Management.
6. Review SITE STAN DARDS for requirements for development of the site.
• Landscaping, Screening and Buffering
• Parking, Loading and Bicycle
• Sidewalks
• Signs
• Lighting
• Hazardous Materials
7. Determine the applicable DEVELO PMENT APPROVAL PROCESS to prepare all
required application materials.
Zoning Map
Section 6
Section 3
Section 4.1
Section 5
Section 3
Section 4.2
Section 7
Section 8
8.1
8.2
8.3
8.4
8.5
8.6
Section 9
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 1
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 2
PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
xi
HOW TO USE THESE REGULATIONS
e. Application Types
The following application types have been established for these regulations:
(1) Review agency based on associated application.
1-1
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019
PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
SECTION 1: PURPOSE, AUTHORITY &
APPLICATION
1.1 PURPOSE
In accordance with the provisions of Chapter 124 of the General Statutes of the State of Connecticut (CGS), as
amended, the Zoning Commission of the Town of Groton hereby adopts the following Zoning Regulations for
the Town of Groton, Connecticut, for the following purposes:
Promoting the health, safety, and general welfare of the community; lessening congestion in the streets; securing
safety from fire, panic and other dangers; providing adequate light and air; preventing the overcrowding of
land and avoiding undue concentration of population; facilitating adequate provision for transportation, water,
sewerage, schools, parks, and other public requirements; conserving the value of buildings, and encouraging
the most appropriate use of land throughout the Town; providing for the public health, comfort, and general
welfare in living and working conditions; regulating and restricting the location of trades and industries and
the location of buildings designed for specific uses; regulating and limiting the height and bulk of buildings
hereafter erected; regulating and determining the area of yards, courts and other open spaces for buildings
hereafter erected; and exercising reasonable consideration for restoration and protection of the ecosystem
and habitat of Long Island Sound.
1.2 AUTHORITY
The Town of Groton Zoning Official has the authority to interpret these regulations.
No land, building, or part thereof shall be constructed, reconstructed, extended, enlarged, moved, arranged,
designed, intended to be used, or altered except in conformity with these regulations, and no lot shall be
less in area or width nor have yards that do not meet the dimensional requirements of these regulations, nor
shall any building or buildings or part thereof occupy in the aggregate a greater percentage of the lot, nor
shall any building be greater in height than as prescribed in the applicable section hereof, except as otherwise
specifically provided in these regulations. No lot shall be diminished in area nor shall any yard or open space
be reduced, except in conformity with these regulations.
1.3 PROVISIONS AND REQUIREMENTS
In the event that there are found to be conflicting requirements within these regulations, the most restrictive
provisions shall be applied.
The provisions of these regulations may be superseded by, or be in addition to, other local, State or Federal
laws or regulations.
These regulations do not release a person from having to comply with a more restrictive law, ordinance,
easement, covenant, rule, regulation or permit.
2-1 Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 1
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 2
PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
SECTION 2: DEFINITIONS
For the purpose of these regulations, certain terms or words shall be defined as below.
• The words “will”, “shall” or “must” are always mandatory and not discretionary. The words “may” or
“should” are permissive.
• All words and phrases shall be construed and understood according to the common preferred usage of
the language; but technical words and phrases and such as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate
meaning in the law shall be construed and understood according to such peculiar and appropriate meaning.
• Words in the present tense include the future; the singular number includes the plural, and vice versa,
unless the context clearly indicates to the contrary.
• The word “lot” includes the words “plot” or “parcel”.
• The word “building” or “structure” includes any part thereof. Any building shall be considered a “structure”.
• The word “person” includes an individual, a corporation, a partnership, an incorporated association or any
similar entity.
• The word “used” shall be deemed also to include “designed, intended or arranged to be used”.
• Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, the conjunctions noted below shall be interpreted as
follows:
?? The term “and” indicates that all connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply.
?? The term “or” indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events may apply singularly
or in any combination.
?? The term “either…or” indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply
singularly but not in combination.
• Unless otherwise specified, all distances must be measured horizontally.
These definitions are listed alphabetically in two sections: Section 2.1 General Definitions and Section 2.2
Flood Protection Definitions. Flood Protection Definitions apply only to the Flood Protection provisions of
Section 7.2, Flood Protection Regulations.
2-2
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019
PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
2.1 GENERAL DEFINITIONS
ABUTTER: A person or entity holding a fee simple interest in real property abutting property cited in an
application, petition or request pending before a commission.
ABUTTING: The condition of two properties having a common property line or boundary or being separated
from such a common border by a right-of-way, alley or easement.
ACCESS: A means for vehicular or pedestrian entry to or exit from a property.
ACCESS, UNOBSTRUCTED: An area of the site that can be feasibly designed and constructed using established
engineering practices and can be used legally for vehicular entry and exit.
ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT: A residential dwelling unit subordinate in size and accessory to a one-unit
dwelling, which may be located within, attached to or on the same lot as a one-unit dwelling.
ACCESSORY USE OR BUILDING: A subordinate use or building or structure which is customarily incidental to
and located on the same lot with the principal use or building or a contiguous lot under the same ownership.
ACTIVE SENIOR HOUSING: Housing designed and deed restricted for seniors, 55 years or older, including
Assisted Living or Congregate Living Facilities. Furthermore, it is a housing facility or community that fully
complies with the provisions of the United States Fair Housing Act 42 USC Section 3601 et seq. as amended
(and Connecticut State Statutes Section 46a-64b, as amended, as it pertains to “Housing for Older Persons”).
This includes compliance with any and all rules promulgated by the United States Department of Housing and
Urban Development which govern implementation of such Act and compliance with all rules and restrictions
promulgated by the Town of Groton and set forth in this zoning regulation.
ADAPTIVE REUSE: Rehabilitation or renovation of existing building(s) or structures for any use(s) other than
the present use(s).
AFFORDABLE HOUSING: Housing, whether for rent or for ownership, that meets the criteria for affordable
housing as defined by C.G.S. Section 8-30g-2.
AGRICULTURE: The use of land or buildings for agricultural
purposes, including farming, dairying, pasturage agriculture,
horticulture, floriculture, viticulture, and animal and poultry
husbandry, and the accessory uses and buildings for growing or
storing the products. This term may include accessory retail sales
by the producer of products raised on the farm.
AGRICULTURE, COMMERCIAL: The production principally for the
sale of plants, animals or their products including, but not limited
to: forage and sod crops; livestock such as cattle, poultry, sheep,
swine, horses, and goats (including the breeding and grazing of all
such animals, and the milking of dairy animals); bees and apiary
products; fruits and vegetables; and nursery, trees, and floral
products. Commercial agriculture may be conducted indoors
or outdoors, and does not include animal feedlot operations,
AG RICULT URE EVENTS
Examples may include:
• Farm tours
• Classes and/or conferences
related to agricultural
production and skills
• Petting, feeding, and viewing
of farm animals
• Special or seasonal events
such as weddings, farm
dinners, etc.
2-3 Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 1
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 2
PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
aquaculture or forestry /silviculture. For purposes of these regulations, commercial nurseries and greenhouses
are not considered commercial agriculture.
AGRICULTURE EVENTS: An event or activity accessory to and conducted on the same property as an ongoing
Commercial Agriculture operation. Events or activities may be agricultural or non-agricultural in nature but
must use the scenic or agricultural setting of the farm as the basis for the enterprise.
AGRICULTURE, HOME: The production, principally for the use, consumption or education of the residents of
the property, of agricultural products. May include plants, animals or their products, including gardening, fruit
production, and raising of poultry and livestock, including accessory sale of products grown or produced on the site.
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE PRODUCTION: A facility used for the commercial purpose of processing grapes, grains or
other fruits or vegetables to produce wine, beer or spirits. Processing includes wholesale sales, crushing, brewing,
distilling, fermenting, blending, aging, storage, bottling, administrative office functions, and warehousing. Retail
sales and tasting facilities of wine, beer, spirits, and related promotional items, as well as a café with limited food
service, may be permitted as accessory use to any winery, brewery or distillery operations.
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE PRODUCTION, LARGE SCALE: Includes the definition for Alcoholic Beverage
Production and exceeds 2,000 SF of floor area.
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE PRODUCTION, SMALL SCALE: Includes the definition for Alcoholic Beverage
Production and does not exceed 2,000 SF of floor area.
ALTERATION: As applied to a building or structure, means a change or rearrangement in the structural parts
thereof, the movement of all or any part thereof or the substantial reconstruction thereof, to produce
a substantial change in appearance, character or construction; also means an enlargement, whether by
increasing in height, coverage, volume or floor area. As applied to a use, means a change or enlargement in
the character, area occupied by, intensity or scope of the use, including, but not limited to, the extension of
hours of operation, the addition of other activities, equipment, functions or processes, or the extension into
additional land or building area.
ANTENNA: A device used to receive or transmit telecommunications or radio signals. Such signals include, but
are not limited to, radio, television, cellular telephone, paging, personal communication services (PCS), and
microwave communications. Such antennae are typically mounted on a tower or support on the rooftop of a
structure or on free-standing towers. Examples include panels, microwave dishes, and single poles known as
whip antennae.
AQUACULTURE: The farming and production of fish, oysters, clams, mussels, and other molluscan shellfish, as
well as aquatic plants such as seaweed and other aquatic plants, in tanks or other built structures whether indoors
or outdoors, and accessory uses such as feed storage and water treatment facilities. This may include aquaponics,
which combines aquaculture with hydroponics (cultivating plants in water) in a symbiotic environment.
ARTISAN AND CRAFT WORKSHOPS: An establishment, not exceeding 3,000 SF of floor area, for the preparation,
display, and sale of individually crafted artwork, jewelry, furniture, sculpture, pottery, leathercraft, hand-woven
articles, and related items.
ASSISTED LIVING FACILITY: A managed residential facility designed for seniors who require assistance in their
daily care and with support services provided through an entity that is licensed by the CT Department of
Public Health as an Assisted Living Services Agency (ALSA). The facility must offer communal dining facilities
with full meal service, nursing services, transportation, and assistance with personal care to residents. This
2-4
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019
PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
includes facilities licensed and designed to meet the needs of seniors with Alzheimer’s or other dementiarelated
illnesses.
AWNING: A roof-like cover, often of fabric, metal or glass, designed and intended for protection from the
weather or as a decorative embellishment, and which projects from a wall or roof of a structure over a window,
walk, door or the like.
BED AND BREAKFAST: An owner-occupied residential facility that is managed by the property owner and
provides transient lodging to the general public without in-room cooking facilities.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs): A range of procedures generally accepted by the engineering and
construction industry to provide a schedule of activities, prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping
practices, pollution prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other management
practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to stormwater, receiving
waters or stormwater conveyance systems. BMPs also include treatment practices, operating procedures, and
practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal or drainage from raw materials
storage.
BLOCK: The property abutting one side of a street and lying between the two nearest intersecting streets
(crossing or terminating) or between the nearest such street and railroad right-of-way, watercourse or any
other physical barrier to the continuity of development or corporate boundary line of the municipality.
BOARD: The Zoning Board of Appeals (ZBA) of the Town of Groton.
BREWERY: See ‘Alcoholic Beverages Production’
BUILDING: An independent structure having a roof supported by columns or walls. Also includes a shed, garage,
stable, greenhouse or other accessory building. Covered porches or covered decks (whether open or enclosed)
and fixed awnings are considered part of the building, as well as all uncovered decks, ramps, and stairs over
30-inches in height above finished grade. Any other structure over 8-feet in height, including walls and fences,
is considered a building for meeting minimum required yard (building setback) standards.
BUILDING AREA: The horizontal ground area enclosed by the walls or perimeter of a building together with all
roofed portions, covered porches, covered decks, fixed awnings, and uncovered decks, ramps, and stairs over
30-inches in height.
BUILDING COVERAGE: The percentage of the total area of a lot that is covered by the aggregate building area
on the lot.
BUILDING ENVELOPE: The area formed by the front, side, and rear setback lines of a lot within which the
principal buildings must be located.
BUILDING LINE: A line parallel to the street at a distance equal to the minimum required front yard.
BUILDING SETBACK: A line marking the setback distance from a lot line which establishes the minimum front,
side or rear yards as required by the zoning district in which the lot is located. Also known as Minimum
Required Yard.
BUILDING STORM DRAIN: A building drain that conducts storm water from any part of a building to a storm
water disposal location.
2-5 Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 1
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 2
PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
BULK AND MASSING: The size and mutual relationships of a building or structure and the location of same with
respect to: size and height of the building; location of exterior walls at all levels in relation to lot lines, streets or
other buildings; gross floor area of the building in relation to the lot area; all open space allocated to the building.
BUS AND LIMOUSINE GARAGE AND MAINTENANCE: Any lot or land area used for the storage, layover,
maintenance or repair of limousines, passenger buses or motor coaches.
CAMA: A Computer Aided Mass Appraisal system used by the Groton Assessor to establish fair market value
for all land and improvements within the Town of Groton.
CAMPGROUND: A lot where two or more campsites are located, established or maintained for occupancy by
the general public as temporary living quarters for recreation or vacation purposes.
CAMPSITE: A plot of land within a campground intended for the accommodation of one tent, recreation
vehicle, or other individual camping unit on a temporary basis.
CANOPY: A freestanding cover above an outdoor service area, such as at a fuel dispensing station.
CANOPY/SHADE TREE: A large deciduous tree having a minimum height of twenty-five (25) feet at maturity,
typically used as a means of providing shade within and adjacent to parking areas, play areas or other such
open spaces, as a means of reducing excessive heat, reducing stormwater temperatures from pavement areas,
and for other like beneficial purposes.
CARETAKER/SECURITY SERVICES DWELLING: A dwelling for a caretaker or security services provided as an
accessory use and located on the same property as the principal use. One such dwelling unit is occupied by an
employee or contractor of the principal use who resides on the lot for the legitimate provision of maintenance
and/or security services.
CEMETERY: Land used or intended to be used for the burial of the dead and dedicated for cemetery purposes,
including columbariums and mausoleums, when operated in conjunction with and within the boundary of
such cemetery.
CERTIFICATION, EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL: A signed, written approval by the PZC, its designated
agent or the New London County Soil and Water Conservation District, that a soil erosion and sediment control
plan complies with the applicable requirements of these regulations.
CERTIFIED EROSION CONTROL SPECIALIST: An individual who has knowledge of soil properties, erosive
stormwater runoff, erosion rates, vegetative establishment, sediment capture, sediment detention, and
sediment control products, and is a recognized specialist in soil erosion and sediment control evidenced by
successfully completing the Certified Erosion Control Specialist program.
CHURCHES AND OTHER PLACES OF RELIGIOUS WORSHIP: A building, together with its accessory buildings and
uses, where persons regularly assemble for religious purposes and related social events and which building,
together with its accessory buildings and uses, is maintained and controlled by a religious body organized to
sustain religious ceremonies and purposes. Includes accessory residential structures and associated buildings for
religious personnel. Does not include any use defined in these regulations as Public/Private Schools or Day Care.
CLUB, LODGE OR ASSOCIATION: An establishment occupied and operated by a membership association solely
for recreation, social, fraternal, religious, political or athletic purposes whose activities are confined to members
and guests, and not to the general public. This use category does not include overnight accommodations or
any activity which is typically carried out primarily for business or gain.
2-6
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019
PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
COMMERCIAL RECREATION AND FITNESS, INDOOR, SMALL SCALE:
A recreational or fitness activity, carried out for profit, generally
conducted within a building or substantial structure in a space
not to exceed 2,000 SF of gross floor area.
COMMERCIAL RECREATION AND FITNESS, INDOOR, LARGE SCALE:
A recreational or fitness activity, carried out for profit, generally
indoors in a space greater than 2,000 SF of gross floor area.
COMMERCIAL RECREATION, OUTDOOR: A recreational activity,
which is typically carried out for profit, conducted primarily
outside of an enclosed building.
COMMISSION: Unless otherwise specified, Commission means
the Planning and Zoning Commission (PZC) of the Town of Groton.
COMMON DRIVEWAY: A private access shared by two or more
property owners and providing access for vehicles to a parking
space, garage, dwelling or other structure or use.
COMMUNITY GARDEN: A single piece of land gardened collectively
by a group of people to produce plants.
CONFERENCE/EXHIBITION HALL: A commercial facility used for
assemblies or meetings, including exhibition space, conventions,
conferences, seminars, product displays, etc.
CONGREGATE LIVING FACILITY: A residential facility designed for
seniors, 55 years or older, who require little, if any, assistance with activities of daily living and who may have
some home health care-type services provided to them by in-house staff or an outside agency. The facility
must offer communal dining facilities with at least one daily meal and include, but not be limited to, services
such as housekeeping, organized social and recreational activities, and transportation services.
CONSTRUCTION, FARM, AND HEAVY EQUIPMENT RENTALS: The use of any building, land area or portion
thereof, for the display and rental or lease of tractors or construction and heavy equipment, including accessory
parking and servicing of associated vehicles and equipment.
CONSTRUCTION, FARM, AND HEAVY EQUIPMENT SALES: The use of any building, land area or portion thereof,
for the display and sale of tractors or construction and heavy equipment, including accessory parking and
servicing of associated vehicles and equipment.
CONSTRUCTION VEHICLE AND HEAVY EQUIPMENT PARKING, RESIDENTIAL: The parking of a commercial
vehicle as accessory to a principal residential use.
CONTRACTOR VEHICLE PARKING AND CONSTRUCTION EQUIPMENT STORAGE: The storage of a contractor’s
construction equipment and the parking of contractor’s commercial vehicle(s), as a primary, industrial use.
COTTAGE COMMUNITY: A residential development on a single lot made up of cottage units that may be
situated on a common, landscaped courtyard, share a common parking area, and may include one or more
common buildings for community gatherings, as authorized pursuant to Section 5.1-8.E of these regulations
and in compliance with all design standards therein.
COMMERCIAL RECREATION AND
FITNESS , INDOOR, SMALL SCALE
Examples may include:
• Small gym or personal
training center
• Small yoga and pilates
studios
• Swimming pools
• Martial arts
• Indoor golf, etc.
COMMERCIAL RECREATION ,
OUTDOOR
Examples may include:
• Golf driving ranges
• Miniature golf
• Water parks
• Outdoor ropes courses
• Wall climbing
• Swimming pools
• Batting cages
• Tennis clubs, etc.
2-7 Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 1
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 2
PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
COTTAGE UNIT: A one-unit dwelling built as part of a Cottage Community, as authorized pursuant to Section
5.1-8.E of these regulations and in compliance with all design standards therein.
COURT: An open area, other than a yard, on the same lot with a building(s), which space is bounded on three
or more sides by the walls of such a building(s).
CREMATORY SERVICES: An enclosed facility wherein human remains are cremated.
CRITICAL ROOT ZONE: A circular area measured outward from a tree trunk, representing the essential area
of the roots that must be maintained for the tree’s survival and typically associated with the “drip line” or
otherwise one foot of radial distance for every inch of tree diameter at breast height (i.e. 4 ½ feet above
grade), but in no case less than an eight-foot radius.
DAY CARE: A facility that provides for the care of children or adults. Those receiving care are not all related to
each other by blood or marriage and are not legal wards or foster children of the care providers, and for which
care a payment, fee or grant is made. Of those receiving care, only dependents of an attendant adult living at
the site may reside there.
ADULT DAY CARE CENTER: A non-residential facility in which custodial care is provided for related or
unrelated adults who need supervision and/or assistance with routine daily functions but who are not
in need of regular medical attention (including drug or alcohol rehabilitation services). Programs may
include training in things such as self-care, activities on daily living, personal and social adjustment,
work habits and skills, and speech and language development, and/or recreational activities of a
social, athletic or purely diversionary nature.
FAMILY CHILD CARE HOME: A child care facility which consists of a private family home caring for not
more than six (6) children, including the provider’s own children not in school full time, where the
children are cared for not less than three (3) nor more than twelve (12) hours during a twenty-four
(24) hour period and where care is given on a regularly recurring basis. During the regular school year,
a maximum of three (3) additional children who are in school full time, including the provider’s own
children, are permitted, except that if the provider has more than three (3) children who are in school
full time, all the provider’s children are permitted. Said facility conforms to this definition if it operates
either as a for profit or nonprofit business and meets all the requirements of the State of Connecticut
Office of Early Childhood, Division of Licensing “Statutes and Regulations for Licensing Family Day Care
Homes”, Connecticut General Statutes Section 19a-87b through 19a-87e inclusive, as amended, and
any other applicable regulations, statutes or ordinances. This definition is deemed not to represent an
intensification of use of a property.
CHILD CARE CENTER: A facility which offers or provides a program of supplementary care to more than
twelve (12) related or unrelated children outside their own homes on a regular basis for a part of the
twenty-four (24) hours in one or more days in the week, which is operated either as a for profit or
nonprofit business, and licensed by the State of Connecticut in accordance with Connecticut General
Statutes 17b-733, et. Seq., and any other applicable regulations, statutes or ordinances. This includes
preschools, learning centers, and any other such use registered with the State per the statutes noted
above. May be accessory to an elementary or secondary school, college or university.
GROUP CHILD CARE HOME: A child care facility consisting of a private home which offers or provides
a program of supplementary care to not less than seven (7) nor more than twelve (12) related or
unrelated children on a regular basis for part of the twenty-four (24) hours in one or more days in
the week, which is operated either as a for profit or nonprofit business, and licensed by the State
of Connecticut in accordance with Connecticut General Statutes 17b-733, et. Seq.b, and any other
2-8
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019
PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
applicable regulations, statutes or ordinances. This includes preschools, learning centers, and any
other such use registered with the State per the statutes noted above.
DEEP: State of Connecticut Department of Energy and Environmental Protection
DEVELOPER: The legal or beneficial owner or owners of any land included in a proposed development including the
holder of an option or contract to purchase, or other persons having enforceable proprietary interests in such land.
DEVELOPMENT: Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate including, but not limited to, the
construction of buildings or structures; the construction of additions, alterations or substantial improvements
to buildings or structures; the placement of buildings or structures; mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving,
excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment; the storage, deposition or extraction of materials;
and the installation, repair or removal of public or private sewage disposal systems or water supply facilities.
DIRECTOR OF HEALTH: The Director of the duly appointed Health District for the Town of Groton or his/her deputy.
DISTILLERY: See ‘Alcoholic Beverages Production’
DISTURBED AREA: An area of land subject to erosion due to the removal of vegetative cover or earthmoving
activities, including filling.
DRINKING ESTABLISHMENT: A commercial establishment open to the general public which sells and serves
alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises, and in which the service of food is only incidental to
the consumption of such beverages. Dancing and entertainment may also be permitted as an accessory use.
DRIVE THROUGH FACILITY: Any facility accessory to an allowed use with operations that include a building
opening, such as windows, doors or mechanical devices, through which occupants of a vehicle receive a
product or service.
DWELLING: Any building or portion thereof which is designed or used exclusively for residential purposes and
containing one or more dwelling units.
DWELLING, MULTI-UNIT: Three or more principal dwelling units, all of which are located on the same lot.
DWELLING, ONE-UNIT: One principal dwelling unit located on a lot that does not contain any other principal
dwelling units.
DWELLING, TWO-UNIT: Two principal dwelling units located on the same lot, with no other principal dwelling
units located on such lot.
DWELLING UNIT: A room or group of connected rooms that include a bathroom and facilities for living, sleeping,
cooking, and eating that are arranged, designed or intended to be used as living quarters for one household,
whether owner occupied, rented or leased.
ENTERTAINMENT OR SPORTS FACILITIES: An indoor or outdoor land use attracting large numbers of both local
and regional visitors for entertainment or sporting events. An entertainment or sports facility may include
arenas, amphitheaters, mega-theaters, stadiums and ball parks, other sports facilities, and theme parks.
EROSION: The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by water, wind, ice or gravity.
2-9 Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 1
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 2
PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
EXEMPTION: A privilege which dispenses with the general standard for a use or activity that would otherwise
be required or regulated.
FILLING/EXTRACTION OF EARTH PRODUCTS: The removal, extraction, excavation, fill or grading for any purpose
of soil, sand, shell, gravel, ore, rock, clay or any similar material by whatever process.
FLAG: A piece of cloth or similar material, typically oblong or square, attachable by one edge to a pole or rope
and used as a symbol, emblem or decoration.
FLEX SPACE: A building designed to accommodate a combination of office, light industrial, wholesale, and
warehousing functions, the exact proportions of each use being subject to user needs over time.
FLOOD PROTECTION: For all definitions related to Flood Protection, see Section 2.2 Flood Protection Definitions.
FLOOR: The top surface of an enclosed area of a building (including basement), i.e. top of slab in concrete slab
construction or top of wood flooring in wood frame construction. The term does not include the floor of a
garage used solely for parking vehicles.
FLOOR AREA, GROSS: The floor area within the inside perimeter of the exterior walls of the building under
consideration, exclusive of vent shafts and courts, without deduction for corridors, stairways, closets, the
thickness of interior walls, columns or other features. The gross floor area of a building, or portion thereof,
not provided with surrounding exterior walls shall also include the usable area under the horizontal projection
of the roof or floor above. The gross floor area shall not include shafts with no openings or interior courts.
FLOOR AREA, NET: The actual occupied floor area not including unoccupied accessory areas such as corridors,
stairways, toilet rooms, mechanical rooms, and closets.
FLOOR AREA, PATRON: All floor areas of the facility (including outside areas such as patios, decks, and the like)
that are accessible to a customer, client, participant, visitor or guest of the facility except for hallways, stairwells,
bathroom areas, and those areas of the building used exclusively by the employees of the establishment. This
area shall include, but not be limited to, the entire area for seating, standing, assembling, queuing, ordering,
and service.
FLOOR AREA RATIO: The gross floor area of a building or buildings divided by the area of the zoning lot on
which it is located.
FOOD AND NON-ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE PRODUCTION, LARGE
SCALE: Any facility of more than 3,000 SF of production space
that engages in commercial on-site production and packaging
of food, food related products, and/or non-alcoholic beverages,
including wholesale.
FOOD AND NON-ALCOHOLIC
BEVERAGE PRODUCTION,
LARGE SCALE
Examples may include:
• Machine-produced bakery
and confectionary products
• Machine processing and
jarring or canning of fruits
and vegetables
• Large-scale dairy, meat, and
fish processing, etc.
2-10
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019
PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
FOOD AND NON-ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE PRODUCTION, SMALL
SCALE: Any facility of no more than 3,000 SF of production
space that engages in commercial on-site production of artisan
or small-batch food, food related products, and/or nonalcoholic
beverages, generally produced by hand or with limited
mechanization, and including limited wholesale.
FOOD TRUCK: See RESTAURANT, MOBILE
FOOTCANDLE: A unit of illumination equivalent to the illumination
produced by one candle at a distance of one foot and equal to
one lumen per square foot.
FORESTRY/SILVICULTURE: Any ongoing activity which may alter
the physical or vegetative characteristics of any forest land
and which is undertaken in connection with the harvest of commercial forest products and the long-term
management of the forest land.
FRONTAGE: The uninterrupted linear or curvilinear extent of a lot measured along the street right-of-way from
the intersection of one side lot line to the intersection of the other side lot line. All sides of a lot that abut a
street are considered frontage.
FUEL DEALER WITH STORAGE: A business that sells and delivers fuel to residences, institutions, and businesses
and may also provide accessory services such as equipment repair, cleaning, and maintenance. May include
indoor office, truck storage, and fuel storage facilities.
FUEL DEALER WITHOUT STORAGE: A business that sells and delivers fuel to residences, institutions, and
businesses and may also provide accessory services such as equipment repair, cleaning, and maintenance. May
include accessory indoor office and storage space for one fuel delivery truck, but no other fuel storage facilities.
FUEL DISPENSING STATION: Any lot or parcel of land or portion thereof used partly or entirely for dispensing
flammable liquids, combustible liquids, liquefied flammable gas or flammable gas into the fuel tanks of
vehicles. This does not include bulk storage and wholesale of liquid fuels. May also include, separately or in
conjunction, electric fuel stations for electric and hybrid plug-in vehicles.
FUNERAL SERVICES: An establishment providing services such as preparing the human dead for burial
and arranging and managing funerals. May include limited caretaker facilities. This classification excludes
crematory services, cemeteries, columbariums, and other permanent storage of human remains. The facility
may include an indoor space for the conduct of funeral services and other spaces for funeral services and
informal gatherings or display of funeral equipment.
GARAGE: A building or structure, or part thereof, used for the parking and storage of vehicles.
GOLF COURSE: A tract of land laid out with at least nine holes for playing a game of golf and improved with
tees, greens, fairways, and hazards. A golf course may include a clubhouse, restrooms, driving range, shelters,
etc. as accessory uses.
FOOD AND NON-ALCOHOLIC
BEVERAGE PRODUCTION,
SMALL SCALE
Examples may include:
• Coffee roasting
• Ice cream
• Baked goods
• Confectioneries
• Canned and preserved fruits
and vegetables
• Sodas and seltzers, etc.
2-11 Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 1
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 2
PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
GRADE, AVERAGE FINISHED: A reference plane established by the average of the ground level adjoining the
building or structure along all exterior walls, from the exterior wall to a point 10-feet from the building or structure.
GRADE, FINISHED: Only that grading necessary for construction, not including any filling to gain greater height.
GRADING: Any excavating, grubbing, filling (including hydraulic fill) or stockpiling of earth materials or any
combination thereof, including the land in its excavated or filled condition.
GREEN ROOF: A roof that is purposely designed and built to accommodate natural plantings as a means of
treating stormwater, reducing stormwater runoff, reducing energy use, providing habitat and/or forage, and
for other like purposes generally associated with more sustainable building practices.
HAZARDOUS MATERIAL: Hazardous Material means (A) any hazardous substance as defined by 40 CFR 302.4
and listed therein in Table 302.4, excluding mixtures with a total concentration of less than 1% hazardous
substances based on volume, (B) any hazardous waste as defined by Section 22a-449(c)-101 of the Regulations
of Connecticut State Agencies, (C) any pesticide defined by Section 22a-47 of the Connecticut General Statutes
or (D) any oil or petroleum as defined in Section 22a-448 of the Connecticut General Statutes.
Average Finished Grade
2-12
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019
PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
HEIGHT, BUILDING OR STRUCTURE: The vertical distance from the average finished grade for a building or
other structure, or for a building wing or distinct portion of a building or other structure, to the highest point
of the following elevations on the building or other structure:
• To the highest point of the highest dome, flat, shed, or mansard roof, including the top of any parapet;
• To the mean level between the highest ridge and its lowest corresponding eave of a gable, hip, gambrel,
or a-frame roof;
• To the highest point of buildings or structures not mentioned here, or for any structures that do not
have a roof.
HOME-BASED BUSINESS: The use of a portion of a dwelling unit or accessory building for business purposes by
the resident occupants which use is clearly incidental and accessory to the residential use of the dwelling unit
when such use does not change the residential character thereof.
HOSPITAL/EMERGENCY TREATMENT CENTER: A facility for health maintenance, diagnosis or treatment of
human diseases, pain, injury or physical condition. Such facility may include overnight accommodations for
patients, ancillary services such as pharmacies, cafeterias, and gift shops, and emergency room facilities with
accommodations for ambulance traffic.
HOTEL/MOTEL: A building or buildings providing transient lodging to the general public for compensation,
with daily cleaning service, and with or without meals or kitchen facilities.
HOUSEHOLD: A household is considered the living together in a single dwelling unit of: (a) Any number of
individuals related by blood, marriage or adoption, or (b) up to four (4) adult persons all of whom are not
necessarily related to each other by blood, marriage or adoption, and their minor children.
Height, Building or Structure
2-13 Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 1
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 2
PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
IMPERVIOUS COVERAGE: The percent of a lot covered by
impervious surface/cover.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE/COVER: A hard material that prevents the
percolation of water into the soil including building roofs, streets,
parking lots, driveways, sidewalks, swimming pools, and other
impenetrable surfaces.
INDUSTRIAL, HEAVY: Uses engaged in the basic processing and
manufacturing of materials or products predominantly from
extracted or raw materials, or a use engaged in storage of, or
manufacturing processes using flammable or explosive materials,
or storage or manufacturing processes that potentially involve
hazardous materials.
INDUSTRIAL, LIGHT: A facility engaged in the manufacture,
predominately from previously prepared materials, of finished
products or parts, including processing, fabrication, assembly,
treatment, packaging, incidental storage, sales, and distribution
of such products.
INVASIVE PLANTS: A group of harmful non-native plants that,
once introduced, can proliferate in the environment, crowding
out or destroying indigenous plants. A complete list of such
invasive plants can be found at the State of Connecticut DEEP
and includes such plants as barberry, euonymus, bittersweet, and
purple loosetrife.
KENNEL, COMMERCIAL/ANIMAL DAY CARE: Any lot on which four
(4) or more pets, six (6) months old or older, are available for
sale or boarded for compensation (either overnight or strictly for
animal “day care”), or on which two (2) or more livestock animals,
six (6) months old or older, are boarded for compensation. Any
use that includes the sale of livestock animals will be considered
either home agriculture or commercial agriculture, depending on
the size of the lot.
LAUNDRY, COMMERCIAL: A facility used for the commercial
cleaning of fabrics, textiles, wearing apparel or articles of any
sort, without the use of dry-cleaning chemicals.
LEGAL NON-CONFORMING BUILDING: A building or structure
which was legally constructed and that does not conform to
these regulations with respect to size, height, setback or other
construction requirements for the zone in which it is situated.
LEGAL NON-CONFORMING LOT: A parcel of land which was legal when created and that does not meet the
area, width or other requirements for the zoning district in which it is located.
LEGAL NON-CONFORMING USE: A use of land or of a building that does not conform to these Regulations for
the zone in which it is situated.
HEA VY INDUST RIAL
Examples may include:
• The manufacture of clothing,
fabrics, and other textiles
• Production of chemicals,
drugs, plastics
• Dry cleaning plants and
dyeing facilities
• Fabrication of metal for tools
and machines
• Jewelry manufacturing or
plating
• Lumber, wood, and paper
production
• Foundries and rolling and
extruding of metals
• Solid waste disposal facility
• Electrical equipment
production
LIGHT INDUST RIAL
Examples may include:
• Manufacture of furniture/
fixtures
• Jewelry assembly
• Musical instruments and
parts
• Moving and storage uses
• Photo processors and photo
labs
• Printing and publishing
• Professional, scientific, and
controlling instruments
• Research and testing services
• Scientific and research
laboratories
• Screen printing/embroidery
of clothing
• Stone, clay, glass, and
firewood production
2-14
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019
PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
LIBRARY: A non-profit public or private facility, open to the general public or to members, in which literary,
musical, artistic or reference materials such as but not limited to books, manuscripts, computers, recordings or
films are kept for use by or loaning to patrons of the facility, but are not normally offered for sale.
LIGHT, DIRECT: Light emitted directly from the lamp, off the reflector or reflector diffuser, or through the
refractor or diffuser lens, of a luminaire.
LIGHT FIXTURE, FULL CUT-OFF TYPE: A luminaire or light fixture that, by design of its housing, does not allow
any light dispersion or direct glare to shine above a 90-degree horizontal plane from the base of the luminaire.
LIGHT, FULLY SHIELDED: Fully shielded luminaire light fixtures which can control the glare in any direction.
LIGHT, GLARE: Light emitting from a luminaire with intensity great enough to reduce a viewer’s ability to see.
LIGHT, INDIRECT: Direct light that has been reflected or has scattered off surfaces other than those associated
with the light fixture.
LIGHT TRESPASS: Direct light from an artificial light source on one property that is intruding into an area where
it is not wanted or does not belong.
LIGHTING, OUTDOOR: The night-time illumination of an outside area or object by any man-made device
located outdoors that produces light by any means.
LIVESTOCK: Any apian, avian, bovine, equine, caprine, ovine, camelid, porcine, poultry, leporine or other
animal that is raised for production of food or fiber, or is used primarily for work, commerce or exhibition. Such
animals that are kept simply for companionship or enjoyment but that do not meet the definition of “pet”
herein are still considered livestock. Per the definition of “pet,” more than one miniature pig, goat or sheep on
a lot is considered livestock. This definition does not include wild animals.
LOT: A plot or parcel of land occupied
or capable of being occupied by one
principal building and the accessory
buildings or uses incidental to it
including such open spaces as are
required by these regulations. In the
case of multi-unit dwellings and public,
institutional, commercial or industrial
buildings, a group of buildings under
the same ownership may be considered
as occupying the same lot.
LOT AREA: The total horizontal area
included within lot lines, measured in
square feet.
LOT AREA, MINIMUM USEABLE: The
minimum lot area for any zoning district
minus any wetlands, watercourses, and
steep slopes in excess of 25% as defined
by these regulations. The minimum
usable lot area must be contiguous.
Lot Types (Rear Lot)
2-15 Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 1
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 2
PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
LOT, CORNER: A lot at the intersection of and abutting on two or more streets.
LOT COVERAGE, BUILDING: The area of a lot covered by a building or buildings’ area, expressed as a percentage
of the total lot area.
LOT COVERAGE, IMPERVIOUS: The area of a lot covered by impervious surface/cover, including buildings,
expressed as a percentage of the total lot area.
LOT, INTERIOR: A lot other than a corner lot or through lot.
LOT, REAR: A lot, also referred to as a flag or panhandle lot, that is located behind another lot, and that has a
private accessway connecting the buildable portion of a lot to the street.
LOT, THROUGH: A lot other than a corner lot which abuts two or more streets which do not intersect at the lot.
LOT LINE: The property division line between lots or between a lot and a street line.
LOT LINE, FRONT: All lot lines between a street and the lot are considered front lot lines. In the case of corner
lots, this means there will be at least two front lot lines, one for each street abutted.
LOT LINE, REAR: The lot line bounding a lot at the rear and approximately parallel to and at the maximum
distance from the front lot line. In the case of corner lots, there is no rear lot line, as the lot lines that are not
front lot lines are considered side lot lines.
Lot Types
2-16
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019
PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
LOT LINE, SIDE: The lot line or lines bounding a lot which extend from the street towards the rear in a direction
approximately perpendicular to the street. In the case of through lots, all lot lines extending from streets are
considered side lot lines. In the case of corner lots, all lot lines that are not front lot lines are considered side lot lines.
LOT, MINIMUM WIDTH OF: The minimum distance between the side lot lines measured in a straight line at
right angles to the mean direction of such side lot lines, which line of measurement must touch, but not be in
front of, the building line. In the case of a corner lot, the minimum width is similarly measured based only on
the front lot line which has the least dimension. Any other front lot lines adjacent thereto are considered as
side lot lines for the purpose of this measurement only.
LOW IMPACT DEVELOPMENT (LID): A range of development practices and operational methods, all having
the objective of reducing or mitigating environmental impacts. LID may include use of stormwater infiltration,
clustering of buildings to reduce land clearing and grading, use of overland (sheet) flow and grass swales,
use of pervious pavement or other pervious materials, shared or deferred parking, “rain gardens,” and other
similar techniques.
Minimum Lot Width
2-17 Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 1
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 2
PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
LOWEST FLOOR: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement).
LUMINAIRE: A complete lighting system, including a light source component (lamp or lamps that produce the
actual light) and a fixture.
MARINA: A facility for the secure mooring of boats, including facilities for the storage and repair of boats
and the accessory sale of boating equipment, supplies, and fuel, and accessory facilities such as showers,
restrooms, and self-service laundries.
MARINE CRAFT AND EQUIPMENT SALES AND RENTALS: A marine-oriented retail sales, rental, and service facility.
MEDICAL/HEALTH CARE OFFICE/CLINIC: A facility where human
patients, who are typically not lodged overnight, are treated by
physicians, dentists, therapists, other health care professionals or
similar professions. Such facility may include ancillary laboratory,
rehabilitation, and pharmacy services.
MEDICAL LABORATORY: A facility for the analysis of blood, tissue
or other human medical products.
MESSAGE, COMMERCIAL: Any sign, wording, logo or other
representation that names or advertises a business, product,
service or other commercial activity.
MESSAGE, NON-COMMERCIAL: Any sign, wording, logo or other
representation other than a commercial message, e.g. commentary or advocacy on topics of public debate
and concern.
MINIATURE PIGS, GOATS, AND SHEEP: The types of pigs commonly known as Vietnamese potbellied pigs;
the types of goats commonly known as the African Pygmy and Nigerian Dwarf goats; and the type of sheep
commonly known as the Miniature Babydoll, Miniature Shetland, and Miniature Cheviot sheep, and similar
miniature breeds of pigs, goats, and sheep.
MIXED USE DEVELOPMENT: A tract of land or building or structure developed for two or more different uses
such as, but not limited to, residential, office, manufacturing, retail, public or entertainment.
MOBILE MANUFACTURED HOME: A home constructed entirely within a controlled factory environment and
built to the federal Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards (HUD Code). The home may be
single or multi-sectional, is able to be transported to the site and installed on rigid supports, is suitable for
year-round habitation, and is equipped with a means to connect to water, sanitary, and electric facilities.
For the purpose of flood management regulations, the term also includes park trailers and recreational vehicles
placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. This definition does
not include recreational vehicles placed on sites for fewer than 180 consecutive days and which are fully
licensed and ready for highway use; a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or
jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no
permanently attached additions.
MOBILE MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: Any area or tract of land designed for the parking or
other type of installation of mobile manufactured homes on lots or space offered for lease or rent, including
MEDICAL/HEALT H CARE
OFFICE/CLINIC
Examples may include:
• Health Clinic
• Physician or Dentist Office
• Massage Therapist
• Physical Therapy Clinic
• Acupuncture Clinic
• Chiropractic Clinic
• Mental Health Therapist
2-18
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019
PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
all improvements, buildings, structures, recreation areas or other facilities for the use of the residents of
such development, and situated in such a way as to comply with the Town’s adopted floodplain management
regulations. This includes Existing such developments, as well as their Expansion.
MOBILE MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION (EXISTING): A mobile manufactured home park
or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots or space on which the mobile
manufactured homes are affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction
of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) was completed before April 15,
1977, the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by the Town.
MOBILE MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION (EXPANSION): The preparation of additional
sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots or space on which the mobile manufactured
homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either
final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
MOBILE MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION (NEW): A mobile manufactured home park
or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots or space on which the
mobile manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities,
the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) was or is
completed on or after April 15, 1977, the effective date of the floodplain management regulation
adopted by the community.
MOBILE MANUFACTURED HOME LOTS OR SPACE: A plot of ground within a mobile manufactured home park
or subdivision designed for the accommodation of one mobile manufactured home.
MOORAGE: A pier or system of floating or fixed structures to which boats on water may be secured.
MULTI-UNIT CONVERSION: A multi-unit dwelling developed by converting an existing building from another use.
MUSEUM: An establishment serving as a repository for a collection of objects, art or information of interest,
arranged, intended, and designed to be used by members of the general public for viewing or interaction, with
or without an admission charge, and which may include as an accessory use the sale of goods to the public.
NATIONAL POLLUTION DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES): A body of federal law regulating discharges
to waters of the United States and administered in part by the State of Connecticut DEEP.
NATIVE PLANTS: Plants having their natural origin in the region which, taken together with other native plants,
land forms, soils, and other natural conditions, create a healthy and self-sustaining eco-system, capable of
supporting a diverse range of species, and requiring little if any special maintenance (irrigation, pesticides,
fertilizers, etc.).
NON-CONFORMING BUILDING: A building or structure, whether legally constructed or not, that does not
conform to these regulations with respect to size, height, setback or other construction requirements for the
zone in which it is situated.
NON-CONFORMING BUILDING, LEGAL: See LEGAL NON-CONFORMING BUILDING
NON-CONFORMING LOT: A parcel of land, whether legally created or not, that does not meet the area, width
or other requirements for the zoning district in which it is located.
NON-CONFORMING LOT, LEGAL: See LEGAL NON-CONFORMING LOT
2-19 Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 1
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 2
PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
NON-CONFORMING USE: A use of land or of a building, legal or not, that does not conform to these Regulations
for the zone in which it is situated.
NON-CONFORMING USE, LEGAL: See LEGAL NON-CONFORMING USE
NON-DISTURBANCE AREA: An area in which the natural state must be maintained and on which no development
or construction activity may take place.
NURSERIES AND GREENHOUSES, COMMERCIAL: A business for the sale of nursery products including living
trees or plants, whether grown on site or not, and products or materials ordinarily and necessarily associated
with the growing of said trees or plants, including, but not limited to, soil, mulch, fertilizer, containers, and
water delivery systems. It may include accessory sale of materials such as paving stones and lawn ornaments
but may not include the sale of machinery or equipment such as tractors or lawn mowers.
NURSING FACILITY: A residential facility licensed by the State of Connecticut Department of Public Health to
provide for short-term or long-term nursing, convalescent, and rehabilitative care.
OPEN SPACE: Land or water areas which include but are not limited to: areas left in their existing or natural
state; areas and facilities for non-commercial, non-profit passive and active recreation; or areas for wildlife
habitat, groundwater recharge, and scenic protection.
OPEN SPACE, COMMON: Land within a development that is not covered by buildings, roads, driveways, parking
areas or service areas, or which is not set aside as private yards, private patios or private gardens for individual
residents. Such land may be configured throughout a site to provide for passive and active recreational
opportunities, as well as conservation purposes.
OUTDOOR STORAGE YARD, ACCESSORY: An outdoor area for storing or displaying materials, goods or equipment
associated with a principal use.
OUTDOOR STORAGE YARD, PRINCIPAL: An outdoor area for storing or displaying materials, goods or equipment
as a principal use.
OVERLAY DISTRICT: A special zoning district which addresses special land use circumstances or environmental
safeguards and is superimposed over the underlying existing zoning district(s). Permitted uses in the underlying
zoning district(s) may continue subject to compliance with the regulations of the overlay district.
OWNER: The person(s) owning the fee simple title to any
premises; or all shareholders in a corporation, the partners in a
partnership or the members of a limited liability company.
PERSONAL SERVICES: Establishments that provide non-medical,
individual services generally related to personal needs.
PET: A domesticated animal such as a dog, cat, common cage bird,
rodent, rabbit, ferret, aquarium-kept fish, reptile or amphibian,
which is traditionally kept in the home for companionship or
enjoyment rather than for utility or commercial purposes. Does
not include livestock and wild animals, with the exception that one
(1) miniature pig, goat or sheep may be kept as a pet (keeping of
more than one such animal will be considered Home Agriculture).
PERSONAL SERVICES
Examples may include:
• Tailoring and shoe repair
• Beauty and barber services
and day spas
• Tattoo parlor
• Laundry and dry cleaning,
self-service or pick-up only
• Repair of office equipment
and personal and household
items
2-20
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019
PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
PET GROOMING ESTABLISHMENT: Any commercial establishment engaged in the washing, brushing, trimming
of fur or nails or other such cosmetic services for domestic pets. Such establishments do not perform medical
services, nor allow overnight kenneling of animals.
PHOTOMETRIC PLAN: A graphical representation of illuminance used to show the level and/or evenness of a
lighting design and how light fixtures will perform on a given site.
PHOTOVOLTAIC SYSTEM: A photovoltaic system is a power system designed to supply usable solar power by
means of photovoltaics. It consists of an arrangement of several components, including solar panels (collectively
a solar array) to absorb and convert sunlight into electricity, a solar inverter to change the electric current from
DC to AC, as well as mounting, cabling, and other electrical accessories to set up a working system. It may also use
a solar tracking system to improve the system’s overall performance and include an integrated battery solution.
PORCH: A one-story roofed structure attached to a house, with no floor space above and which is not heated
or cooled and is open on all sides that are not attached to the house.
PREMISES: A lot, together with all buildings and structures thereon.
PRINCIPAL USE: The primary purpose or function for which a premise is used, designed or intended to be used.
PRIVATE ACCESSWAY: Any private road or driveway. Private accessways are not to be considered “streets” as
defined in these regulations.
PROFESSIONAL OFFICES: A facility for professional services, as
opposed to retail products, to individuals, business, industry,
government, and other enterprises.
PROFESSIONAL, ARTS, AND EDUCATIONAL SCHOOLS AND
STUDIOS, NON-DEGREE: Non-degree granting professional
and educational service businesses or organizations providing
specialized education and instruction for children and/or adults.
PUBLIC RECREATION, INDOOR OR OUTDOOR: Recreation facilities
open to the public on Town, State, or other lands permanently protected
for preservation or recreation by ownership or deed restriction.
PZC: The Planning and Zoning Commission (Commission) of the
Town of Groton.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A vehicular type unit with a maximum
size of 400 SF, primarily designed as temporary living quarters
for recreational, camping or travel use, which either has its own
motive power or is mounted on or is drawn by another vehicle.
The basic entities are travel trailer, camping trailer, truck camper,
and motor home (self-propelled).
REDEVELOPMENT: To demolish existing buildings or to increase
the overall floor area or impervious surface/cover on a site; or
any combination of these activities, irrespective of whether a
change occurs in the land use of the site.
PROFESSIONAL OFFICES
Examples may include:
• Offices for architects,
engineers, lawyers, real
estate, insurance, and other
professional occupations
• Banks and financial services
• Offices of Government
agencies
PROFESSIONAL , ARTS , AND
EDUCATIONAL SCHOOLS AND
ST UDIOS, NON-DEG REE
Examples may include:
• Business and office skills
• Public speaking
• Computer training
• Music studio
• Dance studio
• Acting studio
• Fine art studio, etc.
2-21 Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 1
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 2
PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
RESIDENTIAL COUNSELING FACILITY: A residential building or group of buildings in which counselors and
staff members provide counseling, rehabilitation, evaluation, and other supportive services to (a) detoxified
resident persons or their dependents seeking to arrest, reverse or ameliorate the compulsive use of alcohol
or drugs pursuant to an organized and structured program, (b) resident persons or their dependents suffering
from acute physical abuse pursuant to an organized and structured program or (c) resident persons or their
dependents having professionally and certified diagnosed eating disorders or addiction to gambling or drugs
pursuant to an organized and structured program. This definition shall not include community correction
programs under the jurisdiction of the Department of Correction pursuant to Section 18-100 of the Connecticut
General Statutes or court ordered treatment programs under Section 17a-653 to 17a-656 of the Connecticut
General Statutes.
RESIDENTIAL LIFE CARE FACILITY: A service-enriched facility comprised of a building or group of buildings located
on one or more contiguous parcels of land containing one or more facilities defined herein as congregate living
facilities and assisted living facilities, primarily for the aged, and may or may not include nursing facilities. The
facility may also contain meeting rooms, dining rooms, a central kitchen, and recreation areas for the use of
the residents of the facility, offices used for the management and operation of the facility, and services such
as, but not limited to, a general store, beauty shop, and laundry for the use of the residents.
RESTAURANT, FAST-FOOD: Any establishment whose business involves the sale of pre-prepared or rapidly
prepared foods, confections or beverages to the customer in a ready-to-consume state, and whose method
of operation is such that customers normally order and obtain the product at a central location separate from
the tables or counters used for consumption on site. This definition includes convenience stores which sell
prepared food for on-site consumption.
RESTAURANT, MOBILE: A licensed, motorized vehicle or other mobile food unit which is temporarily parked on
a privately or publicly owned lot where food items are sold to the general public.
RESTAURANT, STANDARD: Any establishment whose business involves the sale of foods, confections or
beverages to the customer in a ready-to-consume state, and whose method of operation is such that an
employee normally takes the seated customer’s order and serves the food or beverages at tables and/or
counters located inside or outside the building.
RETAIL: A commercial establishment that provides goods and/or services directly to the consumer, where such
goods are available for immediate purchase and removal from the premises by the purchaser.
RETAIL, LARGE-SCALE: A single user commercial building, having a gross floor area of 40,000 SF or greater,
generally serving local, Town, and regional consumer needs.
RETAIL, MEDIUM-SCALE: A single commercial use, having a gross floor area of 10,000 SF or greater, but less
than 40,000 SF, generally serving local and Town consumer needs.
RETAIL, SMALL-SCALE: A single commercial use, having a gross floor area of less than 10,000 SF, generally
serving local consumer needs.
RETAIL SHOPPING CENTER: A single piece of real estate of two (2) acres or more containing more than three
(3) commercial establishments and a total business space of more than 20,000 gross SF planned, constructed,
and managed as a total entity with customer and employee parking provided on site.
RETAIL WITH OUTDOOR SALES AND STORAGE: Any retail establishment with an outdoor area that has been
altered, improved or used for the temporary or longer-term storage of equipment, supplies, products, and
2-22
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019
PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
materials as an accessory use. Such materials are generally in bulk and/or collectively do not serve the purpose
of outdoor display.
RETAIL OUTDOOR DISPLAY: Part of a retail establishment with an outdoor arrangement of products or materials,
designed and used primarily for the purpose of advertising or identifying a business, product, service or other
non-residential use. Said display includes items normally vended by the contiguous business and is generally
deemed integral but accessory to the operation of the business.
RETAIL WITH LARGE INDOOR DISPLAY AND STORAGE: A retail
establishment that sells large items that require significant display
and storage space, and larger facilities for loading and warehousing
than a typical retail establishment.
RIDING OR BOARDING STABLE: A commercial establishment
for boarding, riding, and training of equines and/or camelids;
including riding instruction and fields or arenas used for events.
RIGHT-OF-WAY (ROW): An area dedicated to public use
for pedestrian and vehicular movement, which may also
accommodate public utilities.
ROOMING/BOARDING HOUSE: A dwelling in which at least 3 people but less than 12 are housed or lodged for
hire or otherwise without individual kitchen facilities, with or without meals.
SAILMAKING: A manufacturing establishment that makes and repairs sails for sailboats, kites, hang gliders,
wind art, architectural sails or other structures using sails. A sailmaker typically works on shore in an indoor
sail loft large enough to lay out sails for construction or repair. Modern sailmaking may involve computer-aided
design and manufacturing tools, including low-power lasers to cut sail materials.
SCHOOLS, PUBLIC/PRIVATE (K-12): A site that is operated as a primary or secondary school and which contains
all improvements required by local, State of Connecticut, and/or federal regulations necessary for general
primary or secondary academic instruction.
SCHOOLS, PUBLIC/PRIVATE (Post-High School / College): A post-secondary institution for higher learning that
has State approval to grant associate’s or bachelor’s degrees and may also have research facilities and/or
professional schools that grant master’s and doctoral degrees. This may also include community colleges and
trade schools that grant certificates of completion in business, technical or vocational fields.
SEDIMENT: Solid material, either mineral or organic, that is in suspension, is transported or has been moved
from its site or origin by erosion.
SELF-SERVICE STORAGE FACILITY: Any real property designed and used for the renting or leasing of individual
self-contained units of storage space to occupants who are to have access to such units for storing and removing
personal property only, and not for residential purposes.
SEWER SYSTEM, COMMUNITY TYPE: A sewer system operated by the Town of Groton and/or a political
subdivision or a private central plant approved by the State of Connecticut for sewage treatment consisting
of a primary and secondary treatment and the production of a substantially clear effluent. Community type
sewer system is not construed to mean a septic tank and leaching field serving a one-unit or two-unit dwelling
or a single non-residential use.
RETAIL WITH LARGE INDOOR
DISPLAY AND STO RAGE
Examples may include:
• Furniture stores
• Appliance stores
• Hardware stores
• Carpet stores, etc.
2-23 Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 1
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 2
PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
SHADE/CANOPY TREE: A large deciduous tree having a minimum height of 25 feet at maturity, typically used
as a means of providing shade within and adjacent to parking areas, play areas or other such open spaces, as
a means of reducing excessive heat, reducing stormwater temperatures from pavement areas, and for other
like beneficial purposes.
SIGN: Any object, device, display or structure or part thereof situated outdoors or adjacent to the interior
of a window or doorway, which is used to advertise, identify, display, direct or attract attention to an object,
person, institution, organization, business, product, service, event or location by any means including words,
letters, pictures, logos, figures, designs, symbols, fixtures, colors, illumination or projected images.
SIGN, A-FRAME: A freestanding, temporary sign which is ordinarily in the shape of an “A” or some variation
thereof, which is readily moveable, and is not permanently attached to the ground or any structure. See also
the definition of T-frame signs.
SIGN, AIR-ACTIVATED: A sign, all or any part of which is designed to be moved by action of forced air to make
the sign appear to be animated or otherwise have motion.
SIGN AREA: The surface area of any sign is the entire area within a single continuous perimeter, enclosing the
extreme limits of lettering, representations, emblems or other figures, together with any material or color forming
an integral part of the display or used to differentiate the sign from the background against which it is placed.
For free-standing signs, the surface area includes the entire face of the sign, inclusive of any background but not
inclusive of any support structure. Only one side of a double-faced sign is used in computing the total area of
said double-faced sign, provided that the two surfaces are joined at an angle of no greater than 60 degrees. The
area of a sign composed of characters or words attached directly to a large, uniform building wall surface is the
smallest rectangle, circle or spherical figure which encloses the whole group of said characters or words.
SIGN, AWNING: Any permanent sign painted on or attached to an awning face. The method for calculating the
total area of awning signs is illustrated in the graphics below.
SIGN, BALLOON: Any temporary sign that is an air inflated object, which may be of various shapes, made of
flexible fabric, resting on the ground or a structure, and equipped with a portable blower motor that provides
a constant flow of air into the device. Balloon signs are restrained, attached or held in place by a cord, rope,
cable or similar method. See also the definition for air-activated signs.
Sign, Awning
2-24
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019
PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
SIGN, BANNER: Any temporary sign composed of cloth, canvas, plastic, fabric or similar lightweight, nonrigid
material that can be mounted to a structure with cord, rope, cable or a similar method or that may be
supported by stakes in the ground.
SIGN, BLADE: Any temporary sign that is constructed of cloth, canvas, plastic fabric or similar lightweight, nonrigid
material and that is supported by a single vertical pole mounted into the ground or on a portable structure.
SIGN, CANOPY: Any permanent sign painted on or attached to or supported by a canopy.
The method for calculating the total area of canopy signs is illustrated in the graphics below.
SIGN, CONSTRUCTION: A temporary sign directly connected with a construction project; may include the
construction company’s name, address, and/or telephone number.
SIGN, DIGITAL: Any free-standing, permanent sign with an electronic sign display or device component that
changes message copy on the sign by means of emitting diodes (LED), fiber optic light bulbs, liquid crystal
display or other illumination devices within the display area. Signs using such display methods are commonly
called by various names, including, but not limited to, CEVMS (commercial electronic variable message signs or
changeable electronic variable message signs), electronic message boards, electronic reader boards, dynamic
signs, digital signs, electronic signs, variable message boards, message centers, and similar terms.
SIGN, DIRECTLY ILLUMINATED: Any sign designed to give forth any artificial light directly or through any
transparent or translucent material from a source of light internal to such sign.
SIGN, DRIVE-THROUGH: Any permanent on-site wall or free-standing sign located immediately adjacent to a
drive-through lane that is meant to be viewed from an automobile.
Sign, Canopy
2-25 Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 1
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 2
PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
SIGN, FREE-STANDING: Any permanent sign erected or affixed to the land and any and every exterior sign that
is not attached to a building. Below are illustrations of typical free-standing signs.
The method for calculating the total area of free-standing signs is illustrated in the graphics below:
SIGN, INDIRECTLY ILLUMINATED: A sign illuminated by devices that project artificial light from either behind
an opaque surface (halo lighting) or onto the outside surface of the sign and involves no translucent surfaces.
Sign, Free-Standing
Sign, Free-Standing (Calculating Area)
Sign, Free-Standing
(Calculating Area)
2-26
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019
PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
SIGN, LIGHT POLE BANNER: Any temporary banner or sign that is designed to be attached to a permanent light
pole or other pole structure, and where the temporary sign element can be changed without modifying the
permanent structure.
SIGN, OFF-PREMISE: Any sign that advertises or otherwise directs attention to a product sold, service provided
or an activity that occurs on a different parcel than where the sign is located.
SIGN, ON-PREMISE: Any sign that advertises or otherwise directs attention to a product sold, service provided
or activity that occurs on the same parcel where the sign is located.
SIGN, PORTABLE MESSAGE CENTER: A sign not permanently affixed to the ground, building or other structure,
which may be moved from place to place, including, but not limited to, signs designed to be transported by
means of wheels. Such signs may include changeable copy.
SIGN, PROJECTED IMAGE: A sign which involves an image projected on the face of a wall, structure, sidewalk
or other surface, from a distant electronic device, such that the image does not originate from the plane of the
wall, structure, sidewalk or other surface.
SIGN, PROJECTING: Any permanent sign
which is attached to the wall or a building
and which extends more than fifteen inches
from the face of such wall, including a sign
erected at the corner of a building.
SIGN, T-FRAME: A free-standing, temporary
sign which is ordinarily in the shape of
an upside down “T” or some variation
thereof, which is readily moveable, and is
not permanently attached to the ground
or any structure. See also the definition for
A-frame signs.
SIGN, TEMPORARY: Portable signs or any
sign not permanently embedded in the ground, or not permanently affixed to a building or sign structure
that is permanently embedded in the ground and intended to be displayed for a limited period of time, are
considered temporary signs.
SIGN, TOPPER: Any sign that sits on top of a fuel pump.
SIGN, VEHICLE: Any sign permanently or temporarily attached to or placed on a vehicle or trailer in any manner
so that the sign is used primarily as a stationary identification or advertisement sign.
Sign, Projecting
2-27 Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 1
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 2
PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
SIGN, WALL: A sign which is attached to, or painted on, the wall or other plane surface of a building, with the
face in a plane approximately parallel to such wall or surface, and not extending more than fifteen inches from
such wall or surface.
The method for calculating the total area of wall signs is illustrated in the graphic below:
SIGN, WINDOW: Any sign with its face parallel and affixed to,
in contact with or within 12 inches of depth from a window or
exterior glass door, whether inside or outside, and visible from
the street. Normal display of merchandise in store windows is
not considered a sign.
SIGN, YARD: Any temporary sign placed in a street-facing yard on private property.
SITE PLAN: An accurate, scaled plan prepared by a CT registered architect, landscape architect, surveyor or
engineer, showing existing and proposed buildings and uses, parking, loading and circulation, open space and
landscaping, signs and lighting, utilities, topography, and other existing and proposed features required in
Section 9.5 of these regulations.
SITE PLAN, SIMPLIFIED: A site plan reflecting minor changes to an existing development where: a fully
engineered drawing is not necessary to establish compliance with these regulations; an A-2 survey is not
necessary to determine zoning compliance; and proposed changes do not involve storm drainage, flood flow
or storage, extensive grading, the location of existing or proposed underground utilities, or other attributes
requiring professional design, location, and/or documentation on a site plan.
SLOPE, PERCENT OF: The ratio of vertical rise or fall to horizontal distance measured perpendicular to the
contour lines at horizontal intervals of typically 10 feet or greater.
Sign, Wall
Sign, Window
2-28
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019
PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
SLOPE, STEEP: Areas of topography greater than 25% slope as measured across the most extreme change in
elevation portions of the ground surface in minimum horizontal intervals of typically 40-feet.
SOIL: Any unconsolidated mineral or organic material of any origin.
SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN: A designed program that minimizes soil erosion and
sedimentation resulting from development and includes, but is not limited to, a map and narrative.
SPECIAL PERMIT: A development permit that must be obtained for certain classes or kinds of buildings,
structures or uses of land that may only be appropriate in particular locations or districts based on how their
attributes relate to specific locations, and where modifications and reasonable conditions and safeguards may
be imposed to render the application consistent with the Zoning Regulations.
STORY: A space in a building
between the surface of any floor
and the surface of the next floor
above, or if there is no floor above,
then the space between such floor
and the ceiling or roof above;
provided, however, that where the
floor level is at least five feet below
the adjoining finished grade, the
space is considered a basement
and not counted as a story.
STREET: An accepted State
or Town road or a road on an
approved subdivision plan that is
duly bonded or the construction
of which is otherwise assured in
accordance with the Groton Subdivision Regulations. “Street” is deemed to include the entire width of the
right-of-way. A private accessway, as defined in these regulations, is not to be considered a street.
STREET LINE: The line dividing the street and the lot.
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected which requires location on, in or under the ground, or anything
attached to something located on, in or under the ground.
TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITY: Towers and/or antennae and accessory structures and equipment used
in receiving or transmitting telecommunications or radio signals from a mobile communication source and
transmitting those signals to another wireless site, and other communication source or receiver or to a central
switching computer which connects the mobile unit with land-based telephone lines.
TELECOMMUNICATION TOWER: The structure designed to support equipment and antennae used to transmit
and/or receive telecommunications or radio signals. Examples of such structures include, without limitation,
freestanding towers, guy towers, monopoles, and lattice towers.
TEMPORARY EVENTS: A temporary festival or other such group or aggregation of rides, shows, games, exhibits,
demonstrations or concessions or any combination thereof. Also, any special events such as weddings, large
parties, and other such gatherings where the property is rented for a fee and not held within or on the grounds
of a private residence in a residential district.
Story
2-29 Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 1
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 2
PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
THEATER OR CINEMA: An outdoor or indoor area, building, part of a building, structure or defined area utilized
primarily for rehearsal and production of dramatic, dance, musical or other live performances or movies.
Such establishments may include accessory services such as food and beverage sales and other concessions,
management offices, costume shops, set design shops, and storage areas.
TRANSIT STATIONS AND HUBS: Any property, equipment, and improvements used, maintained, and operated to
provide public or private mass transportation for passengers and their luggage, including bus, rail, air, and ferry
services, as well as associated passenger parking. May also include related ticketing sales, offices, and accessory
retail sales of food and sundries. This definition does not include curbside bus stops, with or without shelters.
UNIVERSAL DESIGN FEATURES: Such housing and site design features that promote equal opportunity for
use by individuals with or without disabilities. These features may include, but are not limited to, lever door
handles, minimum 36” wide interior/exterior doors, hallways, and stairs, non-slip flooring with level thresholds,
grab bars at residential toilets and showers, and seat or walk-in access to showers, security wiring, personal
alarm system connected to onsite management and/or off-site emergency alarm organization, Connecticut
Building Code compliant bath/shower for accessibility, ability for living, sleeping, and eating for the resident to
be accommodated on a single floor level with an accessible means of egress to this living area from the outside
or garage, and garage door openers and access from garage directly to home if garage provided.
UPLIGHTING: Any light source that distributes illumination above a 90-degree horizontal plane.
USE: Any purpose for which a building, structure or premises may be designed, arranged, intended, maintained
or occupied; or, any activity, occupation, business or operation actually carried on in a building or other
structure or on a lot or parcel.
UTILITIES: Utilities include water, sewer, gas, electricity, telephone and television lines, and cables.
UTILITY INFRASTUCTURE: The structures necessary to deliver
services essential to the health, safety, and general welfare of
the public, which may be provided by a public or a private entity.
VEHICLE: Includes all automobiles, trucks, trailers, vans, camp
trailers, house trailers, recreational vehicles, motor homes,
motorcycles or any other powered wheeled vehicle used on or
off road and which may be required to be registered by the State
of Connecticut Motor Vehicle Department. Devices powered by
humans are not considered a vehicle under this definition.
VEHICLE DEALERS (NEW): The use of any building, land area or portion thereof, for the display, sale, lease or
service of new automobiles and/or other vehicles. Manufacturer certified pre-owned automobiles or vehicles
shall also be considered new for this definition.
VEHICLE DEALERS (USED): The use of any building, land area or portion thereof, for the display, sale, lease or
service of used automobiles and/or other vehicles.
VEHICLE PARTS AND SUPPLIES (NEW): Stores that sell new automobile parts, tires, batteries, and accessories.
May also include minor parts installation. Does not include businesses dealing exclusively in used parts.
VEHICLE RENTAL: The use of any building, land area or portion thereof, for the display and rental of automobiles,
panel trucks or vans, trailers or recreational vehicles, including incidental parking and servicing of vehicles for
rent or lease.
UTILITY INFRAST UCTURE
Examples may include:
• Electric substations
• Telephone stations
• Water and sewer facilities
• Water and sewer treatment
plants
2-30
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019
PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
VEHICLE REPAIR AND SERVICE, MAJOR: Repair of construction equipment, commercial trucks, agricultural
implements, and similar heavy equipment, including automobiles, where major engine and transmission
repairs are conducted. Typical uses include automobile and truck repair garages, transmission and engine
shops, radiator shops, body and fender shops, equipment service centers, machine shops, and other similar
uses where major repair activities are conducted.
VEHICLE REPAIR AND SERVICE, MINOR: The business of minor repairs to any vehicle, including repairs and
replacement of cooling, electrical, fuel, and exhaust systems, brake adjustments, relining and repairs, wheel
alignment and balancing, and repair and replacement of shock absorbers, ignition systems, and mufflers.
VEHICLE WASHING FACILITY: A commercial establishment for washing, polishing, and/or detailing vehicles.
VETERINARY SERVICE: An establishment of a licensed practitioner engaged in veterinary medicine, dentistry
or surgery for animals such as horses, rabbits, dogs, cats, birds, and other pets, and may include overnight
keeping of animals for medical attention.
VISITABILITY: A term used to mean that a person with a physical disability or mobility limitation can easily get
into a home or building for a visit and be able to move about and have access to a bathroom.
WAREHOUSE AND DISTRIBUTION: A facility where goods are received and/or stored for delivery to the ultimate
customer at remote locations. This definition includes parking lots for overnight truck, railcar or shipping
container storage, and such establishments as commercial distribution services, freight forwarding services,
and freight agencies. May include intermodal distribution facilities for a mix of truck, rail or shipping transport.
WATER DEPENDENT USE: Those uses and facilities which require direct access to, or location in, marine or
tidal waters and which therefore cannot be located inland, including but not limited to: Marinas, recreational
and commercial fishing and boating facilities, finfish and shellfish processing plants, waterfront dock and port
facilities, shipyards and boat building facilities, water-based recreational uses, navigation aides, basins and
channels, industrial uses dependent upon water-borne transportation or requiring large volumes of cooling
or process water which cannot reasonably be located or operated at an inland site, and uses which provide
general public access to marine or tidal waters
WATER SYSTEM, COMMUNITY TYPE: A system operated by the Town of Groton or a political subdivision or a
duly licensed water company which has at least 15 service connections or serves at least 25 residents or as
otherwise defined by the CT State Department of Public Health.
WATERCOURSE: A river, stream, brook, waterway, lake, pond, marsh, swamp, bog, and all other bodies of
water, natural or artificial, vernal or intermittent, public or private, which are contained within, flow through
or border upon the Town or any portion thereof, not regulated pursuant to Sections 22a-28 through 22a-35,
inclusive, of the Connecticut General Statutes.
WETLANDS: Lands, including submerged lands, not regulated pursuant to Sections 22a-28 through 22a-35,
inclusive, of the Connecticut General Statutes, which consist of any of the soil types designated as poorly
drained, very poorly drained, alluvial, and floodplain by the National Cooperative Soil Survey, as it may
be amended from time to time, of the Natural Resources Conservation Service of the U.S. Department of
Agriculture (USDA). Such areas may include filled, graded or excavated sites which possess an aquic (saturated)
soil moisture regime as defined by the USDA National Cooperative Soil Survey.
WHOLESALE: A place of business primarily engaged in selling and/or distributing merchandise to retailers; to
industrial, commercial, institutional or professional business users, or to other wholesalers; or acting as agents
or brokers and buying merchandise for, or selling merchandise to, such individuals or companies.
2-31 Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 1
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 2
PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
WIND TURBINE: An energy production device which converts wind energy by means of a rotor to mechanical
or electrical energy. A wind generator may also be deemed a windmill.
WINERIES: See ‘Alcoholic Beverage Production’
WILD ANIMAL: Any member of the animal kingdom, other than humans, that can sustain itself in its native
habitat, whether born in captivity or not, and is not domesticated. Does not include livestock or pets.
YACHT CLUB: A private or community club with structures, related grounds, and/or moorage used for social and
recreational purposes related to pleasure boating and/or swimming, the use of which is primarily restricted to
members and their guests.
YARD: An area on a lot between a building or group of buildings and the nearest lot line that is unoccupied and
unobstructed from the ground upward, except as otherwise permitted by these regulations.
YARD, FRONT: An area between the building and the front lot line, extending the full width of the lot,
or in the case of a corner lot, extending along all streets.
YARD, REAR: An area between the building and the rear lot line, extending the full width of the lot.
YARD, SIDE: An area between the building and a side lot line, extending from the front yard to the rear
yard. Any yard not a rear yard or a front yard is deemed a side yard.
Yard Types
2-32
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019
PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
YARD, MINIMUM REQUIRED: The minimum yard requirement for each zoning district as set forth in these
regulations. Otherwise known as a Building Setback.
YARD SPACE: A space, not occupied by a building or other roofed structure, on the same lot as the principal
building.
ZBA: The Zoning Board of Appeals (Board) of the Town of Groton.
ZONING OFFICIAL: The officer responsible for enforcing and administering the requirements of the Town’s
Zoning Regulations.
2.2 FLOO D PROTECTION DEFINITIONS
The following definitions shall apply only to the Flood Protection provisions of Section 7.2, Flood Protection
Regulations.
BASE FLOOD: A flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year; a 100-year storm.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION: The level, referenced to mean sea level, to which the flood waters of the base flood
rise at any particular location.
BASEMENT: For flood management purposes, any area of a building having its floor subgrade (i.e., below
ground level) on all sides.
BREAKAWAY WALL: A wall that is not part of the structural support of a building and is intended through its
design to collapse under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to the elevated portion of the
building or supporting foundation system.
Minimum Required Yard (Setback)
2-33 Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 1
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 2
PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
COASTAL AE ZONE: The portion of the Coastal High Hazard Area with wave heights between 1.5 feet and 3.0
feet during the base flood and seaward of the line labeled the “Limit of Moderate Wave Action” (LiMWA) on a
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM).
COASTAL HIGH HAZARD AREA: An area of special flood hazard extending from offshore to the inland limit of a
primary frontal dune along an open coast and any open coast and any other area subject to high velocity wave
action from storms or seismic sources. Coastal high hazard areas are designated as zone VE and Coastal AE on
a Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM).
COST: As related to substantial improvements, the cost of any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, alteration,
repair or other improvement of a structure must be established by a detailed written contractor’s estimate.
The estimate must include, but not be limited to: the cost of materials (interior finishing elements, structural
elements, utility and service equipment); sales tax on materials, building equipment and fixtures, including
heating and air conditioning and utility meters; labor; built-in appliances; demolition and site preparation;
repairs made to damaged parts of the building worked on at the same time; contractor’s overhead; contractor’s
profit; and grand total.
Items to be excluded include cost of plans and specifications, survey costs, permit fees, outside improvements
such as septic systems, water supply wells, landscaping, sidewalks, fences, yard lights, irrigation systems, and
detached structures such as garages, sheds, and gazebos.
DEVELOPMENT: Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate including, but not limited to, the
construction of buildings or structures; the construction of additions, alterations or substantial improvements
to buildings or structures; the placement of buildings or structures; mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving,
excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment; the storage, deposition, or extraction of materials;
and the installation, repair, or removal of public or private sewage disposal systems or water supply facilities.
ELEVATED BUILDING: A non-basement building built to have the top of the elevated floor located above the
ground level by means of pilings, columns (i.e., posts or piers) or shear walls or by means of fill or solid
foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of flood waters.
In VE flood zones, a non-basement building built to have the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural
member of the elevated floor located above the ground level by means of pilings, columns (i.e., posts or piers)
or shear walls parallel to the flow of water and adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity
of the building during a flood up to the magnitude of the base flood; it includes a building otherwise meeting
the definition of “elevated building” in the following sentence, even if the lower area is enclosed by means of
breakaway walls, if such walls meet the standards of Section 6.6-7 C. of these regulations.
In all other locations, a non-basement building built to have the lowest floor elevated above the ground level by
means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns (posts and piers), shear walls, or breakaway walls.
FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY (FEMA): The federal agency that administers the National
Flood Insurance Program (NFIP).
FINISHED LIVING SPACE: As related to fully enclosed areas below the base flood elevation (BFE), a space
that is, but not limited to, heated and/or cooled, contains finished floors (tiles, linoleum, hardwood, etc.),
has sheetrock walls that may or may not be painted or wallpapered, and other amenities such as furniture,
appliances, bathrooms, fireplaces and other items that are easily damaged by floodwaters and expensive to
clean, repair or replace.
2-34
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019
PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
FLOOD OR FLOODING: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry
land areas from either the overflow of inland or tidal waters, or the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff
of surface waters from any source.
FLOOD HAZARD AREA: The maximum area of the flood plain which is likely to be flooded by a 100-year flood,
or any area for which mudslides can reasonably be anticipated.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM): An official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA) has delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS): The official report from the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA)
which contains examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding
water surface elevations.
FLOOD, 100-YEAR: That level of flooding having a one percent probability of occurrence in any year.
FLOOD PLAIN AREA: The relatively flat area or low lands adjoining the channel of a river, stream, watercourse,
canal, or any body of standing or tidal water, which has been or may be covered by flood water.
FLOODPROOFING: Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to
properties and structures, primarily for the reduction or elimination of flood damage to lands, water, and
sanitary facilities, structures, and contents of buildings.
FLOODWAY: The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order
to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot.
FLOOR (LOWEST): The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood
resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than
a basement area, is not considered a building’s lowest floor, provided that such an area meets the design
requirements specified in Section 7.2-4.B of this regulation.
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT FACILITY: A facility which cannot be used for its intended purpose unless it is
located in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary
for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities. The term
does not include seafood processing facilities, long-term storage, manufacturing, sales or service facilities.
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE: A use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried
out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the
loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities. The term does not
include seafood processing facilities, long-term storage, manufacturing, sales or service facilities.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE: For purposes of flood protection, any structure that is: (a) listed individually in the
National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National
Register; (b) certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historic
significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as
a registered historic district; (c) individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic
preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or (d) individually listed
on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been
certified either: (1) by an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or (2) directly
by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
2-35 Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 1
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 2
PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
LIMIT OF MODERATE WAVE ACTION (LiMWA): The landward limit of the 1.5 foot breaking wave within a
Coastal AE Zone. These areas are seaward of the line labeled “Limit of Moderate Wave Action” (LiMWA) on a
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM).
MARKET VALUE: As related to substantial improvement and substantial damage, the market value of the
structure is determined by the appraised value of the structure using the cost approach to value method prior
to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to
the damage occurring.
MEAN SEA LEVEL: Means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the North American Vertical
Datum (NAVD) of 1988, or other datum to which base flood elevations shown on a community’s Flood
Insurance Rate Map are referenced.
NEW CONSTRUCTION: Within areas of special flood hazard and risk premium zones, any structure for which
the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of the initial Flood Insurance Rate Map
(i.e., April 15, 1977), as well as any subsequent improvements to such structure.
SAND DUNES: Naturally occurring accumulations of sand in ridges or mounds landward of the beach.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA): The land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one (1)
percent or greater change of flooding in any given year. SFHA’s are determined utilizing the base flood elevations
(BFE) provided on the flood profile in the flood insurance study (FIS) for a community. BFE’s provided on Flood
Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM) are only approximate (rounded up or down) and should be verified with the BFE’s
published in the FIS for a specific location. SFHA’s include, but are not necessarily limited to, the land shown
as Zones A, AE, AO, AH, and the coastal high hazard areas shown as Zones VE and Coastal AE on a FIRM. The
SFHA is also called the area of special flood hazard.
START OF CONSTRUCTION: Includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was
issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days
of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of a structure
(including a manufactured home) on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles,
construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation or placement of a manufactured home on
a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling;
nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement,
footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the
property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the
main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of
any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building, regardless of whether such alteration affects the
external dimensions of such building.
STRUCTURE: For flood management purposes, “structure” means a walled and roofed building that is principally
above ground, including a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank, or other man-made infrastructure.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure, whereby the cost of restoring the
structure to its pre-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure
before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: Any combination of repairs, reconstruction, alteration or improvements to a
structure taking place over a one (1) year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50% of
the market value of the structure before the “start of construction” of the improvement. This term includes
2-36
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019
PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
structures which have incurred “substantial damage”, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The
market value of the structure should be (1) the appraised value of the structure using the cost approach to
value method, prior to the start of the initial repair or improvements, or (2) in the case of damage, the value
of the structure prior to the damage occurring. For the purpose of this definition, “Substantial Improvement”
is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the
building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The
term does not, however, include either (1) any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the
local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions, or (2)
any alteration of a “historic structure” provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued
designation as a “historic structure”.
VARIANCE: A grant of relief by the Zoning Board of Appeals from the terms of the floodplain management
regulation that allows construction in a manner otherwise prohibited and where specific enforcement would
result in unnecessary hardship.
VIOLATION: A failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community’s floodplain
management ordinance. A structure or other development without required permits, lowest floor elevation
documentation, flood-proofing certificates or required floodway encroachment calculations is presumed to
be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
WATER SURFACE ELEVATION: The height, in relation to the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 (or
other datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal
or riverine areas.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 3-1
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
SECTION 3: Zoning Districts & Map
3.1 Zoning Districts
All land within the Town of Groton’s zoning authority are zoned with one of the following districts:
3.2-1 Residential (R) Districts
3.2-1.A Residential-7 (R-7)
3.2-1.B Residential-12 (R-12)
3.2-2 Residential Single-Unit (RS) Districts
3.2-2.A Residential Single-Unit-12 (RS-12)
3.2-2.B Residential Single-Unit-20 (RS-20)
3.2-3 Rural Residential (RU) Districts
3.2-3.A Rural Residential-20 (RU-20)
3.2-3.B Rural Residential-40 (RU-40)
3.2-3.C Rural Residential-80 (RU-80)
3.2-4 Residential Multi-Unit (RM)
3.3 Commercial & Mixed-Use Districts
3.3-1.A Commercial, Regional (CR)
3.3-1.B Commercial, Neighborhood (CN)
3.3-1.C Working Waterfront (WW)
3.3-1.D Nautilus Memorial Design District (NMDD)
3.3-2.A Mystic Downtown District (MDD)
3.3-2.C Mixed-Use Town Center (MTC)
3.3-2.E Mixed-Use Village Center (MVC)
3.4 Industrial Districts
3.4-1 Industrial, General (IG)
3.4-2 Industrial, Mixed-Use (IM)
3.5 Green Districts
3.5-1 Green, Recreation (GR)
3.5-2 Green, Conservation (GC)
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 3-2
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
3.2 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
The Residential Districts are meant to accommodate a variety of residential dwellings at a scale of densities,
including one- and two-unit dwellings and multi-unit dwellings. These districts are also meant to accommodate
agricultural uses, as well as limited additional uses that complement and enhance residential uses, such as parks,
libraries, churches, and opportunities for compatible home-based businesses. The Residential Districts include:
3.2-1 Residential (R) Districts
3.2-1.A Residential-7 (R-7)
3.2-1.B Residential-12 (R-12)
3.2-2 Residential Single-Unit (RS) Districts
3.2-2.A Residential Single-Unit-12 (RS-12)
3.2-2.B Residential Single-Unit-20 (RS-20)
3.2-3 Rural Residential (RU) Districts
3.2-3.A Rural Residential-20 (RU-20)
3.2-3.B Rural Residential-40 (RU-40)
3.2-3.C Rural Residential-80 (RU-80)
3.2-4 Residential Multi-Unit (RM)
Residential Density Calculations
The following residential uses must also follow the
residential density calculations of Section 4.2-3:
• Single-Unit and Two-Unit Subdivisions
• Active Senior Housing Community
• Cottage Communities
• Residential Life Care Communities when located in
the R, RS or RU zoning districts
• Open Space Subdivisions
Porches
The graphic to the right applies to all residential zoning
districts where additional dimensional standards are
included for porches.
Porches
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 3-3
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
3.2-1 RESIDENTIAL (R) DISTRICTS, R-7 AND R-12
3.2-1.A Residential-7 (R-7)
Intent
The R-7 zoning district encompasses the densest residential area that surrounds the mixed-use core of historic
Mystic Village. The area is covered by the Mystic River Historic District, and buildings, existing and new, must
adhere to historic district design standards. Dimensions in this district are designed to encourage one- and
two-unit dwellings that support the denser, historic residential patterns of Mystic Village.
R-7 Dimensional Standards
Lot Size
• Minimum lot size: 7,000 SF
• Minimum lot width: 60 ft
Setbacks
• Minimum front yard setback: 10 ft
• Minimum rear yard setback: 25 ft
• Minimum side yard setback: 6 ft
Maximum Building
• Height: 30 ft
• Coverage: 35%
Lot Area
• Minimum Lot Area Per Dwelling Unit: 4,000 SF
R-7
Minimum Lot Size 7,000 SF
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 3-4
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
3.2-1.B Residential-12 (R-12)
Intent
The R-12 district encompasses residential neighborhoods throughout the Town. What these diverse
neighborhoods share are generally smaller lots, often walkable and bikeable internally and to nearby resources.
Future development and redevelopment in this zoning district will enhance these benefits by encouraging
one- and two-unit dwellings in walkable, bikeable, sewered, residential neighborhoods near or adjacent to
mixed-use centers, other retail and services, parks, schools, and major roads and transit.
R-12 Dimensional Standards
Lot Size
• Minimum lot size: 12,000 SF
• Minimum lot width: 60 ft
Setbacks
• Minimum front yard setback: 25 ft
• Minimum rear yard setback: 25 ft
• Minimum side yard setback: 12 ft
Porches
• One covered porch per dwelling of at least 6 ft
and no more than 10 ft in depth is allowed
through a zoning permit and a building permit.
Such porches may be partially or fully within the
front yard setback. In an Open Space Subdivision,
no porch shall be located less than 10 ft from the
front lot line.
Maximum Building
• Height: 30 ft
• Coverage: 30%
Lot Area
• Minimum Lot Area Per Dwelling Unit: 6,000 SF
R-12
Minimum Lot Size 12,000 SF
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 3-5
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
3.2-2 RESIDENTIAL SINGLE UNIT (RS) DISTRICTS, RS-12 AND
RS-20
3.2-2.A Residential Single-Unit-12 (RS-12)
Intent
The RS-12 district encompasses residential neighborhoods throughout the Town. What these diverse
neighborhoods share are generally smaller lots, often walkable and bikeable internally and to nearby resources.
Future development and redevelopment in this zoning district will enhance these benefits by encouraging
one-unit dwellings in walkable, bikeable, sewered, residential neighborhoods near or adjacent to mixed-use
centers, other retail and services, parks, schools, and major roads and transit.
RS-12 Dimensional Standards
Lot Size
• Minimum lot size: 12,000 SF
• Minimum lot width: 60 ft
Setbacks
• Minimum front yard setback: 25 ft
• Minimum rear yard setback: 25 ft
• Minimum side yard setback: 12 ft
Porches
• One covered porch of at least 6 ft and no more
than 10 ft in depth is allowed through a zoning
permit and a building permit. Such porches may
be partially or fully within the front yard setback.
In an Open Space Subdivision, no porch shall be
located less than 10 ft from the front lot line.
Maximum Building
• Height: 30 ft
• Coverage: 30%
Lot Area
• Minimum Lot Area Per Dwelling Unit: 12,000 SF
RS-12
Minimum Lot Size 12,000 SF
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 3-6
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
3.2-2.B Residential Single-Unit -20 (RS-20)
Intent
The RS-20 district is found throughout the Town and is designed to encourage one-unit dwellings in more
traditional suburban settings. Open Space Subdivisions are encouraged in this district. When adjacent to
an R-12 or RS-12 district, new development in the RS-20 district should strive to mirror the connectivity of
the R-12 or RS-12 district, extending existing streets, sidewalks, and bicycle networks, to expand options and
livability for residents.
RS-20 Dimensional Standards
Lot Size
• Minimum lot size: 20,000 SF
• Minimum lot width: 100 ft
Setbacks
• Minimum front yard setback: 30 ft
• Minimum rear yard setback: 30 ft
• Minimum side yard setback: 20 ft
Porches
• One covered porch of at least 6 ft and no
more than 10 ft in depth is allowed through
a zoning permit and a building permit. Such
porches may be partially or fully within
the front yard setback. In an Open Space
Subdivision, no porch shall be located less
than 10 ft from the front lot line.
Maximum Building
• Height: 30 ft
• Coverage: 25%
Lot Area
• Minimum Lot Area Per Dwelling Unit:
20,000 SF
RS-20
Minimum Lot Size 20,000 SF
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 3-7
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
3.2-3 RURAL RESIDENTIAL (RU) DISTRICTS, RU-20, RU-40,
AND RU-80
3.2-3.A Rural Residential -20 (RU-20)
Intent
The RU-20 district is found throughout the Town and is designed to encourage one- and two-unit dwellings in
more traditional suburban settings. Open Space Subdivisions are encouraged in this district. When adjacent to
an R-12, RS-12 or RS-20 district, new development in the RU-20 district should strive to mirror the connectivity
of the adjacent district, extending existing streets, sidewalks, and bicycle networks, to expand options and
livability for residents.
RU-20 Dimensional Standards
Lot Size
• Minimum lot size: 20,000 SF
• Minimum lot width: 100 ft
Setbacks
• Minimum front yard setback: 30 ft
• Minimum rear yard setback: 30 ft
• Minimum side yard setback: 20 ft
Porches
• One covered or uncovered porch of at least
6 ft in depth is allowed (through a zoning
permit and a building permit) within the front
setback, up to 10 ft in depth. In an Open Space
Subdivision, no porch shall be located less than
10 ft from the front lot line.
Maximum Building
• Height: 30 ft
• Coverage: 25%
Lot Area
• Minimum Lot Area Per Dwelling Unit: 15,000 SF
RU-20
Minimum Lot Size 20,000 SF
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 3-8
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
3.2-3.B Rural Residential-40 (RU-40)
Intent
The RU-40 district is located largely to the north of I-95 and covers the majority of remaining developable
land in the Town. This district is meant to accommodate one-unit dwellings, agriculture and related activities,
and other lower-density uses. New developments should strive to connect open spaces in order to maintain a
network of open space and habitat, rather than isolated pockets.
RU-40 Dimensional Standards
Lot Size
• Minimum lot size: 40,000 SF
• Minimum lot width: 150 ft
Setbacks
• Minimum front yard setback: 40 ft
• Minimum rear yard setback: 30 ft
• Minimum side yard setback: 25 ft
Porches
• One covered or uncovered porch of at least 6 ft
in depth is allowed (through a zoning permit and
a building permit) within the front setback, up
to 10 ft in depth. In an Open Space Subdivision,
no porch shall be located less than 15 ft from the
front lot line.
Maximum Building
• Height: 30 ft
• Coverage, Residential: 20%
• Coverage, Non-Residential: 30%
Lot Area
• Minimum Lot Area Per Dwelling Unit: 30,000 SF
RU-40
Minimum Lot Size 40,000 SF
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 3-9
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
3.2-3.C Rural Residential-80 (RU-80)
Intent
The RU-80 district is located entirely to the north of I-95. Like the RU-40 district, the RU-80 district is meant
to accommodate one-family dwellings, agriculture and related activities, and other lower-density uses. New
developments should strive to connect open spaces in order to maintain a network of open space and habitat,
rather than isolated pockets.
RU-80 Dimensional Standards
Lot Size
• Minimum lot size: 80,000 SF
• Minimum lot width: 200 ft
Setbacks
• Minimum front yard setback: 50 ft
• Minimum rear yard setback: 30 ft
• Minimum side yard setback: 25 ft
Porches
• One covered or uncovered porch of at least 6 ft in
depth is allowed (through a zoning permit and a
building permit) within the front setback, up to 10
ft in depth. In an Open Space Subdivision, a porch
must not be located less than 15 ft from the front
lot line.
Maximum Building
• Height: 30 ft
• Coverage, Residential: 10%
• Coverage, Non-Residential: 20%
Lot Area
• Minimum Lot Area Per Dwelling Unit: 60,000 SF
RU-80
Minimum Lot Size 80,000 SF
Note: For non-residential structures, the
maximum building coverage is 20%
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 3-10
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
3.2-4 RESIDENTIAL MULTI-UNIT (RM)
Intent
The RM district is scattered, with most sites on the western half of the Town. Most RM parcels are already
built out with existing multi-unit homes, ranging from side-by-side town houses to stacked garden apartments,
and including both rentals and ownership condominiums. The RM district is meant to encourage and guide the
development of multi-unit projects within the Town where necessary utilities and transportation improvements
are in place. It is designed to accommodate all allowable residential-only developments of three housing units
or more. RM dimensional standards are divided into two categories. Those that apply to one and two-unit
dwellings, and those that apply to every other use permitted in the district.
RM Dimensional Standards (all uses except one and two-unit dwellings)
Lot Size
• Minimum lot size: 40,000 SF
• Minimum lot width: 150 ft
Setbacks
• Minimum front yard setback: 30 ft
• Minimum rear yard setback: 30 ft
• Minimum side yard setback: 20 ft
Maximum Building
• Height: 3 stories/40 ft
• Coverage: 30%
(Building height can be increased to 5 stories/65
feet, provided the minimum lot area is 120,000
square feet. Any building exceeding 40 feet in
height must be set back from its front, side, and
rear lot lines an additional two feet for each foot in
height over 40 feet.)
Lot Area
• Minimum Lot Area Per Dwelling Unit: 2,000 SF
RM
Minimum Lot Size 40,000 SF
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 3-11
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
RM Dimensional Standards (one and two-unit dwellings)
Lot Size
• Minimum lot size: 7,000 SF
• Minimum lot width: 60 ft
Setbacks
• Minimum front yard setback: 10 ft
• Minimum rear yard setback: 25 ft
• Minimum side yard setback: 6 ft
Maximum Building
• Height: 30 ft
• Coverage: 35%
Lot Area
• Minimum Lot Area Per Dwelling Unit: 4,000 SF
RM One- and Two-Unit Dwellings
Minimum Lot Size 7,000 SF
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 3-12
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
3.3 COMMERCIAL & MIXED-USE DISTRICTS
The Commercial and Mixed-Use Districts are meant to accommodate a very wide variety of uses at different
scales, including offices, stores, restaurants, entertainment, schools, recreation, health care, and more, as
well as many types of residential housing. These districts are designed to accommodate these uses, while
still allowing for the changes in commercial district character desired in the Town’s Plan of Conservation and
Development, including smooth transitions from higher intensity to lower intensity uses. The mixed-use
districts allow for multi-unit housing mixed with retail, services, offices, and other such uses in a walkable,
well-connected environment. The Commercial & Mixed-Use Districts include:
3.3-1.A Commercial, Regional (CR)
3.3-1.B Commercial, Neighborhood (CN)
3.3-1.C Working Waterfront (WW)
3.3-1.D Nautilus Memorial Design District (NMDD)
3.3-2.A Mystic Downtown District (MDD)
3.3-2.C Mixed-Use Town Center (MTC)
3.3-2.E Mixed-Use Village Center (MVC)
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 3-13
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
3.3-1 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
3.3-1.A Commercial, Regional (CR)
Intent
The CR district is meant to accommodate heavier commercial uses such as auto-oriented operations and is
aligned primarily along the Route 184 and Route 12 corridors.
CR Dimensional Standards
Lot Size
• Minimum lot size: 15,000 SF
• Minimum lot width: 100 ft
Setbacks
• Minimum front yard setback: 50 ft
• Minimum rear yard setback: 30 ft
• Minimum side yard setback: 30 ft
Maximum Building
• Height: 6 stories/75 ft
• Coverage: 30%
(Building height can be up to 6 stories or 75 ft,
whichever is less. Any building exceeding 40 ft in
height must be set back from its front, side, and
rear lot lines an additional one foot for each foot
in height over 40 feet.)
Lot Area
• Minimum Lot Area Per Dwelling Unit: N/A
CR
Minimum Lot Size 15,000 SF
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 3-14
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
3.3-1.B Commercial, Neighborhood (CN)
Intent
The CN district is meant to accommodate lighter, neighborhood-serving retail in nodes or gateways that can
serve as a smooth transition between commercial and residential uses. It may include one-unit dwellings,
though two-unit and multi-unit dwellings are preferred, in order to support commercial uses and serve as a
buffer to neighboring residential districts. The district is primarily found along or near the Route 1 corridor.
High-quality, human scale design, with an emphasis on pedestrian connections and green space is desired for
development in this district, as it is meant to play a transitional role between commercial and residential uses.
CN Dimensional Standards
Lot Size
• Minimum lot size: 12,000 SF
• Minimum lot width: 80 ft
Setbacks
• Minimum front yard setback: 30 ft
• Minimum rear yard setback: 30 ft
• Minimum side yard setback: 12 ft
Maximum Building
• Height: 3 stories/40 ft
• Coverage: 30%
Lot Area
• Minimum Lot Area Per Dwelling Unit: 2,000 SF
CN
Minimum Lot Size 12,000 SF
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 3-15
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
3.3-1.C Working Waterfront (WW)
Intent
The WW district is restricted to marine-dependent commercial uses and limited marine-related or marinedependent
light industrial uses. It is a very small district, confined on Willow Point peninsula, and among
the few in Town where such uses are allowed. It is critical to maintain a space for these uses as they play an
important role in the Town’s economy and history. This district is surrounded by a residential neighborhood,
and the only access road into the district crosses through that neighborhood. Therefore, there must continue
to be a balance between ensuring access and activity in the WW to maintain a healthy business climate, and
any negative impacts on the existing neighboring homes.
WW Dimensional Standards
Lot Size
• Minimum lot size: 20,000 SF
• Minimum lot width: 100 ft
Setbacks
• For buildings containing water-dependent uses
which require proximity to the water, the setbacks
below do not apply to any side of the building
facing the water:
• Minimum front yard setback: 40 ft
• Minimum rear yard setback: 30 ft
• Minimum side yard setback: 20 ft
Maximum Building
• Height: 30 ft (or 45’ for buildings used for
construction, repair or storage of boats)
• Coverage: 65%
Lot Area
• Minimum Lot Area Per Dwelling Unit: N/A
WW
Minimum Lot Size 20,000 SF
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 3-16
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
3.3-1.D Nautilus Memorial Design District (NMDD)
Intent
The intent of this district is to permit and control development within the designated design district which
will protect and enhance the primary entryway to the Nautilus Memorial, to service tourist related and Navy
needs, and to provide protection to adjacent residential areas. Development within this district is subject to
the approval of a special permit.
NMDD Dimensional Standards
Lot Size
• Minimum lot size: 200,000 SF (or 40,000 SF*)
• Minimum lot width: 300 feet (or 150 feet*)
Setbacks
• Minimum front yard setback: 50 feet
• Minimum rear yard setback: 30 feet
• Minimum side yard setback: 30 feet
• The front yard and side yard may be reduced to no less than 10 feet from any property line (or easement
line if more restrictive), if the PZC determines that a lesser dimension can best carry out the objectives of
the NMDD.
Maximum Building
• Height: 40 feet
• Coverage: 40%
Lot Area
• Minimum Lot Area Per Dwelling Unit: N/A
* The PZC may approve the development of any lot with less area or dimensions as noted above which existed
in separate ownership at the effective date of this section and continuously thereafter provided the PZC finds
that the proposed development and its site plan are compatible with the purposes of the NMDD and conform
to the alternative minimum lot area and minimum lot width noted above.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 3-17
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
3.3-1.E Nautilus Memorial Design District (NMDD) Additional Standards
1. Purpose
The purpose of this district is to permit and control development within the designated design district
which will protect and enhance the primary entryway to the Nautilus Memorial, to service tourist related
and Navy needs and to provide protection to adjacent residential areas. Development within this district
is subject to the approval of a special permit as noted in Section 9.4 Special Permits and the following
provisions.
2. Design Objectives
All development within the Nautilus Memorial Design District (NMDD) shall be consistent with the
following objectives:
a. To insure the creation of a high-quality tourist service area and to provide an area for those
commercial and other activities that service the needs of visitors to the Nautilus Memorial and
Submarine Base as well as other area attractions.
b. To ensure that high intensity and bulk uses do not encroach into and/or adversely impact
surrounding residential districts.
c. To encourage assemblage of small parcels into larger units of land.
d. To encourage uses and architectural and site designs which improve the existing environment of
the area and highlight the uniqueness of the Nautilus Memorial and Submarine Base Museum.
e. To create a viable tourist commercial, service and residential area which serves the needs of
visitors to the Nautilus Memorial, personnel associated with the Submarine Base and adjacent
residential areas.
f. To establish a coordinated pattern of land uses which allows safe access and movement of
pedestrians, bicycles and vehicles to, from and throughout the NMDD and to limit possible access
to the properties from Crystal Lake Road only.
g. To encourage architectural and site design which promotes aesthetic qualities while sustaining and
enhancing the unique qualities associated with the Nautilus Memorial and the Submarine Base.
h. To provide circulation patterns and related facilities within and adjacent to the NMDD such as
walkways, benches, bike tracks, which will give priority to pedestrian movement and travel.
i. The Thames River is a vital element within the NMDD and as such must be given primary
consideration in any proposed development. To this end, special consideration must be given
to the area of the water and land interface, preservation and creation of use from public and
other areas to the water, and the preservation and integrity of an existing river bank. Pedestrian
access to the river’s edge, where possible, should be encouraged from the Nautilus Memorial and
Military Highway to the Gold Star Bridge.
3. Permitted Uses
Tourist commercial uses, uses to service the Navy base and/or their personnel, and residential uses or
mix of same which are consistent with the purpose and objectives of the NMDD, and which are not
detrimental to the unique character of the area, are permitted in the district. Any use to be located
in a new structure or any use located in an existing structure that is an intensification of the use of
that structure and/or parcel shall be subject to the approval of a special permit. Intensification of use
shall be defined as additional multi-family residential units, or additional required parking for nonresidential
uses from that which existed prior to the application for a special permit.
Examples of the types of uses that could be considered in the district for tourist commercial include
hotel/motels, restaurants, convention/meeting facilities, photo services, etc. Uses that could be
considered to serve the Navy base and personnel include banking/credit services, library, associations,
personal services, day care facilities, etc. The examples listed above should not be construed to mean
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 3-18
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
that said uses will be allowed in the district as a matter of right nor should it be interpreted that uses
not listed could not be considered in a special permit or a site plan application.
Residential uses are allowed in the NMDD as provided for in Section 3.2-4 entitled “Residential Multi-
Unit (RM)” and in Section 5.1-8.G Multi-Unit Dwellings. The RM district must be complied with unless
superseded by provisions of the NMDD with respect to additional and/or more stringent requirements.
It is envisioned that residential uses within the NMDD will be situated so as to provide a transition/
buffer area between proposed tourist commercial and service uses and adjacent residential zones.
In granting or denying approval for a specific proposed use or mix of uses, the PZC shall evaluate the
proposal’s conformance with the purpose and design objectives as stated above.
4. Building and Development Standards
a. Access to existing and future parcels of land shall be from Crystal Lake Road only. Access to
Military Highway, Route 12, North Pleasant Valley Road and the residential areas of Bailey Hill will
not be allowed unless they are the only access points possible and/or the PZC determines that
such access is needed for safety reasons.
b. Access points between various properties and/or uses shall be provided so as to allow vehicle
and/or pedestrian circulation. Common access points shall be provided so as to limit the number
of curb cuts.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 3-19
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
3.3-2 MIXED-USE DISTRICTS
The purpose of the Town’s three commercial mixed-use districts (MDD, MTC, and MVC) is to:
1. Allow a mixture of complimentary land uses that may include housing, retail, offices, commercial services,
and civic uses;
2. To create economic and social vitality and to encourage the linking of trips;
3. Develop commercial and mixed-use areas that are safe, comfortable, and attractive to pedestrians;
4. Reinforce streets as public places that encourage pedestrian and bicycle travel;
5. Provide roadway and pedestrian connections to residential areas;
6. Provide transitions between high traffic streets and neighborhoods;
7. Encourage efficient land use by facilitating compact, higher-density development and minimizing the
amount of land that is needed for surface parking;
8. Facilitate development that supports public transit, where applicable;
9. Provide appropriate locations and design standards for automobile- and truck-dependent uses; and
10. Maintain mobility along traffic corridors and highways.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 3-20
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
3.3-2.A Mystic Downtown District (MDD)
Intent
Mystic is known for its traditional coastal New England character and is one of the biggest tourist destinations
in the state. It is an important retail district in Groton with small, locally-owned shops along a main street and
high density residential within historic structures. The MDD district is designed to maintain and enhance this
special village by establishing specific standards to ensure a mix of compatible uses, concentrated development,
pedestrian friendly circulation, shared parking and public spaces, and the compatibility with existing historic
character. The area is also covered by the Mystic River Historic District, and buildings, existing and new, must
adhere to historic district design standards.
MDD Dimensional Standards
Lot Size
• Minimum lot size: 8,000 SF
• Minimum lot width: 60 ft
Setbacks
• Minimum front yard setback: 0 ft
• Minimum front yard setback for any development fronting Fort Rachel Place: 10 ft
• Minimum rear yard setback: 10 ft unless a Common Lot Line Agreement in accordance with Section
4.2-2.H. is filed in land records
• Minimum side yard setback: 10 ft unless a Common Lot Line Agreement in accordance with Section
4.2-2.H. is filed in land records
(Note: See Section 3.3-2.B for setbacks for non-water dependent uses)
Maximum Building
• Height: 35 ft
(Building height is a maximum of 35 ft, but can be increased to 40 ft. Any building exceeding 35 feet in
height must be set back from its front, side, and rear lot lines an additional one foot for each foot in height
over 35 feet.)
• Coverage: 65%
Lot Area
• Minimum Lot Area Per Dwelling Unit: 2,000 SF
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 3-21
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
3.3-2.B MDD Design and Building Standards
1. Design Objectives
All development within the MDD must be consistent with the following design objectives:
a. Structural rehabilitation, wherever feasible, will be encouraged in order to preserve and enhance
the historic and diverse qualities of the Mystic area.
b. Architectural and site design which promote aesthetic qualities while sustaining and enhancing
the unique qualities of the Mystic area will be encouraged.
c. A circulation pattern and related facilities within the MDD, such as sidewalks, benches, and bike
racks, which will give priority to pedestrian and bicycle movement and must be demonstrated
with the project design.
d. The Mystic River is the most vital element within the MDD and as such must be given primary
consideration in any proposed development. To this end, special consideration must be given to
the area of the water and land interface; the preservation and creation of views from public and
other areas to the water, and the preservation and integrity of the existing river bank. Pedestrian
and public access to the river’s edge must be incorporated into a project’s design for all non-water
dependent uses adjacent to or that could provide access to the river.
2. Building and Development Standards
The following standards are in addition to the building and development standards in other sections
of these regulations and supersede other standards where a conflict exists.
a. All new construction of new non-water dependent uses must maintain a minimum setback of 25-
feet from the coastal jurisdiction line (CJL) of the Mystic River.
b. A Certificate of Appropriateness must be obtained as required by the Historic District Commission
regulations prior to the start of construction and issuance of a building permit.
c. Where the PZC deems it feasible, it may approve a site plan for a use which does not have direct
access from a Town approved road, provided that adequate and safe pedestrian access is provided.
d. Any applicant for a Site Plan or Special Permit should demonstrate how the propose site plan
achieves the objective of provision of pedestrian access to the riverfront and preserves visual
access to the river, if applicable, where feasible and appropriate.
e. All landscaping and screening requirements of Section 8.1 including those of Section 8.1-4.B
specific to mixed use districts must be followed.
f. A truck loading space is required in accordance with Section 8.2-16 for new non-residential
development on sites of one (1) acre or more.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 3-22
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
3.3-2.C Mixed-Use Town Center (MTC)
Intent
This district is meant to encourage the redevelopment of existing strip malls and other single-story and
single use buildings into mixed-use developments, allowing Groton to meet regional market demand for such
development. The MTC district may accommodate a mix of uses, including residential, and act as a destination
for residents across and outside the Town, ultimately serving as a true Town Center and gathering spot with its
own clear identity. The district is designed to be pedestrian friendly, but still able to accommodate significant
vehicular traffic. Development here should be oriented to existing or planned streets with wide sidewalks,
street trees, pedestrian-scale lighting, and street furnishings, as well as transit stops. Creative placemaking is
a critical component of the success of the MTC, and design standards and guidelines emphasize public spaces,
sidewalks, and spaces for public art.
MTC Dimensional Standards
Lot Size
• Minimum lot size: 10,000 SF
• Minimum lot width: 100 ft
Setbacks
Minimum and Maximum front yard setbacks
• Along Route 1: 20 ft Minimum, 40 ft Maximum
• Along all streets or any other major vehicle travel lane that abut a residential district: 30 ft Minimum
• Along all other streets or any other major vehicle travel lane internal to the district: 0 ft Minimum, 15 ft
Maximum.
• Where a public space is placed between the front lot line and the building, the maximum front yard may
be increased to 40 feet.
Minimum rear yard setbacks
• For all rear yards that abut a non-MTC district: 30 ft
• For all other rear yards in the district: 10 ft unless a Common Lot Line Agreement in accordance with
Section 4.2-2.H is filed in land records
Minimum side yard setbacks
• For all side yards that abut a non-MTC district: 30 ft
• For all side yards with portions of buildings sharing a common wall: 0 ft with a Common Lot Line Agreement
in accordance with Section 4.2-2.H filed in land records
• For all other side yards on lots with buildings up to 40 ft in height: 10 ft
• For all other side yards on lots with buildings over 40 ft in height: 20 ft
Maximum Building
Height
• Along Route 1: 60 ft
• For all other lots: 45 ft
Coverage
• All lots: 85%
Lot Area
Minimum Lot Area Per Dwelling Unit: N/A
Public Space
Minimum amount of public space on sites of two (2) acres or more: 15% of total lot area. At least 2/3 of the
minimum public space must be contiguous.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 3-23
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
3.3.-2.D Design Standards for the MTC District
1. Purpose
The Town of Groton recognizes that current development in the MTC generally does not meet the
intent of the district and the Town wishes to see high levels of investment that will transform this area
into a high-density, walkable, mixed-use center.
2. Applicability of Design Standards
The following design standards apply to development activity in the MTC district. These standards are
in addition to other building and development standards found in these regulations and supersede
other standards where a conflict exists. Supplementary design guidelines can be found in the MTC
Guidelines located in Appendix B.
Unless specifically exempted by a particular situation identified herein, the following additional design
standards 3.3-2.D.3 through 3.3-2.D.11 for the MTC shall apply where:
• A site plan is reviewed by the Commission under Section 9.5-1.A
• A building addition of 1000 SF or more is proposed
• An accessory structure of 500 SF or more is proposed
• Ten or more parking spaces are proposed
3. Circulation
The design of individual properties or groups of properties reinforces the purposes of MTC mixed-use
district by encouraging pedestrian and bicycle circulation. Pedestrian and bicycle infrastructure shall
be provided using the following site design techniques:
a. Pedestrian connections between frontage sidewalks and buildings and between buildings
separated by a parking lot must be designed to be safe, broad, and easily identifiable.
b. Pedestrian connections that cross parking lots must be designed to clearly show that the space
is primarily dedicated to pedestrian traffic using raised or alternative surfaces, signage or raised
landscaped islands that serve as a safe resting area for pedestrians between automobile travel
lanes.
c. Where sidewalks or other pedestrian or bikeways intersect with automobile driveways or lanes,
raised surfaces and/or durable, decorative alternatives to conventional pavement must be used to
connect sidewalks or bikeways across the automobile lane. On its own, striping across the asphalt
used for an automobile lane to connect the pedestrian or bikeway is not adequate to achieve this
goal.
4. Property Frontage
The location and design of frontage buildings, and associated frontage areas, are extremely important
to achieving the goals of any mixed-use district, as they will shape the quality of experience for people
in the public realm.
a. Newly proposed frontage buildings shall be located in a manner that facilitates pedestrian and
bicycle access along and across the frontage area of that property.
b. Any parking or travel lanes associated with newly proposed frontage buildings shall not be located
in the frontage area except where access driveways are located.
c. Street trees must be spaced along the sidewalk at an average frequency of one tree every 40 feet.
d. Frontage sidewalks along Route 1 shall be concrete, a minimum width of ten (10) feet, and shall be
separated from Route 1 by a landscaped buffer that is at least five (5) feet wide. All other streets
in the zone shall comply with the requirements of Section 8.3, Sidewalks. The PZC may require
the extension of sidewalks in the MTC consistent with Section 8.3-3 and may allow for frontage
sidewalk options consistent with Section 8.3-5.A and 8.3-5.B. All streetscape design in the MTC
shall be consistent with Section 8.3-2.C.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 3-24
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
5. Landscaping
All areas of a site that are not rendered impervious through the development of structures, parking
features, circulation features, or other hardscape features must be landscaped. Landscaping may
occur as installed or retained vegetation in accordance with the following standards.
a. Landscaping must meet the standards of Section 8.1 unless superseded by the standards below in
Section 3.3.-2.D.6.a for Surface Parking Location, Design, and Landscaping.
6. Parking Areas and Loading
a. Surface Parking Location, Design, and Landscaping
• For surface parking areas associated with new construction, parking areas must be located
behind or to the side of frontage buildings on the property.
• Where a pre-existing surface parking area is adjacent to a pedestrian space (e.g., plaza,
sidewalk, etc.), the applicant must provide a minimum 5-ft wide landscaped area to separate
these site elements.
• In lieu of Section 8.1-5 (Landscaped Parking and Vehicle Accessway Areas), for developments
with proposed surface parking areas of ten (10) spaces or more, a minimum of ten percent
(10%) of the designated parking area must be landscaped. This calculation may be inclusive of
any landscaped borders surrounding the parking lot.
• In lieu of Section 8.1-5, the ends of parking aisles in surface lots that are more than 15 spaces
in length must incorporate landscape islands at either end of the row. Each island must include
at least one tree that is two (2) inches in caliper at the time of planting. Where the length of
a parking aisle exceeds 25 spaces, additional landscaped islands must be installed at regular
intervals. This interval must not be more than every 13 spaces. Landscape island design must
meet Section 8.1-5.
• Parking areas for ten (10) or more cars or any travel lane must be separated from adjacent
properties by a landscaped buffer at least 5 feet in width unless the parking area is contiguous
across the property line.
b. Bicycle Parking. Bicycle parking must meet Section 8.2-17.
c. Truck Loading. Accommodations for truck loading must meet Section 8.2-16.
7. Fencing and Screening
a. All screening for solid waste enclosures, services areas, mechanical equipment, and utilities must
meet the standards of Section 8.1-9
b. Chain link fencing is prohibited in front and side yards within the MTC unless it is necessary for
security standards unique to the individual use, is vinyl coated, and is screened using evergreen
trees (minimum 6-ft in height) and/or shrubs.
8. Lighting
a. Lighting for parking areas and public/gathering spaces must be decorative in shape, scale, and
finish, with detailed, articulated treatments for the base, post, fixture, and crown. Where decorative
street lighting is already installed, the design of proposed lighting standards and fixtures must be
consistent with or complementary to said lighting.
b. Light poles and fixtures must not exceed 20 feet in height.
c. Height is measured from finished grade to the highest point of the structure. Structural features
used to anchor light standards (e.g., concrete pilings) must not protrude more than 12 inches from
the ground.
d. Lighting fixtures must meet the standards of Section 8.5.
9. Utility Lines
Utility lines and cables must be located underground.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 3-25
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
10. Building Form
a. Multi-story buildings must clearly articulate the base, middle (where applicable), and top of the
building using cornices, borders of distinct material, or other articulating features on every visible
surface of the building.
b. In new non-residential or mixed-use construction, ground floors in the MTC shall be a minimum
of 11 feet from floor to ceiling to enhance the pedestrian streetscape, regardless of the overall
building height. All buildings over 40 feet tall must have at least one recess line of at least five (5)
feet somewhere above the second story.
c. All buildings with façades longer than 40 feet must articulate the façade with varied rooflines,
distinct signage for multiple tenants, awnings, arcades, pilasters, columns, recessed spaces and/
or entrances and any other features that serve to add texture to these longer façades.
d. The front façade of any new frontage building shall be designed to appear as the front of the
building and shall have a primary entrance.
11. Building Entranceways
a. All buildings must have a principal façade and entry (with operable doors) facing a street or other
area dedicated to pedestrian circulation. Buildings may have more than one principal façade and/
or entry. Primary entrances not facing a street must open onto sidewalks or other designated
pedestrian areas that are at least ten (10) feet in width. The street façade must be designed to
appear to be a principal point of entry for the building.
b. Main entrances must incorporate architectural features that draw attention to the entrance. These
features may include covered porches, distinct sidewalk surfacing, porticos, recessed doorways,
and awnings.
c. Any new frontage building located along Route 1 shall have a primary entrance facing Route 1.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 3-26
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
3.3-2.E Mixed-Use Village Center (MVC)
Intent
This district intends to provide spaces to accommodate demand for mixed-use development on a small “village”
scale with neighborhood-serving retail and services, and places to accommodate artisan production. The MVC
is meant to build upon existing character, preserving and enhancing historic or otherwise important buildings,
and encouraging context sensitive infill development. The district is designed to be pedestrian friendly, but still
able to accommodate significant vehicular traffic along major routes. Development here should be oriented
to existing streets with pedestrian amenities, such as sidewalks, street tree cutouts, pedestrian-scale lighting,
and street furnishings, as well as transit stops, where applicable. Stone walls should be preserved within the
district. Residential uses include mixed-use with ground floor retail, offices or services, multi-unit dwellings
or live-work spaces for “makers” and artisans. The MVC design standards and guidelines help ensure that
redevelopment and infill respect the history and character of the sites. Creative placemaking is also a critical
component of the MVC, and design standards and guidelines emphasize streetscapes and sidewalks as well as
smaller public plazas, parks, and spaces for public art.
MVC Dimensional Standards
Lot Size
• Minimum lot size: 5,000 SF
• Minimum lot width: 80 ft
Setbacks
Minimum and Maximum front yard setbacks
• Along any arterial road: 20 ft Minimum, 35 ft Maximum
• Along all roads that abut a residential district: 30 ft Minimum
• Along all other roads internal to the district: 10 ft Minimum, 25 ft Maximum.
Minimum rear yard setbacks
• For all rear yards that abut a non-MVC district: 30 ft
• For all other rear yards in the district: 20 ft
Minimum side yard setbacks
• For side yards that abut a non-MVC district: 30 ft
• For side yards where buildings share a common wall: 0 ft provided a Common Lot Line Agreement in
accordance with Section 4.2-2.H is filed in land records
• For all other side yards: 10 ft
Maximum Building
• Height: 35 ft
• Coverage: 80%
Lot Area
• Minimum Lot Area Per Dwelling Unit: N/A
Public Space
• Minimum amount of public space on sites of two (2) acres or more: 10% of total lot area. At least ½ of the
minimum public space must be contiguous.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 3-27
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
3.3.-2.F Design Standards for the MVC District
1. Purpose
The Town of Groton recognizes that current development in the MVC has many elements that meet
the vision for the MVC districts including some historic buildings and setbacks that create a strong
connection between buildings and the street. However, this area could be significantly improved with
circulation upgrades, streetscape improvements, and well-designed/well-placed infill development.
2. Applicability of Design Standards
The following design standards apply to development activity in the MVC district. These standards are
in addition to other building and development standards found in these regulations and supersede
other standards where a conflict exists. Supplementary design guidelines can be found in the MVC
Guidelines located in Appendix C.
Unless specifically exempted by a particular situation identified herein, the following additional design
standards 3.3-2.F.3 through 3.3-2.F.11 for the MVC shall apply where:
• A site plan is reviewed by the Commission under Section 9.5-1.A.
3. Circulation
The design of individual properties or groups of properties reinforces the purposes of the MVC mixeduse
district by encouraging pedestrian and bicycle circulation. Pedestrian and bicycle infrastructure
shall be provided using the following site design techniques:
a. Pedestrian connections between frontage sidewalks and buildings and between buildings
separated by a parking lot must be designed to be safe and easily identifiable.
b. Pedestrian connections that cross parking lots must be designed to clearly show that the space is
primarily dedicated to pedestrian traffic.
c. Where sidewalks or other pedestrian or bikeways intersect with automobile driveways or lanes,
raised surfaces and/or durable, decorative alternatives to conventional pavement must be used to
connect sidewalks or bikeways across the automobile lane. On its own, striping across the asphalt
used for an automobile lane to connect the pedestrian or bikeway is not adequate to achieve this
goal.
4. Property Frontage
The location and design of frontage buildings, and associated frontage areas, are extremely important
to achieving the goals of any mixed-use district, as they will shape the quality of experience for people
in the public realm.
a. Newly constructed frontage buildings must be located in a manner that facilitates pedestrian and
bicycle access along and across the frontage area of that property.
b. Any parking or travel lanes associated with new frontage buildings shall not be located in the
frontage area except where access driveways are located.
c. Frontage sidewalks along Route 1 shall be concrete, a minimum width of five (5) feet, and shall
be separated from Route 1 by a landscaped area unless the location of existing buildings does
not allow for this landscaped area. Along the south side of Route 1 the continuation of the ten
(10) foot wide bituminous multi-use path may be substituted for the five-foot-wide concrete
sidewalk as determined by the PZC. All sidewalks on all other streets in the zone shall comply
with the requirements of Section 8.3. The PZC may require the extension of sidewalks in the MVC
consistent with Section 8.3-3 and may allow for frontage sidewalk options consistent with Section
8.3-5.A and 8.3-5.B. All streetscape design in the MVC shall be consistent with Section 8.3-2.C.
5. Landscaping
All areas of a site that are not rendered impervious through the development of structures, parking
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 3-28
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
features, circulation features or other hardscape features must be landscaped. Landscaping may occur
as installed or retained vegetation in accordance with the following standards.
a. Landscaping must meet the standards of Section 8.1 unless superseded by the standards below.
6. Parking Areas and Loading
a. Surface Parking Location, Design, and Landscaping
• For surface parking areas associated with new construction, parking areas must be located
behind or to the side of frontage buildings on the property.
• Where a pre-existing surface parking area is adjacent to a sidewalk, the applicant must provide
a minimum 5-ft wide landscaped area or a 3 ft high stone or decorative wall to separate these
site elements.
b. Bicycle Parking. Bicycle parking must meet Section 8.2-17.
c. Truck Loading. Accommodations for truck loading must meet Section 8.2-16.
7. Fencing and Screening
a. All screening for solid waste enclosures, service areas, mechanical equipment, and utilities must
meet the standards of Section 8.1-7.
b. Chain link fencing is prohibited in the MVC in the front and side yards unless it is necessary for
security standards unique to the individual use, is vinyl coated, and is screened using evergreen
trees (minimum 6-ft in height) and/or shrubs.
8. Lighting
a. Light poles and fixtures must not exceed 20 feet in height.
b. Height is measured from finished grade to the highest point of the structure. Structural features used to
anchor light standards (e.g., concrete pilings) must not protrude more than 12 inches from the ground.
c. Lighting fixtures must meet the standards of Section 8.5.
9. Utility Lines
Utility lines and cables must be located underground.
10. Building Form
a. New multi-story buildings must clearly articulate the base, middle (where applicable), and top of
the building using cornices, borders of distinct material, or other articulating features on every
visible surface of the building.
b. All buildings with façades longer than 40 feet must articulate the façade with varied rooflines,
distinct signage for multiple tenants, awnings, arcades, pilasters, columns, recessed spaces and/
or entrances and any other features that serve to add texture to these longer façades.
c. The front façade of any new frontage building shall be designed to appear as the front of the
building and shall have a primary entrance.
11. Building Entranceways
a. All new buildings must have a principal façade and entry (with operable doors) facing a street or
other area dedicated to pedestrian circulation. Buildings may have more than one principal façade
and/or entry. Primary entrances not facing a street must open onto sidewalks or other designated
pedestrian areas that are at least ten (10) feet in width.
b. Main entrances must incorporate architectural features that draw attention to the entrance. These
features may include covered porches, distinct sidewalk surfacing, porticos, recessed doorways,
and awnings.
c. Any new frontage building located along State Routes 1, 27, and 184 shall have a primary entrance
facing the State Route on which it is located.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 3-29
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
3.4 INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
The Industrial Districts are meant primarily to accommodate production, manufacturing, and other related
industrial uses. Most residential uses are prohibited in these districts, but many commercial uses are allowed,
particularly in the Mixed-Use Industrial District. The Industrial Districts include:
3.4-1 Industrial, General (IG)
3.4-2 Industrial, Mixed-Use (IM)
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 3-30
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
3.4-1 INDUSTRIAL, GENERAL (IG)
The IG district is meant to accommodate more intensive, large footprint industrial uses that are generally
incompatible with residential neighborhoods and typically benefit from locations accessible to highway, rail,
air, and water access points. It also includes the Groton-New London Airport.
IG Dimensional Standards
Lot Size
• Minimum lot size: 40,000 SF
• Minimum lot width: 150 ft
Setbacks
• Minimum front yard setback: 40 ft
• Minimum rear yard setback: 30 ft
• Minimum side yard setback: 30 ft
Maximum Building
• Height: 40 ft
• Coverage: 40%
IG
Minimum Lot Size 40,000 SF
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 3-31
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
3.4-2 INDUSTRIAL, MIXED-USE (IM)
The IM district is meant to accommodate low to moderate impact industrial and light industrial uses which
may benefit from proximity to mixed use residential neighborhoods and which are located adjacent to highway
access points. A mix of industrial and commercial uses is also allowed in this district, recognizing the market
demand for industrial business spaces that are not isolated from complementary commercial businesses
and the daily commercial amenities desired by employees. This district allows not only customary research
and development, light manufacturing, office, corporate, and related uses but also amenities such as hotels,
restaurants, limited retail, recreation businesses, and more. This mix of uses is designed to be attractive to
modern manufacturers and their employees.
IM Dimensional Standards
Lot Size
• Minimum lot size: 30,000 SF
• Minimum lot width: 100 ft
Setbacks
• Minimum front yard setback: 30 ft
• Minimum rear yard setback: 30 ft
• Minimum side yard setback: 25 ft
Maximum Building
• Height: 6 stories/75 ft
(Any building exceeding 40 ft in height must be
set back from its front, side, and rear lot lines an
additional one foot for each foot in height over 40
ft.)
• Coverage: 40%
IM
Minimum Lot Size 30,000 SF
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 3-32
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
3.5 GREEN DISTRICTS
The two Green Districts are meant to accommodate permanently protected park and conservation lands,
whether publicly owned by a federal, state or town agency, or privately owned by a land trust or other such
non-profit, through easements from conservation developments, or any other such deed restriction. Most
uses are prohibited in these districts, but some limited building is allowed, supportive of the primary uses of
conservation or recreation. However, while certain uses are allowed under these zoning districts, such zoning
will not supersede any use restrictions stipulated in state or federal law, conservation easements, or any other
legally binding lien or condition in a property’s deed. The Green Districts include:
3.5-1 Green, Recreation (GR)
3.5-2 Green, Conservation (GC)
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 3-33
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
3.5-1 GREEN, RECREATION (GR)
The GR district is meant to accommodate active recreation and limited supporting operations, such as
playgrounds, ball fields, interpretive or nature centers, community gardens, outdoor amphitheaters, and
perhaps small-scale refreshment vending. Lots in this district typically have an ownership structure or deed
restriction that provides for long-term preservation of public recreational uses.
GR Dimensional Standards
Setbacks
• For any building, or outdoor recreation field or facility.
• Minimum setback from the borders of any non-GR zoning district: 30 ft
Maximum Building
• For any enclosed and/or roofed building.
• Height: 25 ft or 2 stories
• Coverage: 3% of the total land area of any parcel or parcels making up a single park or recreation area.
GR
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 3-34
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
3.5-2 GREEN, CONSERVATION (GC)
The GC district is meant to accommodate conservation land for sensitive environmental resources and limited
recreation opportunities, such as hiking, walking trails, boating, bird watching, and the like. All parcels in this
district must have an ownership structure or deed restriction that provides for long-term preservation of open
space. Public access to these parcels may be prohibited or limited, in order to protect their natural resources.
GC Dimensional Standards
Setbacks
• For any building.
• Minimum setback from the borders of any non-GC or GR zoning district: 30 ft
Maximum Building
• For any enclosed and/or roofed building.
• Height: 15 ft or 1 story
• Coverage: 1,000 SF.
GC
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 3-35
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
3.6 ZONING MAP
The boundaries of these districts are hereby established as shown on the map entitled Zoning, Town of Groton,
Connecticut, and amendments thereto, which map, and amendments, are hereby declared to be part of these
regulations. Zoning Map
3.7 EXTENT OF DISTRICTS
It is the intent of these regulations that all areas of the Town of Groton, including all land and land under water
areas, be included in the zoning districts established by these regulations.
3.8 DISTRICT BOUNDARIES
Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of any of the aforesaid districts shown on the zoning
map, the following rules apply:
• Where district boundaries are within the right-of-way of a street, highway, railroad, brook, stream or
easement, the center lines of such rights-of-way are construed to be such district boundaries.
• Where district boundaries are so indicated that they are approximately parallel to the right-of-way lines of
streets, such district boundaries are construed as being parallel thereto and at such distance therefrom as
indicated on the zoning map.
• Where district boundaries are so indicated that they are approximately perpendicular to the center line or
right-of-way lines of streets, such lines are construed as being perpendicular thereto.
• Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following lot lines of record at the time of
adoption of these regulations, such lot lines are construed to be such boundaries.
• Where a question arises and no dimensions or official lot lines of record are shown, then the district
boundaries are determined by the Zoning Official. An appeal may be taken to the Zoning Board of Appeals.
• Where district boundaries are dimensioned on the zoning map, they are measured from the street or
right-of-way line.
3.9 LO T LYING IN MORE THAN ONE DISTRICT
In the case of a lot lying in more than one district, the provisions of each district must be applied only within
the portion of the lot within that district.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 4-1
PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
1 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
DEFINITIONS
2
SECTION 4: DISTRICT REGULATIONS
4.1 TABLE OF PERMITTED USES
Land, water, and buildings may be used only for the purposes set forth in the Table of Permitted Uses and only within those districts specified in the said
table of permitted uses. As used in the table, the following symbols mean:
P = Permitted
C = Permitted with Conditions (Location of conditions noted in the “Conditions” column.)
SP = Permitted with Special Permit
SP/C = Permitted with Special Permit and Conditions (Location of conditions noted in the “Conditions” column.)
A = Permitted only as an accessory use to a permitted use in the underlying zone
A/C or A/SP or A/SP/C = Permitted only as an accessory use with conditions or a special permit or both
X = Prohibited
Key: Zoning Districts
RS = Residential, Single Unit (RS-12, RS-20) CR = Commercial, Regional IM = Industrial, Mixed-Use
R = Residential (R-7, R-12) WW = Working Waterfront IG = Industrial, General
RU = Rural Residential (RU-20, RU-40, RU-80) MDD = Mystic Downtown District GR = Green Recreation Land*
RM = Residential Multi-Unit MTC = Mixed-Use Town Center GC = Green Conservation Land*
CN = Commercial, Neighborhood MVC = Mixed-Use Village Center
*Note on Green Districts: while certain uses are allowed under these zoning districts, such zoning will not supersede any use restrictions stipulated in state
or federal law, conservation easements or any other legally binding lien or condition in a property’s deed.
Parking Standards
The column below marked “Pkng” contains numbers that correspond to the parking standards for various uses. Please see the parking standards in Sec.
8.2. Note: If a use is not marked in this column, it does NOT necessarily mean no parking is required. The Zoning Official may still determine a parking
standard for such uses.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 4-2
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
Water Resource Protection District (WRPD) Restrictions and Conditions
The WRPD is an overlay district designed to protect the Town’s drinking water supply. Any uses marked in the WRPD column below must meet the
requirements of the underlying zoning as well as any specific allowances, conditions or restrictions for the WRPD. ALL development, regardless of use and
underlying zoning, within the WRPD must meet the general performance standards described in Sections 6.4-5 through 6.4-8. Where there may be conflicts
between provisions of the WRPD and other provisions of this ordinance, the stricter of the two shall apply.
a. X = Prohibited
b. W = Permitted with Conditions as described in Sec. 6.4-9. This may include Special Permits or a requirement to use public sewers. This may also include uses
that, while not categorically restricted, have certain related activities that may be prohibited, require a sewer connection or have additional conditions.
c. _= If left blank, the WRPD does not have any additional conditions or prohibitions on the use beyond the requirements to meet the General Performance
Standards (Sections 6.4-5 through 6.4-8) of the WRPD and those of the underlying zoning district.
d. The following activities are prohibited in the WRPD across any and all use categories:
• Any industrial, commercial or other use in which the manufacture, use, storage, transport, process or disposal of hazardous materials or waste is
a principal activity.
• Discharge to the ground of non-sanitary wastewater including industrial and commercial process wastewater, unless specifically exempt by these
regulations.
• Stockpiling and disposal of snow or ice containing sodium chloride, calcium chloride, chemically treated abrasives or other chemicals used for the
removal of snow or ice on roads which has been removed from highways and streets located outside of the WRPD.
Interpretation
In the interpretation of the following Use Table, where a use is not specifically listed in the table, its status under this section shall be determined by the
Zoning Official, by reference to that listed use, if any, which is so like the use in question in purpose, function, character, and effect as to be substantially
similar to said listed use. If a use is not listed in the Use Table and the Zoning Official does not determine it to be substantially similar to a use in the Use
Table, that use is prohibited.
Organization of Uses
To facilitate use of the table, all uses are organized by the following major categories:
AG RICULT URAL, ANIMAL & NAT URAL RESO URCES
CULT URAL, RECREATION & ENTERTAIN MENT
DAY CARE
HEALT H FACILITIES
INDUST RIAL
RESI DENTIAL
RESTA URANT
RETAIL
SERVICES
SIGNST
RANSPORTATION , COMMUNICATION & UTILITIES
VEHICLE & HEA VY EQUIPMENT
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 4-3
PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
1 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
DEFINITIONS
2
Table 4.1 TABLE OF PERMITTED USES
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 4-4
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 4-5
PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
1 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
DEFINITIONS
2
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 4-6
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 4-7
PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
1 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
DEFINITIONS
2
5
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 4-8
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 4-9
PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
1 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
DEFINITIONS
2
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 4-10
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 4-11
PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
1 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
DEFINITIONS
2
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 4-12
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 4-13
PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
1 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
DEFINITIONS
2
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 4-14
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 4-15
PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
1 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
DEFINITIONS
2
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 4-16
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
4.2 DIMENSIONAL , BUILDING, AND LO T STANDARDS
4.2-1 INTRODUCTION
Each use, building or structure must comply with the requirements in Table 4.2, Lot, Yard and Building
Requirements by Zoning District, except where provided otherwise by these regulations. The information below
is compiled here for convenience. If there are any discrepancies between Table 4.2 and the information for each
individual zoning district found in Section 3.1, Zoning Districts, the information in Section 3.1 will apply.
Table 4.2 LOT, YARD AND BUILDING REQUIREMENTS BY
ZONING DISTRICT
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 4-17
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
Notes:
1. Building height in the RM is 40 feet/3 stories. However, building height can be increased to 65 feet/5 stories,
provided the minimum lot area is 120,000 square feet. Any building exceeding 40 feet in height must be
set back from its front, side, and rear lot lines an additional two feet for each foot in height over 40 feet.
2. Building height can be up to 6 stories or 75 ft, whichever is less. Any building exceeding 40 ft in height must
be set back from its front, side, and rear lot lines an additional one foot for each foot in height over 40 feet.
3. 45 feet for buildings used for construction, repair or storage of boats.
4. Except 10 ft where any development fronts Fort Rachel Place.
5. 0 ft where a Common Lot Line Agreement is recorded with the abutting property owner; otherwise 10 ft.
6. Building height is a maximum of 35 ft, but can be increased to 40 ft. Any building exceeding 35 feet
in height must be set back from its front, side, and rear lot lines an additional one foot for each foot
in height over 35 feet.
7. For these zoning districts, there is no minimum lot area per dwelling unit.
8. In Flood Hazard Areas, as designated in Section 7.2-2, where the lowest floor of the building is
elevated to meet the requirements of Section 7.2 Flood Protection Regulations, the maximum total
building height shall be measured from the Base Flood Elevation (BFE)+1’ elevation provided that
the resulting height of the building is not more than five (5) feet greater than the maximum building
height permitted in the applicable zone.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 4-18
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
4.2-2 TOWN-WIDE STANDARDS
4.2-2.A Accessory Buildings
Detached accessory buildings not more than 14 feet in height and not used for human habitation or for the
housing of animals may be located in the required side or rear yard, provided that they are located not less
than 40 feet from any street line and not less than six (6) feet from any side or rear yard line.
4.2-2.B Existing Lots
1. The provisions of these regulations relative to required minimum lot area and required minimum lot
width does not prevent the construction of an otherwise permitted building or the establishment of
an otherwise permitted use on a lot which, at the time of the adoption of these regulations, or of any
pertinent amendment thereto, and continuously thereafter, was owned separately from any adjoining
lot, as evidenced by deed recorded in the Land Records of the Town of Groton.
2. An existing lot that was never improved and is part of an approved and recorded residential subdivision
may comply with the zoning regulations that were in effect at the time of subdivision, per CGS 8-26a.
4.2-2.C Floor Area of Dwelling
All indoor calculations dealing with minimum floor area are governed by the applicable building code
requirements, as determined by the Zoning Official.
4.2-2.D Front Yard Averaging
On any block where two or more buildings, existing before the adoption of these regulations, have a front
yard setback less than required by these regulations, new buildings may be constructed to a front setback
line which is the average of the improved lots along both sides of that same street between the two nearest
intersections. Accessory buildings will not be included in this calculation.
4.2-2.E Height Limitation
1. The building height limit is applied separately for each wing or other distinct portion of the building.
2. Spires, cupolas, towers (other than telecommunication towers reviewed and approved by the Public
Utilities Regulatory Authority), chimneys, flagpoles, penthouses, and similar features occupying in the
aggregate not more than 10% of the building area and not used for human occupancy may be erected
to the following heights:
a. 10 feet above the maximum elevation of the zone, with Administrative Site Plan, or
b. To a reasonable and necessary height as determined by the PZC by Special Permit, though no taller
than 20 feet above the maximum elevation of the zone.
3. Telecommunication towers may be erected to the minimum height necessary as specified in Section 5.1-
12.A of the regulations and/or through the review and approval of the Connecticut Public Utility Regulatory
Authority (PURA), as appropriate. Such towers no more than 10 feet above the maximum elevation of the
zone that are not in PURA’s jurisdiction may be approved through Administrative Site Plan.
4. Water storage tanks (owned and operated by a water supply company), ventilators, and other structures
whose height is required in order to function in accordance with its intended purpose may be erected
to a reasonable and necessary height as determined by the PZC by Special Permit. In making such a
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 4-19
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
determination, the Commission must consider the need for and location of the proposed structure,
and the relationship between its height and its ability to function in accordance with its intended
purpose properly and safely.
5. In Flood Hazard Areas, as designated in Section 7.2-2, where the lowest floor of the building is
elevated to meet the requirements of Section 7.2 Flood Protection Regulations, the maximum total
building height shall be measured from the Base Flood Elevation (BFE)+1’ elevation provided that the
resulting height of the building is not more than five (5) feet greater than the maximum building height
permitted in the applicable zone.
4.2-2.F Lots Adjacent to a Railroad
When a commercial or industrial use in a commercial or industrial district abuts a railroad, the use may be
built up to the railroad along any side or rear lot line if it will be using the railroad for purposes of transporting
passengers or freight, delivery, etc. In these cases, the use does not have to meet the underlying side or rear
yard setbacks.
4.2-2.G More than One Principal Building on a Lot
Any lot in any residential district, except lots containing multi-unit or townhouse dwellings, Town of Groton
services, active senior housing, or institutional services such as elementary and secondary schools, child
care centers, adult day care, residential life care communities, community residential counseling facilities or
colleges and universities, must not contain more than one principal building, unless otherwise authorized in
these regulations.
4.2-2.H Common Lot Line Agreement
In all commercial, mixed-use, and industrial districts, by perpetual agreement of the owners of two adjacent
lots, duly recorded in the Land Records of the Town of Groton, one side yard for each lot may be omitted
and buildings built on the common lot line, provided that the common or other walls separating them meet
all relevant building and fire codes and that such agreement must be approved, prior to filing, by the Zoning
Official. A common lot line agreement may allow for buildings to be built anywhere within the required yard
areas along the property line associated with the common lot line agreement if all relevant building and fire
codes can be met.
4.2-2.I Projection Into Required Yard Areas (Setbacks)
Pilasters, columns, belt courses, sills, cornices or other similar architectural features are allowed to project up
to two feet into the required yard area on a site.
4.2-2.J Required Frontage and Access
For a building to be built on any lot, the lot must have the minimum required legal frontage on a Town of Groton
accepted public street or a State of Connecticut public street, or the lot must be in a legally approved and
recorded subdivision. Minimum required frontage and access to any lot must meet the following standards:
1. The minimum required lot frontage on a public street is 25-feet.
2. A private accessway to a rear lot must be a minimum of 25-feet in width and the private accessway
must be owned in fee simple by the owner of the rear lot. (Exception: a private accessway for one single
rear lot that is split from an existing lot of record may be accommodated by a 25-foot unobstructed
easement).
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 4-20
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
3. Such private accessway shall not exceed a length of 400-feet measured from the edge of the public
street line to a point where the rear lot can meet the minimum lot width for the zoning district.
4. The area of this private accessway must not be included in the minimum lot area requirements
associated with the lot being served.
5. Each 25-foot wide private accessway must be associated with only one lot and must be shown to be
able to be designed and used as an unobstructed private accessway or shown to be part of a designed
private common access drive that meets the requirements of Section 4.2-2.K.
6. A maximum of three (3) private accessways are allowed to adjoin one another if a private common
access driveway is used to serve the two or three lots and meets the requirements of Section 4.2-2.K.
If two or three private accessways are adjoined, the required width of each private accessway may be
reduced to 20-feet.
4.2-2.K Common Access Drive (Private)
1. A private Common Access Drive must provide unobstructed access to all lots. A maximum of five
(5) lots may use a Common Access Drive. The maximum of five (5) lots includes all lots that will take
access off, or have rights of access to, the common access drive even though a lot may also have legal
frontage on a public street.
2. A private Common Access Drive easement and maintenance agreement document(s) must be
submitted for review and approval as part of the subdivision application and must be recorded in land
records prior to sale or development of any lot. The document(s) must clearly indicate the maintenance
responsibility of the owners of the benefitting lots.
3. A private Common Access Drive serving more than one lot should be of adequate width and
construction that permits a safe and unimpeded route to accommodate any fire or emergency vehicle.
4. Minimum width of travel portion of the drive: 15-feet for two (2) or three (3) lots or 18-feet for four
(4) to five (5) lots.
Required Frontage and Access
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 4-21
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
5. Minimum maintained clearance height: 14-feet
4.2-2.L Zero Lot Line
Zero lot line lots for attached dwellings may be created in all residential zones, by agreement of the owners of
the affected adjacent lots duly recorded in the Land Records of the Town of Groton, provided the following:
1. Each lot contains the minimum lot area per dwelling unit required in the applicable zone, and complies
with all other lot, yard, and building requirements.
2. The side yard opposite the zero lot line must meet the combined side yard width required for both
sides of the property.
3. Each individual lot must be vacant and abut another vacant lot to which side the zero lot line is being
created.
4. Zero lot lines will only be allowed on side lot lines, and not on rear or front lot lines.
5. This section applies only to dwellings on zero lot lines, and not to dwellings that otherwise do not
meet the minimum setback requirements.
6. A common lot line agreement and maintenance easement must be established between the two
property owners and recorded with the Town. The common lot line agreement must address future
enlargement or additions of the principal structure and is subject to the review and approval of the
Zoning Official.
7. Attached zero lot line dwellings must be constructed in pairs with certificates of occupancy not issued
until both units are complete.
8. Compliance with all building and fire codes can be achieved.
4.2-2.M Storage of Unregistered Vehicles and/or Waste Material
1. Temporary storage of unregistered vehicles is allowed in residential zones as follows:
• In RS and R zones, one (1) unregistered vehicle may be stored outside. In RU zones, two (2)
unregistered vehicles may be stored outside. Storage of these unregistered vehicles must be in
the side or rear yard and must not be visible from the street.
• All such storage must be temporary and such vehicles must be capable of and intended to be
placed in running condition and registered within six (6) months’ time.
2. In CN, CR, IM, and IG zones, storage of unregistered vehicles is an accessory use to businesses having
the appropriate Department of Motor Vehicles license only.
3. Except as provided above, any waste or scrap material, debris, motor vehicles which are partially or
wholly dismantled, motor vehicle parts, abandoned machinery, junk or similar unsightly material must
not be stored or allowed to accumulate in any open space or outside a completely enclosed building
on any lot in any district other than as may be permitted in an industrial district. This provision does
not apply to the temporary storage of waste material from a construction operation being legally
executed on the same premises pursuant to an active Building Permit.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 4-22
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
4.2-2.N Sight Lines
In any zoning district, any fence, signage,
planting, foliage or other shrubbery must
not be maintained between a plane 2.5 feet
above the curb level and a plane seven feet
above curb level so as to interfere with traffic
visibility across the corner or side yard which
is within a triangle bounded by the street
lot lines and a straight line drawn between
points on each such lot line 25 feet from
the intersection of said lines or extension
thereof (or shall maintain the sight line and
distances required by the Town’s Road and
Drainage Standards and the CT Department of
Transportation, whichever is more restrictive).
4.2-3 RESIDENTIAL DENSITY CALCULATIONS
1. Applicability: The following standards for calculating residential density apply to the following uses:
• Single-Unit and Two-Unit Subdivisions
• Active Senior Housing Community
• Cottage Communities
• Residential Life Care Communities when located in the R, RS or RU zoning districts
• Open Space Subdivisions
2. Calculation: The possible maximum number of dwelling units permitted for the above uses is
determined by:
• Calculating the total land area of the site (Gross Area).
• Factoring out the portion of the site encumbered by steep slopes of 25% or greater, wetlands, and
watercourses (Net Area).
• Use the Net Area to calculate density as follows:
?? Dividing the Net Area by the minimum lot area per dwelling unit required for the applicable
zoning district in Section 3, Zoning Districts and Map for Single and Two-Unit Subdivisions and
Active Senior Housing Community.
?? Using the Net Area and the density requirements for Cottage Community in Section 5.1-8.E.
?? Using the Net Area and the density requirements for Residential Life Care Communities in
Section 5.1-8.H.
?? Using the Net Area and the density requirements for Open Space Subdivisions in Section
6.3-5.
Where extreme irregularity is determined to exist in the slope of a site (per the definition of steep slope in these
regulations), the PZC may consider an equivalent method of measurement to determine steep slopes. Actual
unit yield within any given development will result from the application of all applicable design requirements
to a specific parcel of land. Accordingly, there is no right or entitlement to a maximum unit yield determined
by the calculations applied in this section.
Sight Lines
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 5-1
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
SECTION 5: USE STANDARDS
5.1 CONDITIONAL USES
Each of the following uses is permitted in a specific district to the extent indicated in 4.1 Table of Permitted
Uses for that use and district, subject to all provisions of the applicable district, and the provisions in this
section. The uses are divided into two categories as follows:
• Conditional: A use that is permitted in the underlying zoning district if it meets all provisions of the
regulations for that district and the specific conditions listed in this Section.
• Special Permit/Conditional: A use that is permitted in the underlying zoning district if it meets
all the requirements for that district, the specific conditions listed in this Section, and receives an
approval of a Special Permit by the PZC. Certain classes or kinds of buildings, structures or uses of
land may only be appropriate in particular locations or districts based on how their attributes relate to
a specific site. Such uses are permitted only after the grant of a special permit by the PZC pursuant to
the requirements of Section 9.4, Special Permit of these Regulations.
Note that some uses require a Special Permit but are NOT subject to the conditions below. Such uses are
noted both in this Section 5.1 and in 4.1 Table of Permitted Uses and are subject to the requirements of Section
9.4, Special Permits.
Application: Every application for the use of property subject to conditions set forth in this Section 5.1 must
be filed in accordance with the provisions of these regulations. Conditional Uses that also require a Special
Permit are noted in the descriptions below. Uses shall also be subject to site plan approval by the PZC or
administrative site plan approval, whichever is appropriate, and any other approval stipulated in this section.
5.1-1 ACCESSORY USES
5.1-1.A Accessory Dwelling Units
Conditions apply in the following zoning districts: RS, R, RU, RM, CN, CR, MDD, WW, MTC, MVC, IM
The intent of this regulation is to encourage the provision of affordable housing units for families and individuals
and to encourage the provision of housing units for small and multi-generational households. An accessory
dwelling unit is permitted within the principal dwelling unit or as a detached, freestanding unit subject to
Administrative Site Plan approval and the following conditions:
1. Associated with One Unit Dwelling: Each accessory dwelling unit created must be associated with
a one-unit dwelling and there may be only one accessory dwelling unit permitted for each one-unit
dwelling.
2. Owner Occupied: The owner of the principal residence to which the accessory dwelling unit is
associated must occupy at least one of the dwellings.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 5-2
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
3. Standards: Detached, freestanding accessory dwelling units are permitted, provided they meet all
lot, yard, and building requirements of Section 4.2, required of the principal dwelling.
4. Size: The accessory dwelling unit must clearly be the secondary use and its maximum floor area must
not exceed 800 SF.
5. Parking: Off-street parking must be provided for all accessory apartments and the principal dwelling
in accordance with Section 8.2-4.
6. Facilities: Each accessory dwelling unit must have its own independent bathroom and kitchen
facilities.
7. Design: Unless prohibited by the State Building Code, all stairways to second or third stories should
be enclosed within exterior walls.
When located within the principal dwelling unit, any new entrance to the accessory dwelling unit should be
located on the side or in the rear of the principal dwelling unit.
When located within a new detached, freestanding building, the unit must meet the required front yard setback
and should also be set back farther from the front property line than the façade of the principal dwelling unit.
5.1-1.B Contractor Vehicle Parking and Construction Equipment Storage,
Residential
Conditions apply in the following zoning districts: RS, R, RU, RM, CN, MTC, MVC, IM
1. Residential Lot: The storage/parking of no more than one contractor’s construction or commercial
motor vehicle per residential lot, not exceeding 1½ tons capacity, whether inside or outside a building,
is a permitted accessory use. This limitation does not apply in those instances where a property is
being primarily used for agricultural uses allowed by these regulations in the district where the lot is
located.
2. Residential Lot in RU District: Contractor Vehicle Parking and Construction Equipment Storage is
a permitted accessory use in the RU district, provided all such vehicles and equipment are stored or
parked within a building. (Except for one vehicle meeting the above requirements in Sec. 5.1-1.B.1.)
5.1-1.C Drive Through Facilities
Special Permit required in certain districts (see specific details below).
Drive through facilities are permitted accessory uses subject to the following conditions:
1. Location On-Site: Drive through facilities, including required stacking lanes, must be located in the
rear or side yards only.
2. Curb- Cuts: Drive through facilities must not generate the need for an additional driveway curb cut.
3. Special Permits: A Special Permit is required for the following types of drive-through facilities in the
following zoning districts:
a. Restaurants: CN, CR, MTC
b. Services: N/A
c. Retail: MTC
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 5-3
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
4. Minimum Lot Size
a. Restaurants: 20,000 SF
b. Services: N/A
c. Retail: N/A
5. Stacking Spaces
a. Restaurants: For fast food restaurants or any window designated for the pick-up of readily
consumable food or beverage, a minimum of ten (10) stacking spaces entering and one stacking
space exiting must be provided for each drive through window, including the vehicle being serviced.
Where an order board and pickup window are involved at such an establishment, a minimum of
five (5) stacking spaces should be provided before the order board.
b. Services: For banks, a minimum of five (5) stacking spaces entering and one (1) stacking space
exiting must be provided for each drive through window or ATM, including the vehicle being
serviced.
c. Retail: For pharmacies or any window designated for the pick-up of retail goods to be used or
consumed later, a minimum of three (3) stacking spaces entering and one (1) stacking space exiting
must be provided for each drive through window, including the vehicle being serviced.
6. Size: Stacking lanes must be a minimum of 10 feet wide and each space shown must be 20 feet long.
7. Circulation: Stacking lanes should be separate from internal aisles which allow traffic to circulate
through the site without entering the drive through facility.
8. Exiting Space: Exiting stacking space must be separate from other circulation aisles and must be at
least 50 feet from the curb line of the street to which they will exit.
9. Traffic/Pedestrian Circulation: Stacking lanes should be designed and located to minimize traffic
congestion and to promote pedestrian safety using pavement markings, signs, and designated
walkways.
5.1-1.D Home-Based Business
Conditions apply in the following zoning districts: RS, R, RU, RM, CN, CR, MDD, WW, MTC, MVC
Special Permit required for Major Home Occupations.
Home-based businesses are permitted accessory uses in residential dwellings, regulated according to business
intensity as defined by the following three categories:
1. Home Office (No Zoning Permit Required) - The use of a dwelling as a home-based business where
there is occasional business use (as part of employment typically occurring elsewhere) or a homebased
business involving no non-resident employee(s) and no patron, client, or associate visits to the
business, and in either case meets the following:
a. No business is conducted on the premises except by computer, mail, telephone or future
communication technology;
b. No external evidence of the business is visible;
c. No business signs are erected; and
d. No pedestrian or vehicular traffic is generated by the business.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 5-4
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
2. Home Occupation, Minor (Requires Administrative Site Plan) - The use of a dwelling for a homebased
business involving any of the following:
a. Business is other than what is allowed under a Home Office;
b. Business has up to one (1) non-resident employee; or
c. Business has up to five (5) patron, client, or associate visits per day.
3. Home Occupation, Major (Requires Special Permit in Residential Districts and Administrative Site
Plan in all districts) - The use of a dwelling for a home-based business, other than a Home Office or
Home Occupation, Minor, and involving any of the following:
a. A maximum of two (2) non-resident employees;
b. More than five (5) patron, client, or associate visits per day; or
c. Classroom, studio or outdoor teaching activity not normally permitted in the district.
4. Regulations/Applications:
a. Home Office: Allowed in one- and two-unit dwellings and multi-unit dwellings if the above
requirements for a Home Office are met.
b. Home Occupation, Minor: Allowed in one- and two-unit dwellings with an Administrative Site
Plan approval and subject to the following conditions.
c. Home Occupation, Major: Allowed in one- and two-unit dwellings with a Special Permit in
Residential Districts and an Administrative Site Plan approval in all districts and subject to the
following conditions.
5. Conditions:
a. Size: The home-based business must not occupy more than an area equal to 25% of the gross floor
area of the dwelling unit or 500 SF, whichever is less.
b. Residential Character: The home-based business must not change the exterior residential
character of the dwelling in any visible manner.
c. Residential Use: The home-based business must be clearly incidental to the residential use of the
dwelling.
d. Employees: A home-based business may allow the following employees.
• Home Occupation, Minor: Up to one (1) non-resident employee
• Home Occupation, Major: Up to two (2) non-resident employees
e. Signage: Any signage on the site must meet the requirements of Section 8.4 of these regulations.
f. Storage: The home-based business must not store any materials, products, or equipment outside
of the space allocated in subsection 5.a above.
g. Traffic: The home-based business is allowed pedestrian or vehicular traffic based on the following:
• Home Occupation, Minor: Maximum of five (5) patron, client or associate visits per day.
Typically, by appointment only.
• Home Occupation, Major: More than five (5) patron, client or associate visits per day or as
stipulated in the Special Permit for the site. Typically, by appointment only.
h. Parking: Parking spaces must be provided for the principal use in accordance with Section 8.2 and
the following:
• Home Occupation, Minor: One (1) additional onsite parking space must be provided for
patrons, clients or associates.
• Home Occupation, Major: Two (2) additional onsite parking spaces must be provided for
patrons, clients or associates or as specified in the approved Special Permit.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 5-5
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
5.1-1.E Outdoor Patio, Commercial
Conditions apply in the following zoning districts: CN, CR, MDD, WW, MTC, MVC, IM, IG
Located in the Public Right-of-Way (ROW )
When located on a public right-of-way, outdoor patios accessory to a restaurant (standard, fast food or mobile),
drinking establishment, food and non-alcoholic beverage production, small scale or alcoholic beverage
production, small scale use is a permitted accessory use subject to the following conditions:
1. Location: Outdoor patios may be located on public sidewalks in front of, adjacent to or abutting the
indoor establishment which operates the outdoor patio. Outdoor patios are not to extend beyond the
actual street frontage of the operating establishment.
2. Obstruction: A minimum of five (5) contiguous feet of sidewalk clear of obstructions must be provided
to allow unimpeded pedestrian traffic. At street corner intersections there is to be a minimum of eight
(8) feet of unobstructed sidewalk. Obstructions include, but are not limited to, light poles, traffic signal
poles, fire hydrants, utility structures, street signs, and other signage. Further, the location of outdoor
patios cannot obstruct the clear sight distance for vehicles or pedestrians, or access or crossings for
the disabled.
3. Enclosures: Outdoor patios must have an approved enclosure, such as a planter, railing or fence that
separates the patio from the adjacent public area. Railings, fences or other enclosures are to be no
more than 42 inches in height and must be removed from the sidewalk when an outdoor patio is not
in use unless otherwise approved through the State and Local permitting process.
4. Furnishings: Furnishings for outdoor patios are to consist solely of moveable tables, chairs, and
decorative accessories. Furnishings must be kept in a state of good repair and in a clean and safe
condition at all times. Furnishings must be removed from the sidewalk whenever the outdoor patio is
not in operation, unless otherwise approved through the State and Local permitting process.
5. Noise: Outdoor patios in all districts, except IM, IG, CR, and MTC, are limited to the hours of 7:00 am
to 10:00 pm.
6. Awnings and Umbrellas: Any awnings are to be adequately secured and retractable. Any umbrellas
over tables must be adequately weighted and not project into the unobstructed area in # 2 above.
7. Prohibitions: Outdoor busing stations, trash receptacles, food preparation stations, and live music
are not permitted in the outdoor patio area.
8. Design and Maintenance: Outdoor patios are to be at the same elevation as the public sidewalk
unless otherwise approved through the State and Local permitting process. Paint, carpeting, artificial
turf, platforms or other surfaces of any kind are not permitted at any time in the outdoor patio area.
All surfaces, furniture, and equipment should be periodically cleaned and maintained in good repair
by the lessee.
9. Local and State Approvals: In addition to the required site plan or administrative site plan approval,
patios within a State ROW require approval from the CT Department of Transportation and patios within
a Town ROW require approval from the Groton Public Works Department and appropriate lease.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 5-6
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
Located on Site: When located on site, outdoor patios accessory to a restaurant (standard, fast food or
mobile), drinking establishment, food and non-alcoholic beverage production, small scale or alcoholic beverage
production, small scale use is a permitted accessory use subject to the following conditions:
1. Obstruction: The location of outdoor patios cannot obstruct the clear sight distance for vehicles or
pedestrians and access or crossings for the disabled. A minimum of five (5) contiguous feet of sidewalk
clear of obstructions must be provided to allow unimpeded pedestrian traffic if the patio is located on
a sidewalk.
2. Enclosures: Outdoor patios that abut a public right-of-way must have an approved enclosure, such as
planters, railings or fences between the patio and the right-of-way. Railings, fences or other enclosures
are to be no more than 42 inches in height.
3. Furnishings: Furnishings, equipment, and patio surfaces must be kept in a state of good repair and
in a clean and safe condition at all times. Portable furniture, outdoor heaters, busing stations, trash
receptacles, and food preparation stations should be removed and stored whenever the patio is not
in seasonal operation.
4. Noise: Outdoor patios in all districts, except IM, IG, CR, and MTC, are limited to the hours of 7:00 am
to 10:00 pm.
5. Awnings and Umbrellas: Any awnings are to be adequately secured and retractable. Any umbrellas
over tables must be adequately weighted.
5.1-1.F Outdoor Storage Yard, Accessory
Conditions apply in the following zoning districts: CN, CR, WW, MTC, MVC
Outdoor storage of vehicles, equipment, product, supplies, and materials, as an accessory use, is a permitted
use subject to the following conditions:
1. Prohibited Activities: Such use must not include dismantling, shredding, compressing, or any junk,
salvage, or scrap yard activities.
2. Screening: Outdoor storage areas shall be screened on all sides with a solid fence or wall that is six (6)
feet tall, or eight (8) feet tall if what is stored is greater than six (6) feet in height.
3. Location: Outdoor storage areas may not be located in a required front yard.
4. Hazardous Materials: Outdoor storage of hazardous materials is prohibited, except for bulk storage
of fertilizers, pesticides, herbicides, and other typical products. These products must remain in
their original package, and must be stored in a contained area, under permanent cover, and on an
impermeable surface with no floor drains. Further, incidental hazardous materials, as defined in Sec.
6.4-8.A.1 (Water Resource Protection District), are permitted.
See different conditions in Section 5.1-10.A for Outdoor Sales, Storage, and Display associated with a Retail
Establishment.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 5-7
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
5.1-2 AGRICULTURAL, ANIMAL & NATURAL RESOURCES
5.1-2.A Aquaculture
Conditions apply in the following zoning districts: WW, IM, IG
Conditions and Special Permit apply in the following zoning districts: RU
1. Lot Size: The minimum lot size in the RU District is five (5) acres.
2. Setback: No building or other facilities associated with the aquaculture use in an RU district is
permitted within 100 feet of any property line.
3. Outdoor Storage: In all zoning districts where aquaculture is permitted, the outdoor storage of
hazardous material or waste material from aquaculture activities is prohibited.
4. Stormwater: Compliance with the Town’s Stormwater Regulations must be demonstrated (see
Section 7.3).
5.1-2.B Agriculture, Commercial and Nurseries and Greenhouses,
Commercial
Agriculture, Commercial: Conditions apply in the following zoning districts:
RS, R, RU, RM, CN, CR, MVC, IM, IG
Nurseries and Greenhouses, Commercial: Conditions apply in the following zoning districts:
RU, CN, CR, MVC, IM, IG
Commercial agriculture, nurseries or greenhouses, including truck gardens, are permitted subject to the
following conditions:
1. Lot Size: There must be a minimum lot area of five (5) acres.
2. Setbacks:
a. No livestock, horses, or poultry are allowed to be housed or permitted to graze within 100 feet of
any property line.
b. No building or structure other than a dwelling or display and sales area is permitted within 75 feet
of any property line.
3. Waste: All animal wastes should be properly stored and disposed of in a manner to maintain sanitary
and nuisance free conditions satisfactory to the Director of Health. Manure should be removed from
the site or composted. Any compost piles must be located a minimum of 200 feet from a lot line and
any areas where manure is stored or composted must be visually screened from dwellings on adjacent
lots.
4. CT Public Health Code: Nothing in this section diminishes the property owner’s separate responsibility
for addressing compliance with the keeping of livestock and storage and disposal of waste under the
State of Connecticut Public Health Code.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 5-8
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
5. Sales for Commercial Agriculture: The sale of farm produce raised on the lot is permitted as an
accessory use to any commercial agriculture use provided:
a. The indoor display and sales area is limited to one building or structure not to exceed 200 SF in
area. Additional display and sales areas are allowed outdoors.
b. Provision is made for at least four (4) off-street parking spaces.
6. Sales for Commercial Nurseries and Greenhouses: The sale of garden produce and nursery stock
raised on the lot is permitted as an accessory use to any commercial nursery and greenhouse use,
provided:
a. Provision is made for at least one (1) parking space for every 1,000 SF of indoor sales area.
7. Stormwater: Compliance with the Town’s Stormwater Regulations must be demonstrated (see
Section 7.3).
5.1-2.C Agriculture, Home
1. Conditions Applicable to All Home Agriculture
Conditions apply in the following zoning districts: RS, R, RU, RM, CN, CR, MDD, WW, MVC, IM
a. Sales: The sale of produce and other home agriculture products raised and prepared on the lot
is permitted as an accessory use with an Administrative Site Plan and subject to the standards
below:
• Size: A farm stand and display area must not exceed a total of 50 SF.
• Residential Use: The sales and display area must be clearly incidental to the residential use of
the dwelling.
• Parking: One (1) parking space is required for the farm stand in addition to any parking
required for the main use on the site.
• Employees: Only residents of the dwelling unit are allowed as employees.
• Signage: Any signage on the site must meet the requirements of Section 8.4 of these
Regulations.
• Storage: Materials, products, or equipment related to sales must not be stored outside of the
space allocated in subsection 1.a. above.
b. Home-Based Business: Any sale of Home Agriculture products that does not meet the above
standards (1.a) must comply with and receive approval under the Home-Based Business Section
5.1-1.D of these regulations.
c. Keeping of Animals: The keeping of hens and other livestock animals have additional conditions
as described below.
2. Conditions Applicable to Keeping of Hens
Conditions apply in the following zoning districts: RS, R, RU, RM, CN, CR, MDD, WW, MVC, IM
Purpose: This regulation provides for the limited keeping of female chickens, referred to as hens, on
residentially used properties, for the health, convenience, personal enjoyment and benefits afforded
by such use, and in a manner which preserves the quality of life of the surrounding neighborhood.
The keeping of hens on properties used for residential purposes shall be subject to the following
standards:
a. Number of Hens: No more than four (4) hens may be kept on any lot of twenty thousand (20,000)
square feet or less. On lots greater than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet and up to five
(5) acres, no more than ten (10) hens may be kept. In any case, the keeping of hens shall be
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 5-9
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
considered a non-commercial accessory use to a residential use. Keeping of hens on lots greater
than five (5) acres shall be considered a commercial farm use subject to Section 7.1-9.
b. Location on Lot: Hens shall be confined to a fenced enclosure located in a rear or side yard only.
In lieu of the buffer requirements of Section 7.4-4, the enclosure, coop, and any storage area for
food or compost waste shall be at least ten (10) feet from any property line and at least twenty
(20) feet from any residential structure on adjacent properties.
c. Enclosure, Food, and Waste: A coop shall be required and shall be located entirely within the
fenced enclosure or the coop shall have direct access to the fenced enclosure for the hens. The
coop shall be no greater than eight (8) feet in height and no more than twenty five (25) square
feet for up to four (4) hens and no more than fifty (50) square feet for up to ten (10) hens. The
coop and the enclosure shall be designed and constructed so hens do not have access outside
of the enclosed area. All food products and waste shall be kept so as to limit offensive odors and
the presence of pests and predators, including, without limitation, by keeping all food products in
waterproof and sealed containers off the ground at all times. Waste may be composted.
d. Residential Buildings: No hens shall be kept inside any building or structure used for residential
purposes.
e. Roosters: No rooster shall be kept on any property under five (5) acres.
f. CT Public Health Code: The keeping of hens shall be conducted in a manner consistent with and
in compliance with the State of Connecticut Public Health Code, including, without limitation,
Section 19-13-B32(e) with regard to properties within a public water supply watershed.
g. Certificate of Zoning Compliance: A Certificate of Zoning Compliance is required for the keeping
of hens which must be accompanied by a plot plan showing the location and dimensions of the
fenced area, coop, and any storage area for food and/or compost waste.
3. Conditions Applicable to Keeping of Other Livestock Animals (not hens)
Conditions apply in the following zoning districts: RS, RU, MVC
Within the RS-20, RU-20, RU-40, RU-80, and MVC zoning districts, Home Agriculture and the non-farm
keeping of livestock is permitted on properties between 2 and 4.99 acres, subject to the criteria below.
With the exception of hens (see Sec. 5.1-2.C.2 above), and a total of one miniature pig, goat or sheep
kept as a household pet, the non-farm keeping of livestock is not permitted in other zoning districts.
a. Lot Size and # of Animals: The minimum lot area is two acres. The keeping of a combination of
animal types (Group 1, 2 and 3) must be limited as described below. In no case shall a lot contain
more than 12 total livestock animals, including hens. This limitation does not apply to household
pets. The following list specifies maximums for animals by the size of animals kept:
• Group 1. Animals whose average adult weight is less than 10 pounds (ducks, rabbits, etc.)
are permitted with a maximum number of 12 animals. Any hens kept per this Sec. 5.1-2.C.2
(above) will count toward this maximum.
• Group 2. Animals whose average adult weight is between 10 and 65 pounds (goats, miniature
pigs, turkeys, geese, etc.) are permitted with a maximum number of four (4) animals.
• Group 3. Animals whose average adult weight is greater than 65 pounds (e.g. horses, cows,
alpacas, llamas, sheep, etc.) are permitted with a maximum number of two (2) animals.
b. Setbacks: The following lists minimum setbacks (from all property lines) for any pasture or
recreation area and any structure used to house non-farm livestock. Should one structure be used
to house a combination of animal types, the most restrictive setback will apply:
• Group 1 Animals. A minimum twenty-foot setback (ten-foot setback for hens only – see this
Sec. 5.1-2.C.2 above).
• Group 2 Animals. A minimum fifty-foot setback.
• Group 3 Animals. A minimum seventy-five-foot setback.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 5-10
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
c. Buildings and Structures: All buildings and structures used to house non-farm livestock must meet
the following:
• Be prohibited from placement in the front yard.
• Be predator resistant and well-ventilated.
• Be kept clean, dry, and sanitary at all times.
d. Pasture/Recreation Areas: All outdoor pasture/recreation areas must be enclosed with fencing to
prevent the escape of the animals.
e. Maintenance: All animals, their housing and their outdoor pasture/recreation areas must be
properly maintained so as not to become a nuisance to adjoining properties.
f. Animal Waste: All animal wastes must be properly stored and disposed of. Manure must be
removed from the site or must be composted in enclosed bins, which must not be stored within
50 feet of a lot line. Areas where manure is stored or composted must be visually screened from
dwellings on adjacent lots.
g. Feed Storage: All feed must be stored, secured and covered in a tamper resistant container or area.
h. CT Public Health Code: Nothing in this section diminishes the property owner’s separate
responsibility for addressing compliance with the keeping of livestock and storage and disposal of
waste under the State of Connecticut Public Health Code.
i. Certificate of Zoning Compliance: A Certificate of Zoning Compliance is required for the nonfarm
keeping of livestock which must be accompanied by a plot plan showing the location and
dimensions of the fenced area, animal housing structures, and any storage area for food and/or
compost waste.
j. Stormwater: Compliance with the Town’s Stormwater Regulations must be demonstrated (see
Section 7.3).
k. Commercial Agriculture: Any parcel of land with five (5) acres or more, and which meets the
definition of Agriculture, Commercial under Section 2.1, and which is used in the raising of
agricultural products, livestock, poultry or dairy products, including necessary farm structures and
the storage of equipment customarily incidental to the primary use, is considered a farm and must
follow the appropriate regulations relating to Commercial Agriculture.
5.1-2.D Community Garden
Conditions apply in the following zoning districts: RS, R, RU, RM, CN, CR, MVC, IM, IG, GR
Community gardens are permitted uses subject to the following conditions:
1. Administrative Site Plan: Administrative Site Plan is required in allowed zones.
2. Rules of Operation: The name and telephone number of the garden coordinator and a copy of the
operating rules must be provided with the Administrative Site Plan.
3. Use and Storage of Pesticides, Herbicides, and Fertilizers: The site will be designed and
maintained so that water and fertilizer will not drain onto adjacent property. Storage of anything defined
as a hazardous material must follow the requirements of Section 6.4-8, Hazardous Materials.
4. Stormwater: Compliance with the Town’s Stormwater Regulations must be demonstrated (see
Section 7.3).
5. Buffer from adjacent residential uses/zone: Any storage area for compost waste must be at least
20 feet from any property line and any structure must be at least ten (10) feet from any property line.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 5-11
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
6. Parking: If daytime on-street parking is allowed on one or more streets adjacent to the community
garden, no off-site parking is required. Otherwise, at least two (2) parking spaces are required. Such
spaces may or may not be paved.
7. Sales: There will be no retail sales on site, except for produce grown on the site. A farm stand of no
more than 100 SF is allowed. Two (2) parking spaces are required for the farm stand in addition to any
parking required under sub-section 6 above.
5.1-2.E Filling and Removing Earth Products
Conditions and Special Permit apply in all zoning districts.
1. Applicability. The filling with and/or removal of earth products, such as, but not limited to, earth
loam, topsoil, sand, gravel, clay, stone, or minerals, is permitted in any district subject to the following
standards and conditions.
Exception: In the GR and GC district, the filling and removal of earth products is only allowed for
environmental remediation or restoration and for the expansion and maintenance of a public drinking
water reservoir.
Exception: The filling of earth products in the FEMA designated V-zone is not allowed. All other
placement of fill within any other flood zone is regulated by the Flood Protection Regulations (Section
7.2) and subject to the additional requirements of this Section.
The filling and/or removal of earth products is also subject to a site plan or administrative site plan
approval as provided below.
The filling with and/or removal of earth products includes:
a. Cutting and filling of materials on the site where there is no import or export activity
b. Import or export of materials from the site
c. A combination of a. and b. above
2. Exemptions. The provisions of this section and the requirement to obtain additional approvals
does not apply to filling or removal in the following cases, provided that the filling or removal is only
the minimum quantity of material necessary to make such lot, site, or right-of-way suitable for the
proposed use.
a. Necessary filling with or removal of earth products in direct connection with the building
construction, structural alteration, or site improvements on a lot for which appropriate planning
and/or subdivision approvals have been obtained and a building permit has been issued.
b. Necessary filling with or removal of earth products in direct connection with required site
improvements in accordance with an approved site plan or subdivision plan.
c. Necessary filling with or removal of earth products in direct connection with street or utility
improvements within a public right-of-way for which the Town Department of Public Works or
State Department of Transportation has granted a street opening permit.
3. Standards. For the following categories, quantity calculations are based on the total amount of
earth product movement whether: (1) onsite through cutting or filling, (2) importing or exporting of
materials to or from the site, or (3) a combination of the two.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 5-12
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
4. Approval and Permit Requirements.
a. Minor: The filling with or removal of earth products in a total amount of less than 50 cubic yards in
a 2-year period is exempt from the requirements for a formal application to the Office of Planning
and Development. The owner of the site should notify the Zoning Official of the proposed activity
to determine whether the activity is subject to any additional standards or regulations such as the
Town’s Inland Wetlands and Watercourse Regulations and should provide appropriate Erosion and
Sediment Controls on the site.
b. Incidental: The filling with or removal of earth products of between 50 cubic yards and 1000 cubic
yards on a site requires the submittal of a grading plan and the approval of an administrative site
plan. Compliance with Section 7.1 for Erosion and Sediment Control must be demonstrated as
part of the administrative site plan application.
c. Major: The filling or removal of earth products over 1000 cubic yards requires the submittal of a
grading plan and the approval of a special permit and a site plan by the PZC.
5. Considerations for Approval of Special Permit and Site Plan. All applications for a special permit
to fill or remove earth products shall be accompanied by a grading plan. In reviewing all plans, the
PZC will take into consideration the Special Permit Criteria of Section 9.4, and the following specific
considerations. The PZC will consider the location, intensity, and type of operation contemplated
and may impose conditions with regard to safety of operations and damage to adjacent lands or
improvements, including the application of the following appropriate performance standards:
a. Filling with and/or removing earth products is restricted to areas which have access to roads of
sufficient width and capacity to carry maximum projected loads.
b. The grading and site plan must demonstrate compliance with Section 7.1 for Erosion Control and
Section 7.3 for Stormwater.
c. Locations should be avoided where it is anticipated that the activity may cause slides, sinking,
collapse of supporting soil, erosion, water pollution, or undue alteration of the water table of
adjoining properties. Specifically, no bank must exceed a slope of one foot of vertical rise in two
feet of horizontal distance, except in ledge rock. No removal must take place within 25 feet of
a property line, except that where the grade from a property line raises towards the lot where
removal is to take place, material lying above the grade at the property line may be removed.
d. Proper measures must be taken to minimize the nuisance of noise, flying dust or rock, and unsightly
or dangerous conditions. Such measures may include, when considered necessary, limitations on
the time of operation and upon the practice of stockpiling excavated materials or fill upon the site.
The PZC may impose additional buffering requirements beyond what is required in Section 8.1 to
address compatibility issues with adjacent properties.
e. Filling and/or removing activities will also be reviewed with concern for the condition in which the
site will be left after completion of the operation and the relationship of that site to existing and
permitted development in the general area in which the site is located. As part of the grading plan,
the applicant must submit a restoration plan to the PZC showing final grading and landscaping and
whatever other information is necessary to indicate how the site will be restored to permit future
development of the site.
f. In reviewing the grading plan, the PZC will evaluate the extent to which the site can and reliably
will be restored to a condition that will facilitate, and not impede, the appropriate development
of its general area. For this purpose, the PZC may specify such topographic and landscaping and
other conditions and require surety bonds as in its judgment are warranted by the circumstances
of each case.
g. The PZC may condition the Special Permit for the period of time during the year when the specific
activities on the site can take place and may limit the special permit to a certain amount of total
time for the filling and removal activity on a site.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 5-13
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
5.1-2.F Kennel, Commercial/Animal Day Care and Riding or Boarding
Stable
Conditions and Special Permit apply in the following zoning districts: RU, IM, IG
Commercial kennels/animal daycare, riding stables, and boarding stables are permitted uses subject to
approval of a special permit and the following conditions:
1. Minimum Lot Area: A minimum lot area must be five (5) acres for riding and boarding stables and
three (3) acres for commercial kennels/animal daycare, with the exception that commercial kennels/
animal daycare serving only domestic cats need only meet the minimum lot size required by the
applicable zoning district on which they are located.
2. Setbacks: Open exercise areas and buildings containing animals must be a minimum of 100 feet from
any property line, with the exception of the following:
a. Commercial kennels/animal daycare serving only domestic cats need only meet the minimum
setbacks required by the applicable zoning district on which they are located.
b. A building that is sufficiently soundproof so as not to create a nuisance to adjoining property
owners or the general public, and that has no outdoor area for animals, may meet a 50-foot
setback from any property line. Documentation of soundproofing must be provided with any
application.
3. Open Exercise Areas: Open exercise areas must be enclosed by a fence at least five (5) feet in height
and such areas must always be maintained in a sanitary and odor-free condition.
4. Animal Enclosures: All stalls, pens, and similar enclosures for animals must have a floor made from
concrete or other impervious material which must contain adequate drainage facilities connected to
an acceptable sanitary system for proper washing and maintenance.
5. Animal Waste: All animal wastes must be properly stored and disposed of. Manure and other animal
waste must be removed from the site or must be composted in enclosed bins, which must not be
stored within 100 feet of a lot line. Areas where manure or other animal waste is stored or composted
must be visually screened from dwellings on adjacent lots.
5.1-2.G Veterinary Services & Pet Grooming Establishments
Veterinary Services:
Conditions apply in the following zoning districts: CN, CR, MDD, MTC, MVC, IM, IG
Conditions and Special Permit apply in the following zoning districts: RU
Pet Grooming:
Conditions and Special Permit apply in the following zoning districts: RU
Veterinary Services and Pet Grooming Establishments are permitted uses subject to the following conditions:
1. Minimum Lot Area: The minimum lot area for Veterinary Services is as required by the applicable
district or 60,000 SF, whichever is greater. This does not apply to Pet Grooming.
2. Location of Activities: All activities, except as provided in 4. below, must be conducted within an
enclosed building.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 5-14
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
3. Noise: The building must be sufficiently soundproof so as not to create a nuisance to adjoining
property owners or the general public.
4. Open Areas: Open areas such as exercise areas are permitted subject to the additional conditions of
Section 5.1-2.F Kennel, Commercial/Animal Daycare and Riding or Boarding Stable.
5.1-3 CULTURAL, RECREATION & ENTERTAINMENT
5.1-3.A Campground
Conditions and Special Permit apply in the following zoning districts: RU
A campground is a permitted use in the RU district subject to approval of a special permit and the following
conditions:
1. Minimum Lot Area: There shall be a minimum lot area of ten (10) acres.
2. Campsite Density: The average density of the campground shall not exceed eight (8) campsites per
acre.
3. Campsite Area: Each campsite shall have a minimum width of 50 feet and a minimum area of 2,500
SF.
4. Setbacks: No building or campsite shall be located within 100 feet of any property line.
5. Large Recreational Vehicles: Campsites for recreational vehicles over 20 feet in length shall be
grouped in an area separate from other campsites.
6. Campground Roads: Campground roads shall have a minimum width of ten (10) feet per travel lane
and shall be readily traversable with a well-drained surface.
7. Roads for Recreational Vehicles: Roads to be used by recreational vehicles over 20 feet in length
shall have a minimum internal radius of 60 feet.
8. Turnarounds: Turnarounds shall be provided for all dead-end roads over 100 feet in length and those
to be used by recreational vehicles over 20 feet in length shall have a minimum internal radius of 60 feet.
9. Water and Sewage: Water supply, sanitary conveniences and sewage facilities shall be provided in
accordance with the Standards for Recreational Vehicle Parks and Campgrounds of the National Fire
Protection Association (Chapter 7 of NFPA publication 1194 as amended).
10. Electrical Systems: If provided, electrical systems shall be in accordance with Chapter 4 of NFPA
publication 1194 as amended.
11. Fire Safety: Provision shall be made for fire safety in accordance with Chapter 6 of NFPA publication
1194 as amended.
12. Residence: Within the campground, one dwelling unit may be permitted for the residence of the
campground owner or operator.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 5-15
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
13. Retail Sales: Within the campground, the sale of camp supplies and a snack bar are permitted
accessory uses provided they do not exceed a total of 500 SF of floor area and they are used only by
persons using the campground.
5.1-3.B Club, Lodge or Association
Conditions and Special Permit apply in the following zoning districts: RS, R, RU
Clubs, lodges, and associations are permitted uses subject to a special permit and the conditions below:
1. Minimum Lot Size: In all R, RS, and RU zoning districts, the minimum lot size for a club, lodge or
association is 50% more than the underlying zoning otherwise requires (e.g. R-7 = 10,500SF, RU-40 =
60,000SF, etc.).
2. Accessory Outdoor Facilities: Outdoor facilities other than parking, such as, but not limited to,
swimming pools, tennis courts, and putting greens are permitted as accessory uses in the RU districts,
provided the minimum lot area is five (5) acres. Such uses are subject to the conditions for 5.1-3.D
Commercial Recreation, Outdoor and Golf Courses per the underlying zoning.
3. Setbacks: All buildings or outdoor facilities other than parking must not be located within 75 feet of
any property line.
5.1-3.C Commercial Recreation, Health and Fitness, Indoor (small and
large)
Conditions apply in the following zoning districts: RM, IM, IG
Indoor commercial recreation, health, and fitness facilities, when located in Industrial Districts (IM and IG), are
subject to the following conditions:
1. Accessory Facilities: Indoor commercial recreation, health, and fitness facilities in the IM and IG
districts may include related accessory facilities which are supportive but supplemental to the principal
use, subject to the following conditions:
a. Services provided to patrons of the principal facility and their guests may include:
• Food and beverage service
• Retail sale of items directly related to the principal use
• Child care services to patrons while they are utilizing the facility
b. The floor space of these services in the IG district must not exceed 20% of the total floor area of
the building.
2. Co-Location with Industrial Uses: Indoor commercial recreation, health, and fitness facilities, when
located in an Industrial district and in a building or complex that also includes industrial uses, are
subject to the following conditions:
a. The applicant must accommodate all pedestrian and vehicular traffic to and on site and provide an
acceptable area for dropping people off on site. To the extent possible, parking stalls dedicated to
the public must be located to preclude pedestrian crossing of interior drives.
b. Clearly demarcated and direct pedestrian routes should extend from any public sidewalks to any
sidewalks or pedestrian ways that front on-site buildings and along driveways.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 5-16
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
Large indoor commercial recreation, health, and fitness facilities, when located in the RM district, are subject
to the following condition:
3. Co-Location with Multi-Unit Dwellings: Large indoor commercial recreation, health, and fitness
facilities, may only be located in an RM district when accessory to a multi-unit dwelling.
5.1-3.D Commercial Recreation, Outdoor and Golf Courses
Commercial Recreation, Outdoor:
Conditions apply in the following zoning districts: CN, CR, MTC, MVC, IM, IG
Conditions and Special Permit apply in the following zoning districts: RU, MDD, GR
Golf Courses:
Conditions and Special Permit apply in the following zoning districts: RU, IM, IG
Golf courses and other outdoor commercial recreation facilities are permitted subject to the following conditions:
1. Setbacks:
a. Proximity of any active recreation portion of the site to any property line associated with a
residential dwelling existing at the time of application for a special permit or site plan (other than
a dwelling occupied or owned by the applicant) or to any residentially-zoned property, must not
be less than 100 feet.
b. Any individual outdoor commercial recreation activity must be setback an additional one (1) foot
for every one (1) foot of height over 30 feet up to the maximum height allowed in the underlying
zone.
2. Motorized Vehicles: No motorized vehicles may be used for competitive or exhibition purposes.
3. Noise: In considering the application for special permit, the ZPC may condition the special permit and
may limit the hours of operation of a use in the interest of minimizing/eliminating noise.
4. Buffers: Section 8.1-6 of the Zoning Regulations concerning required buffer areas applies, except no
buffer adjacent to residentially-zoned property may be less than 50 feet in width.
5.1-3.E Entertainment or Sports Facilities
Conditions and Special Permit apply in the following zoning districts: RU, CR, MTC, IM, IG
The purpose of this regulation is to regulate entertainment and sports facilities that are large in scale and
attract visitors from beyond the Town’s and even the region’s boundaries. Such facilities may provide ancillary
services that are customarily associated with the principal use, and are permitted subject to approval of a
special permit and the following conditions:
1. Minimum Lot Area: The minimum lot area must be five (5) acres.
2. Public Water & Sewer: The site must be served by public water and sewer.
3. Setbacks: All structures and outdoor activities must be located a minimum of 100 feet from any
property line.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 5-17
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
4. Height: The maximum height of any structure must not exceed that allowed in the underlying zone,
except where for each additional foot of setback from all property lines an additional foot of height
may be achieved to a maximum of 65 feet.
5. Access: Primary access to and from these facilities should be via arterial streets or State highways.
a. The special permit application will include a detailed traffic study projecting daily and peak hour
traffic generation and probable routes of travel to the site.
b. Where the existing road network is deemed substandard to accept the projected traffic, the PZC
may condition the issuance of the special permit on upgrade/improvements to the road system,
the specific details of which shall be approved by the PZC at the time of site plan approval.
c. Provision shall be made to accommodate the use of mass transit and other modes of travel to the site.
6. Noise: In considering the application for special permit, the PZC may condition the special permit and
may limit the hours of operation of a use in the interest of minimizing/eliminating noise.
7. Lighting: Outdoor lighting at the proposed facility must not spill over beyond the site’s property lines
and must be the minimum intensity necessary to adequately and safely light the facility and its parking
lot and access drives. The applicant must provide a photometric plan to demonstrate compliance with
these regulations.
8. Signs: The maximum size of freestanding signs must be no greater than 300 SF or as allowed in the
underlying zone, whichever is greater.
9. Buffer: A landscaped buffer area of 75 feet in width must be provided along all property lines.
5.1-3.F Marina /Yacht Club
Conditions and Special Permit apply in the following zoning districts: RS, R, RU
1. Fuel: The sale of fuel and or bottled gas on a marina site must conform to the following conditions: Fuel
storage facilities shall be adequately containerized so as to prevent spillage, leakage or damage from
storms and shall be set back no less than 50 feet from the mean high-water line. However, gasoline pumps
may be located conveniently to serve boats, if precautions are taken to prevent spillage in the waters
of the town. The vessel containing the fuel or gas must comply with Federal Emergency Management
Agency flood hazard regulations and the National Fire Protection Association regulations.
2. Wastes: There must be provisions made for the collection and disposal of boat-generated wastes.
3. Setbacks: All structures and outdoor activities must be located a minimum of 100 feet from any
residential property line.
4. Noise: In considering the application for special permit, the ZPC may condition the special permit and
may limit the hours of operation of a use in the interest of minimizing/eliminating noise.
5. Lighting: Outdoor lighting at the proposed facility must not spill over beyond the site’s property lines
and must be the minimum intensity necessary to adequately and safely light the facility and its parking
lot and access drives. When located adjacent to a residential district, the applicant must provide a
photometric plan to demonstrate compliance with these regulations.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 5-18
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
6. Accessory Outdoor Facilities: Outdoor facilities other than parking, such as, but not limited to,
swimming pools, tennis courts, and putting greens, are permitted as accessory uses, provided the
minimum lot area is five (5) acres. Such uses are subject to the conditions for 5.1-3.D Commercial
Recreation, Outdoor and Golf Courses per the underlying zoning.
7. Accessory Indoor Facilities: Marinas and Yacht Clubs may include related accessory facilities which
are supportive but supplemental to the principal use, subject to the following conditions:
a. Services provided to patrons of the principal facility and their guests may include:
• Food and beverage service
• Retail sale of items directly related to the principal use
The floor space of these services must not exceed 20% of the total floor area of the building.
Documentation must be filed with the Commission indicating that such services are for the
benefit of patrons and guests of the principal use only and will not be open to the general
public. Hours of operations as related to those of the principal use must be indicated, and the
conditions pertaining to guest usage must be defined.
5.1-3.G Public Recreation
Conditions apply in all zoning districts.
In the GC district, public recreation is allowed only for the construction of trails, non-motorized boating, and
other passive recreation uses.
1. Lighting: Outdoor lighting at the proposed facility must not spill over beyond the site’s property lines
and should be the minimum intensity necessary to adequately and safely light the facility and its
parking lot and access drives. When located adjacent to a residential district, the Town must provide a
photometric plan to demonstrate compliance with these regulations.
2. Setbacks: All buildings and outdoor activities must be located a minimum of 50 feet from any
residential property line.
3. Buffer: A landscaped buffer area of 25 feet in width must be provided between public recreation uses
and any abutting residential property.
4. Parking: If one or more facilities for team sports (such as a baseball or soccer field, basketball or tennis
courts, swimming pool, etc.) is located on the premises, the recreation area will meet the following:
a. Parking standard #15 for Commercial Recreation, Indoor and Outdoor, to the extent possible.
b. Accommodate all pedestrian and vehicular traffic to and on site and provide an acceptable area
for dropping off children and other visitors on site. To the extent possible, parking stalls dedicated
to the public will be located to preclude pedestrian crossing of interior drives.
5. Noise: Public address loudspeakers will be directed away from populated areas and shall only be used
from 9:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 5-19
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
5.1-3.H Temporary Event
Conditions apply in all zoning districts. Also requires Administrative Site Plan in all zoning districts.
Temporary Events are permitted in the CN, CR, MDD, WW, MTC, MVC, IM, IG, and GR zoning districts with an
Administrative Site Plan approval and subject to the following conditions.
Temporary events are permitted in the GC zoning district only for non-profit events with an administrative site
plan and subject to the following conditions.
Temporary Events are permitted as an accessory use to a non-residential use in the RS, R, RU, and RM zoning
districts with an Administrative Site Plan and subject to Section 5.1-14 and the following conditions.
1. Minimum Lot Area:
a. Vacant Site: There must be a minimum lot area of two (2) acres for a stand-alone temporary event
on a vacant site.
b. Non-Vacant Site: Sites with existing uses should demonstrate that the area taken up by the
temporary event will not impede normal access to the existing uses on the site.
2. Time Period: No event shall exceed a time period of nine (9) consecutive calendar days (Exception:
maximum of three (3) consecutive days in the GC district), and no site may be permitted more than six
(6) temporary events per calendar year.
3. Alcohol Sales: The sale of alcohol must follow all State and Local regulations and ordinances.
4. Noise: The Town may limit the hours of operation of a temporary use in the interest of minimizing/
eliminating noise.
5. Lighting: Outdoor lighting at the proposed event must not spill over beyond the site’s property lines
and should be the minimum intensity necessary to adequately and safely light the event area, including
any parking lots and access drives.
6. Tents and Fencing: All tents and fencing will meet all relevant Building and Fire Code.
7. Waste and Recycling: The application will include a detailed description of the number and location
of all waste and recycling bins or barrels at the event, along with the process for removing waste from
the event.
a. Locate recycling bins or barrels close to trash receptacles near concession areas, rest rooms,
entrances, and exits, and make sure they are clearly marked.
8. Sanitary Facilities: The application will include a detailed description of the number and location of
all sanitary facilities.
9. Emergency Management: Notification of the temporary event must be made by the applicant to
the Local Police and Fire Department.
10. Parking: The application will include a detailed description of how parking for the expected number of
guests will be accommodated on site. Parking must not spill over into the surrounding neighborhood
unless a specific parking plan is approved by the Town.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 5-20
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
5.1-3.I Theater or Cinema
Conditions and Special Permit apply in the following zoning districts ONLY when the theater or cinema is
located outdoors: CN, CR, MDD, MTC, MVC, IM, GR
Outdoor theaters or cinemas require a special permit and are subject to the following conditions:
1. Noise: In considering the application for special permit, the ZPC may condition the special permit and
may limit the hours of operation of a use in the interest of minimizing/eliminating noise.
2. Lighting: Outdoor lighting at the proposed event may not spill over beyond the site’s property lines
and will be the minimum intensity necessary to adequately and safely light the event area, including
any parking lots and access drives. Stage lighting and any special effects involving lighting also may
not spill over beyond the site’s property lines. The applicant must provide a photometric plan to
demonstrate compliance with these regulations.
3. One-Time Events: One-time events are considered temporary events and will meet the use conditions
for 5.1-3.H Temporary Events.
5.1-4 DAY CARE
5.1-4.A Adult Day Care Facility
Conditions apply in the following zoning districts: CN, CR, MDD, MTC, MVC, IM
Conditions apply for facilities with more than seven (7) adults and conditions and a Special Permit apply to
facilities with more than 20 adults in the following zoning districts: RS, R, RU, RM.
Adult Day Care Facilities are permitted uses subject to the conditions listed below.
1. Setbacks: No building may be located within 50 feet of any property line, except in non-residential
districts, where the required setbacks of the respective zone apply.
2. Outdoor Activity Area: All facilities must include an outdoor activity area for the adults being cared
for. A graded, suitably surfaced, and fenced or otherwise protected outdoor area should be free of
hazards and provide appropriate means of access from the building. In RS, R, and RU zones, outdoor
activity areas are restricted to the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
3. Buffers: Section 8.1-6 of the Zoning Regulations concerning required buffer areas applies. The buffer
area will be designed to mitigate impacts from adjacent uses, particularly where facilities are located
in commercial and industrial districts. This buffer area is typically applied to the portion of the site
dedicated to day care uses, including any outdoor activity areas. The outdoor activity area may not be
located within the designated buffer area. The PZC may modify the width requirement of the buffer
area per Section 8.1-6.
4. Access: The applicant will accommodate all pedestrian and vehicular traffic to and on the site and
must provide an acceptable area for dropping off and picking up adults using the facility. To the extent
possible, parking stalls should be located to preclude pedestrian crossing of interior drives.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 5-21
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
5. Licensing and Permitting: Nothing in this section diminishes the property owner’s separate
responsibility for addressing compliance with any other CT State or Local licensing and permit
requirements for the proposed daycare use.
5.1-4.B Child Care Center
Conditions apply in the following zoning districts: CN, CR, MDD, MTC, MVC, IM
Conditions and Special Permit apply in the following zoning districts for any Care Facilities of 20 or more
children: RS, R, RU, RM
Child Care Centers are permitted uses subject to the conditions listed below and other applicable regulations.
1. Setbacks: No building may be located within 50 feet of any property lot line, except in non-residential
districts, where the required setbacks of the respective zone apply.
2. Outdoor Play Space: A graded and suitably fenced play area, including a minimum of 75 SF
of play space for each child who would be using the play area at any one time, must be provided.
The minimum required play area must be free of hazards and regulated wetland soils, provide a
suitable play surface, and be a minimum of 1%, but not in excess of 3%, in grade. Where the existing
topography and conditions present unique circumstances which will not compromise child safety, the
PZC may modify the maximum play area grade requirement to 5%. Active play areas, defined as areas
containing playground equipment, including but not limited to swings and other apparatus, must not
exceed 1% in grade. In RS, R, and RU zones, outdoor play activities are restricted to the hours of 7:00
a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
3. Buffers: A buffer area must be provided in accordance with the intent of Section 8.1-6 of these
regulations within all boundaries of a lot as follows:
Residential Districts: 25 feet
Commercial Districts: 25 feet
Industrial Districts: 50 feet
The buffer area will be designed to mitigate impacts from adjacent uses, particularly in cases where
facilities are located in commercial and industrial districts. This buffer requirement is typically applied
to the portion of the site dedicated to child care use, including such items as play area(s). The play
area or areas shall not be located within the designated buffer area. The PZC may modify the width
requirement of the buffer area per Section 8.1-6.
4. Access: The applicant will accommodate all pedestrian and vehicular traffic to and on site and must
provide an acceptable area for dropping off children on site. To the extent possible, parking stalls
dedicated to the public should be located to preclude pedestrian crossing of interior drives.
5. Licensing and Permitting: Nothing in this section diminishes the property owner’s separate
responsibility for addressing compliance with any other CT State or Local licensing and permit
requirements for the proposed daycare use.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 5-22
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
5.1-4.C Group Child Care Home
Conditions apply in the following zoning districts: RS, R, RU, RM, CN, CR, MDD, MTC, MVC, IM
Group Child Care Homes are permitted uses subject to the conditions listed below and other applicable
regulations.
1. Setbacks: No building may be located within 50 feet of any property line, except in non-residential
districts, where the required setbacks of the respective zone shall apply.
2. Outdoor Play Space: A graded and suitably fenced play area, including a minimum of 75 SF
of play space for each child who would be using the play area at any one time, must be provided.
The minimum required play area must be free of hazards and regulated wetland soils, provide a
suitable play surface, and be a minimum of 1%, but not in excess of 3%, in grade. Where the existing
topography and conditions present unique circumstances which will not compromise child safety, the
PZC may modify the maximum play area grade requirement to 5%. Active play areas, defined as areas
containing playground equipment, including but not limited to swings and other apparatus, must not
exceed 1% in grade. In RS, R, and RU zones, outdoor play activities are restricted to the hours of 7:00
a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
3. Buffers: A buffer area must be provided in accordance with the intent of Section 8.1-6 of these
regulations within all boundaries of a lot as follows:
Residential Districts: 25 feet
Commercial Districts: 25 feet
Industrial Districts: 50 feet
The buffer area will be designed to mitigate impacts from adjacent uses, particularly in cases where
facilities are located in commercial and industrial districts. This buffer requirement is typically applied
to the portion of the site dedicated to child care use, including such items as play area(s). The play
area or areas shall not be located within the designated buffer area. The PZC may modify the width
requirement of the buffer area per Section 8.1-6.
4. Access: The applicant will accommodate all pedestrian and vehicular traffic to and on site and must
provide an acceptable area for dropping off children on site. To the extent possible, parking stalls
dedicated to the public should be located to preclude pedestrian crossing of interior drives.
5. Licensing and Permitting: Nothing in this section diminishes the property owner’s separate
responsibility for addressing compliance with any other CT State or Local licensing and permit
requirements for the proposed daycare use.
5.1-5 HEALTH FACILITIES
5.1-5.A Hospital/Emergency Treatment Center
Conditions and Special Permit apply in the following zoning districts: RU, CN, CR, MDD, MTC, MVC, IM
Public and private hospitals and emergency treatment centers (other than drug rehabilitation centers and
psychiatric institutions) are permitted uses subject to approval of a special permit and the following conditions:
1. Lot Area: There must be a minimum lot area of five (5) acres.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 5-23
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
2. Emergency Entrance: The emergency entrance must have direct access to a collector or greater
public street if the facility is located within a residential district. Public parking areas should be
separated from the emergency entrance area.
3. Setbacks: Any building must not be located within 75 feet of any property line. Any generator or
laundry facility must not be located within 100 feet of any property line.
5.1-5.B Medical/Health Care Professional Office/Clinic
Conditions and Special Permit apply in the following zoning districts: RU
1. Lot Area: Minimum lot area of 60,000 SF.
2. Building Dimensions: Gross floor area of the building must not exceed 6,000 SF and the maximum
horizontal cross section of a building must not exceed 3,000 SF.
3. Setbacks: Any building must not be located within 75 feet of a rear or side property line.
4. Parking: All parking must be located in the side or rear yards.
5. Accessory Uses: Medical and dental laboratories are permitted as accessory uses to medical and
dental offices and outpatient clinics.
5.1-6 INDUSTRIAL
5.1-6.A Flex Space
Conditions apply in the following zoning districts: IM, IG
1. Parking: Any Flex Space use will follow the parking requirements of Section 8.2, Off-Street Parking and
Loading, Bike Parking for the types and proportion of uses proposed for the Flex Space at the time of
application. Any change of use that results in a more intensive use of the property, including the need
for more parking, or a more commercial use of the site, will trigger Site Plan Review per Section 9.5.
2. Drop Off and Circulation: Flex Spaces that include or will include a commercial use or non-industrial uses
in a building or complex that also includes an industrial use or uses, are subject to the following conditions:
a. The applicant must accommodate all pedestrian and vehicular traffic to and on site and should
provide an acceptable area for dropping people off on site and a safe access route from the parking
to the building entrance. To the extent possible, parking stalls dedicated to the public must be
located to preclude pedestrian crossing of interior drives.
b. Clearly demarcated and direct pedestrian routes should extend from any public sidewalks to any
sidewalks or pedestrian ways that front on-site buildings and along driveways.
5.1-6.B Food and Non-Alcoholic Beverage Production, Small Scale
Conditions and Special Permit apply in the following zoning districts: RU
1. Lot Area: Minimum lot area of 60,000 SF.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 5-24
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
5.1-6.C Heavy Industrial
Heavy Industrial uses encompass a wide array of activities. Not all heavy industrial activities are subject to the
same restrictions. Below is a description of specific heavy industrial activities that are prohibited or conditioned.
1. For All Heavy Industrial Uses. The following industrial activities are prohibited anywhere in Town:
a. Chemicals, Drugs & Plastics Related:
• Rendering, reduction, or refining of animal or marine fats and oils
• Distillation of bones
• Manufacture of corrosive, poisonous, or malodorous acids and chemicals
• Refining of petroleum
• Manufacture of glue, gelatin, printing ink, carbon black, and explosives other than small arms
ammunition
b. Fabricated Metals Related:
• Use of drop hammers and punch presses of over 10 tons rated capacity
c. Food Related:
• Rendering, reduction, or refining of animal or marine fats and oils
• Distillation of bones
• Slaughtering of animals
d. Textile Related:
• Manufacture of artificial leather and oil cloth
• Coating or impregnating or fabrics
• Leather tanning and finishing
e. Waste and Scrap Related:
• Junk, salvage, and scrap yard activities
• Waste handling/reduction activities except Town of Groton services
2. Display and Sales
Any permitted wholesale or industrial use in an Industrial, Heavy district may use up to 25% of the
building floor area for display/sales to the general public of goods stored or manufactured on the lot.
5.1-6.D Light Industrial
Conditions apply in the following zoning districts: WW
1. Marine Dependent Uses. In the WW zoning district, light industrial uses are only allowed if they are
marine dependent, meaning that a location on the waterfront is critical to their core operations.
5.1-6.E Outdoor Storage Yard, Principal
Conditions and Special Permit apply in the following zoning districts: IM, IG
Outdoor storage of vehicles, equipment, product, supplies, and materials, as a primary use, is a permitted use
subject to approval of a special permit and the following conditions:
1. Prohibited Activities: Such use must not include dismantling, shredding, compressing, or any junk,
salvage, or scrap yard activities.
2. When located within an IM or IG district: Outdoor storage areas may not be located in a required
front yard, side yard, or rear yard.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 5-25
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
3. When located adjacent to any district other than IM or IG: Outdoor storage areas must be set
back 100 feet from the front lot line, and fifty feet from all other property lines.
4. Screening: Outdoor storage areas shall be screened on all sides with a solid fence or wall that is six (6)
feet tall, or eight (8) feet tall if what is stored is greater than six (6) feet in height.
5. Hazardous Materials: Outdoor storage of hazardous materials is prohibited, except for bulk storage
of fertilizers, pesticides, herbicides, and other typical products. These products must remain in
their original package, and must be stored in a contained area, under permanent cover, and on an
impermeable surface with no floor drains. Further, incidental hazardous materials, as defined in Sec.
6.4-8.A.1 (Water Resource Protection District), are permitted.
5.1-7 LODGING
5.1-7.A Hotel/Motel
Conditions and Special Permit apply in the following zoning district: IG
Special Permit ONLY (no Conditions) apply in the following zoning district: MDD
1. Accessory Facilities. Hotels/motels allowed in IG zones may include related accessory facilities which
are supportive, but supplemental to the principal use, and which would not otherwise be allowed
in the IG unless accessory to a hotel/motel. Examples of such accessory facilities include drinking
establishments, barber and beauty shops, books and stationery, cameras and photo supplies, gifts,
novelties and souvenirs, newspapers and magazines, restaurants, apparel and accessories, etc.
5.1-7.B Bed & Breakfast
Conditions apply in the following zoning districts: RU, RM, MDD, MTC, MVC
Conditions and Special Permit apply in the following zoning districts: RS, R
Bed and Breakfasts are permitted uses that may be conducted in any one-unit residential dwelling by the
owner-occupant, provided the following conditions are met:
1. Meals: Breakfast is to be the only common meal provided.
2. Occupants: There must not be more than 16 occupants at any one time, including the property owner
and any other permanent residents. In the R and RS zoning districts, there must not be more than 12
occupants.
3. Exterior Evidence: There is to be no exterior evidence of the activity other than a sign permitted
pursuant to Section 8.4 of these regulations and the required parking.
4. Location of Guest Rooms: Guest rooms may be located in the principal building and/or up to one
accessory building.
5. Code Compliance: The building is to be in compliance with all applicable zoning, building, fire,
electrical and plumbing codes.
6. Length of Stay: No guest may be registered for more than 21 consecutive nights.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 5-26
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
7. Registration Records: The owner is to maintain a guest register and retain registration records for a
minimum of three (3) years. The register and all records are to be made available for inspection by the
zoning official or designee.
8. Parking: All required parking must be accommodated on site.
9. Temporary Events: All events other than the renting of rooms must follow the requirements of
Section 5.1-3.H, Temporary Events. Temporary Events as part of a Bed & Breakfast are not allowed in
the R and RS districts or in a RU district on a site of less than two (2) acres.
5.1-8 RESIDENTIAL
5.1-8.A Single-Unit Dwellings and Two-Unit Dwellings
Conditions apply in the following zoning districts: CN, CR, IM
1. Existing Lots. Single-unit dwellings and two-unit dwellings are permitted uses in the CN, CR, and
IM zoning districts, but only on lots existing at the time of the adoption of these zoning regulations,
subject to the dimensional regulations of the R-12 Zoning District. Residential subdivision for such
uses is not permitted.
5.1-8.B Active Senior Housing Community
Conditions and Special Permit apply in the following zoning districts: RS, R, RU, RM, CN, CR, MTC, MVC
Purpose: The purpose of this section is to provide for the construction of diverse alternative housing types
for active seniors age 55 and over that are designed for aging in place and including common recreational
and socialization amenities to meet the needs of this population while balancing the need to protect existing
neighborhood character in the Town of Groton.
No provisions in this regulation shall be applied, enforced or implemented in a manner that is inconsistent
with or prohibited by the Fair Housing laws of the United States (42USCA Section 3607) and the State of
Connecticut (46a-64b).
Active Senior Housing Communities are permitted uses subject to approval of a special permit and the following
conditions:
1. Location: The site and the primary access thereto shall be located on a collector road or higher
classification in the Town’s system as shown in the Plan of Conservation and Development.
2. Minimum Lot Area:
RS-20, RU-20, RU-40: 10 acres
RS-12, R-12, RM, CN, CR, MTC, MVC: In accordance with the minimum lot area for the underlying
zoning district
3. Minimum Lot Width: In accordance with the minimum lot width for the underlying zoning district.
4. Permitted Number of Dwelling Units: The possible maximum number of dwelling units permitted in
the Active Senior Housing Community is determined per Section 4.2-3 Residential Density calculations.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 5-27
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
5. Allowed Dwelling Types: In order to maintain consistency of project scale with its neighboring
surroundings, the following respective product types shall be allowed:
RS and RU Zones: Product Type = Single-Unit, Two-Unit, and Townhouse (maximum three units
attached)
R Zone: Product Type = Single-Unit, Two-Unit, and Townhouse (maximum 4 units attached)
MVC and RM Zone: Product Type = Single-Unit, Two-Unit Townhouse, and Multi-Unit.
MTC, CN, and CR Zones: Product Type = Townhouse, Multi-Unit.
6. Setbacks: Any building containing a dwelling unit or community facilities must not be located within
75 feet of any property line or within 150 feet of any existing residential structure in an R, RU or
RS zone, except in the case of single-unit or two-unit dwellings where the minimum setback is in
accordance with the underlying zone.
7. Building Height and Coverage: The maximum building height and coverage of all buildings on the
lot must be in accordance with the underlying zone.
8. Occupancy:
a. Active Senior Housing Communities are intended for senior citizens and must be restricted to
persons 55 years of age and older subject to the following exceptions:
• If a couple resides in one unit, one member of the couple must meet this age requirement.
At any time, the total number of dwelling units occupied by persons under 55 years of age
cannot exceed 20% of the total number of units. The community or facility is responsible for
submitting verification of this requirement annually to the Town of Groton Zoning Official.
b. Active Senior Housing shall meet all requirements of the United States Federal Fair Housing Act,
as amended. The Active Senior Housing facility or community shall be responsible for compliance
with the Fair Housing Act and must publish and adhere to policies and procedures that demonstrate
intent to comply with the requirement of the Fair Housing Act and shall so state in the appropriate
legal documents for the community or facility.
c. The Town shall have the right, but not the obligation, to review continuing compliance with the
criteria of the Federal Fair Housing Act.
9. Multi-Unit Dwelling Standards: The provisions of Section 5.1-8.G for Multi-Unit Dwellings apply
to all residential dwellings except for single-unit and two-unit dwellings. Where a conflict exists for a
specific standard such as Recreation/Community Space, this Section 5.1-8.B shall apply.
10. Recreation and Community Amenities:
a. The community shall be designed to promote mobility, recreation, and socialization of residents
with each other and throughout the community, provide appropriate facilities and amenities for the
intended community, and provide for a variety of common and shared spaces. The development
should encourage open space development patterns to preserve meaningful open space.
b. Total Recreation/Community Space: 250 SF per dwelling unit.
c. Indoor Recreation/Community Space: 25 SF of the total 250 SF per dwelling unit must be in indoor
recreation/community space. In no case must the community building or indoor recreation/
community space area be less than 500 SF in size.
11. Universal Design Standards: Active Senior Housing must, at a minimum, meet the following
universal design standards:
a. The required percentage of residential units and all common spaces must conform to requirements
for accessibility in accordance with the Connecticut Building Code.
b. All units must also be designed with an accessible means of egress, as defined by Connecticut
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 5-28
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
Building Code (i.e. at least one means of level access into the area of the unit that is used for living,
eating, and sleeping).
c. All units must be designed for the ability for living, sleeping, and eating to be accommodated on
a single accessible floor.
d. All units must be designed with a full bath on the accessible floor that is compliant with the
provisions of the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, as amended, for accessibility.
e. All interior doorways must provide a minimum 32” wide unobstructed opening.
The applicant for special permit must provide, and have approved by the PZC, a list of all universal design
features and all social and recreational amenities for active senior housing that will be incorporated
into the project.
12. Parking: Parking shall be provided in accordance with Section 8.2.
13. Utilities: The active senior housing community must connect to a municipal or public water and sewer
system that has the capacity to serve the proposed development.
14. Common Area Maintenance: Active Senior Housing communities are required to implement a
mechanism that ensures the continued care and maintenance of all common areas (including recreation/
community facilities, common open space, parking facilities, common accessory structures, etc.). A
typical example would be the creation of a homeowner’s association or condominium association
with authority and funding necessary to maintain the common areas. Documents for the mechanism
of continued care and maintenance must be submitted for review as part of the site plan application.
5.1-8.C Caretaker/Security Service Dwelling
Conditions apply in the following zoning districts: RS, R, RU, RM, CN, CR, MDD, WW, MTC, MVC, IM, IG
One (1) dwelling for the provision of caretaker/security services may be provided as an accessory use to the
principal use in all zones, subject to the following conditions:
1. Location. Such dwelling unit may be located in the same building as the principal use or in a separate
accessory building.
2. Size. The size of the unit must not exceed 800 SF.
3. Documentation. The applicant must provide documentation that this dwelling unit will be occupied
by an employee or principal of the proposed use, and that the occupant will be residing on the premises
for the legitimate provision of maintenance/security services.
5.1-8.D Residential Counseling Facility
Conditions and Special Permit apply in the following zoning districts: RM, MVC
Conditions apply in the following districts; CN, CR, MTC
Community residential counseling facilities are permitted uses subject to the conditions below.
1. Minimum Lot Area: 20,000 SF
2. Maximum Residential Density: The lot shall contain 1,500 SF for each resident of the facility.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 5-29
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
3. Parking: Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 8.2 of the regulations, the minimum number of
off-street parking spaces provided is to be one space for each staff member plus one space for each
three adult residents. Additional parking spaces may be required by the PZC at the special permit
stage based upon the nature of the specific facility.
4. Non-Resident Services: A facility may provide counseling services to non-residents as well as
residents in non-residential districts provided that the facility includes a separate waiting area and
separate meeting room for such non-resident services. Parking for non-resident counseling services
shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of Section 8.2.
5. Room/Apartment Standards: Residents and their dependents must be housed in rooms and/
or apartments. Each room or apartment must have its own kitchen facilities unless the residential
counseling facility contains a common kitchen adequate to prepare and serve meals for all residents.
6. Staff: A staff member must be on site at the residential facility at all times.
7. Occupancy Limit: No more than 16 residents are permitted in any facility.
8. Licenses and Permits: Any facility must not be operated without obtaining all licenses and permits
otherwise required by state or federal law.
5.1-8.E Cottage Community
Conditions apply in the following zoning districts: RS, R, RM, MVC
Cottage Communities are permitted uses subject to the following conditions:
1. Density: The maximum density is twelve (12) cottage units per acre of land.
2. Number of Units: An individual cottage community must contain a minimum of six (6) cottage
units and may contain a maximum of twenty-four (24) cottage units. Within this range, the possible
maximum number of dwelling units permitted in a Cottage Community is determined per Section 4.2-
3 Residential Density calculations.
3. Utilities: Utility lines and cables (e.g., electricity, telecommunications, etc.) must be located
underground. The cottage community must connect to a municipal or public water and sewer system.
4. Dimensional Requirements:
a. A cottage community may be developed with cottage units on a single lot.
b. One private attached or detached accessory building at a maximum of 100 SF is allowed per unit.
c. Shared facilities such as storage sheds, garages, utility structures, or similar common facilities are
allowed.
d. Dwelling units must be separated by a minimum of ten (10) feet from the side edge of one building
to another. Where attached architectural features such as eaves, window bays, bulkheads, etc.
project into the space between residences, the ten (10) foot separation is measured from the
outside edge of these features.
e. Front yards of cottage units not abutting or oriented towards a right-of-way must be oriented
towards the common open space.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 5-30
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
f. The total floor area of each cottage unit is no greater than 1,200 SF. Any building footprint,
excluding any covered porch area, is not to exceed 900 SF.
g. The distance between the front building edge and the right of way or the edge of the common
space must be at least fifteen (15) feet.
h. The building height for all structures must not exceed eighteen (18) feet.
i. Any building or structure in a cottage community will be set back from the lot boundary by the
minimum standards for the underlying zoning district Accessory dwelling units are not allowed
within a cottage community.
j. The development may include a maximum of 200 SF of designated private yard area per unit.
5. Common Open Space:
a. A minimum of 250 SF of common open space per cottage unit must be provided. However, not
less than 3,000 SF of total common area regardless of number of cottage units.
b. No dimension of a common open space area used to satisfy the minimum square footage
requirement may be less than 20 feet, unless part of a pathway or trail.
c. Required common open space may be divided into no more than two separate areas per cluster
of cottage units.
d. Cottage units face each other across common open spaces.
e. Common open space is designed for passive or active recreational use. Examples may include but
are not limited to courtyards, orchards, landscaped picnic areas, or gardens. Common open space
includes amenities such as seating, landscaping, trails, gazebos, outdoor cooking facilities, covered
shelters, or ornamental water features.
f. Common open space areas should consist of plantings and pervious surfaces to the greatest extent
possible, while accommodating pedestrian access to homes and parking areas.
g. Stormwater management facilities may be incorporated below a common open space area but
must not be located on the surface of a common open space area.
h. All dwelling units must have access to the common open spaces.
i. Any significant changes to the common areas from the site plan approved by the PZC will require
additional review and approvals by the PZC. Minor changes may be handled by the Administrative
Site Plan process in accordance with Section 9.5.
j. With the approval of the PZC, a maximum of 25% of the required common open space may be
substituted for a community building with recreational/social amenities.
6. Cottage Building Design Standards: In addition to the dimensional requirements in subsection 4.
above, the following building design standards apply. . .
a. Variety in Building Design. The same combination of building elements, features and treatments
must not be repeated on individual cottage units for more than twenty (20) percent of the total
cottage units in a cottage community. Cottage units with the same combination of features and
treatments must not be located adjacent to each other. A minimum of five (5) of the following
building elements, features, and treatments must be provided in a manner that creates visual
variety between adjacent structures and within clusters of cottage units:
• Variation in general architectural elevation and size;
• Variation in roof or building colors and materials, such as brick, stone or other masonry as
accents;
• Varying roof shapes or gables between adjacent structures;
• Windows with visible trim and mullions;
• Roof brackets;
• Dormers;
• Fascia boards;
• Bay windows;
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 5-31
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
• Entry enhancement such as a well detailed door (multi-panel or glass insert), window adjacent
to front door, or roof extension;
• Trellis;
• Modulation;
• Chimney (shown on the exterior of the house);
• Other building elements, treatments, features, or site designs approved through the site plan
process that provide variety and visual interest;
• Additional porches and patios (required porch not included).
b. Porches. Cottage units must have a covered porch over the primary entrance at least sixty (60)
square feet in size with a minimum dimension of six feet on any side. The covered porch of any
main entry of a cottage unit is oriented to the common open space or the public street right-ofway
as applicable.
c. Fences. All fences interior to the development are no more than thirty-six (36) inches in height.
d. Design for Visitability: In any cottage community development, 100% of all cottage units must
be developed to incorporate the three “visitable” features defined in Section 29-269 of the
Connecticut General Statutes:
• Interior doorways that provide a minimum 32-inch-wide unobstructed opening;
• An accessible means of egress, as defined in Appendix A to 28 C.F.R. Part 36, including a ramp
complying with the International Residential Code portion of the State Building Code intending
to allow access by a wheelchair; and
• A full or half bathroom on the first floor that is compliant with the provisions of the Americans
with Disabilities Act of 1990, as amended, 42 USC 12101.
7. Parking:
a. A minimum of 1.5 spaces per dwelling unit is provided for the entire cottage community. Parking
spaces located within garages and driveways may count towards this requirement.
b. Parking for cottage units is combined into shared parking garage structures or surface parking
clusters in order to facilitate housing clusters that are oriented to common open space areas. An
individual garage structure for a unit, whether attached or detached, is not permitted.
c. Garage doors are not to be oriented towards a public right-of-way, with the exception of an alley.
d. Garages and carports are not to be located between the common open space and the cottage
units.
e. Surface parking lots are to be broken into sub-lots of no more than fifteen (15) parking spaces.
f. Parking in the form of garages, carports, or surface lots may occupy no more than 40 percent of
site frontage on a public right-of-way, except in the case of an alley, in which case no restriction
applies.
g. Surface parking lots are to be set back twenty (20) feet from the outside perimeter of the cottage
community.
h. Parking is to be set back a minimum of twenty (20) feet from a public street.
i. Surface parking lots of more than four (4) spaces, visible from a public right-of-way (not including
alleys) or adjacent single-family uses or zones, are to be at least partially screened by landscaping,
walls, and/or other architectural features.
j. Any enclosed parking structures should generally be consistent with the architectural style of the
cottage units. However, a pitched roof design is generally preferred.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 5-32
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
8. Common Area Maintenance: Cottage communities are required to implement a mechanism that
ensures the continued care and maintenance of all common areas (including common open space,
parking facilities, common accessory structures, etc.). A typical example would be the creation of
a homeowner’s association or condominium association with authority and funding necessary to
maintain the common areas. Documents for the mechanism of continued care and maintenance must
be submitted for review as part of the site plan application.
Cottage Community - Site
Cottage Community - Height and Spacing
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 5-33
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
Cottage Community - Detail
5.1-8.F Mobile Manufactured Home Park or Subdivisions (Existing)
Conditions and Special Permit apply in the following zoning districts: RS, R, RU, RM, CN, CR, MTC, MVC
Mobile manufactured home parks or subdivisions existing at the time of the adoption of these regulations may
be permitted to expand in the RS, R, RU, RM, CN, CR, MTC, and MVC zoning districts, subject to approval of a
special permit and the following conditions:
1. Location: The expansion area is to be contiguous to the existing mobile manufactured home park or
subdivision.
2. Expansion: The mobile manufactured home park or subdivision may be permitted to expand its land
area without increasing the number of mobile manufactured home lots or spaces.
3. Objectives and Guidelines: In evaluating the proposal, the PZC is to take into consideration the site
plan objectives in Section 9.5-4 and the following guidelines:
a. The principal purpose of expanding an existing mobile manufactured home park is to improve the
living environment for the residents within the park.
b. This may be accomplished by enlarging and rearranging the mobile manufactured homes,
increasing open space around the periphery of the park, providing recreation areas for residents,
and/or providing additional automobile parking spaces.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 5-34
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
5.1-8.G Multi-Unit Dwellings
Conditions apply in the following zoning districts: RM, CN, CR, MDD, MTC, MVC, NMDD
Multi-unit dwellings should adhere to the following design objectives: The architectural design, scale and mass of
buildings including, among other elements, the exterior building material, roof line, and building elevation, should
be of such character as to harmonize and be compatible, so as to protect the property values in the neighborhood
and to preserve and improve the appearance of the area. Where appropriate and applicable, individual treatment
of areas is encouraged, whereby each unit is accented architecturally to indicate its individuality.
In addition to the dimensional requirements of the underlying zoning district, multi-unit dwellings, located
in any zoning district in which they are a permitted use (with the exception of the MTC and MDD, in which
multi-unit dwellings must simply follow the standards for those underlying zoning districts), are subject to the
following building and site requirements.
1. Storage/Laundry: At least 50% of the multi-unit dwellings will be provided with an individual dead
storage area of at least 100 cubic feet per dwelling unit. The storage may be provided within the
individual unit, garage, or basement or within a common onsite storage area. Indoor laundry facilities
will be provided within individual units or as a common onsite facility.
2. Private Outdoor Space: At least 50% of the dwelling units have at least one balcony, porch, deck,
or patio, to afford relative privacy by architectural articulation or in the case of patios, by fencing and
planting. The minimum size of these areas is 30 square feet.
3. Building Form: The exterior of a multi-unit structure shall use articulation to reduce the perceived
massing of the structure. At a minimum, decorative horizontal borders, trim, cornices, or similar
features shall be used to identify the different stories of a building. Changes in material and color
are encouraged between these dividing features to further differentiate the stories of a multi-unit
building. No multi-unit building surface shall occupy the same architectural plane for more than forty
(40) feet measured from one vertical edge of the surface to the other. Protrusions, recesses, window
bays or other similar features that provide at least two (2) feet of depth or extend outward at least two
(2) feet from the primary architectural plane shall be used to meet these requirements.
Multi-Unit Dwellings,
Building Form
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 5-35
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
4. Setbacks: Required front, side, and rear yard setbacks of the underlying zone apply to any residential
building or group of residential buildings. All residential buildings must also be set back at least ten (10)
feet from the edge of any pavement associated with a driveway or parking area. Accessory structures,
except for carports, garages, trash enclosures, and fences must be set back at least ten (10) feet from
the edge of pavement associated with a driveway or parking area.
5. Residential Building Setbacks: The minimum separation distance between residential buildings up
to 40 feet in height on the same site is 30 feet. For buildings over 40 feet in height, this minimum
separation distance between residential buildings on the same site is 40 feet. Where a residential
building has an attached accessory structure, the minimum separation distance to another residential
building shall be measured from the outside of the accessory structure as applicable.
6. Detached Accessory Structures: Detached accessory structures shall be separated from any other
building by a minimum of ten (10) feet.
7. Recreation/Community Space: The developer must provide at least 100 SF per unit of recreation/
community space amenities onsite, but no less than 2,000 SF in total. The areas may be located inside
or outside, and should include suitable recreation equipment, socialization amenities, and facilities.
8. Water/Sewer Service: Public sewer and water systems must be available and used. Multi-Unit
dwellings must be connected to systems before a certificate of occupancy can be issued.
9. Utilities: Utilities must be placed underground.
10. Solid Waste/Recycling: Outdoor solid waste/recycling storage areas will be screened on all sides by
a solid fence or wall and meet the design standards of Section 8.1-7.
5.1-8.H Multi-Unit Dwellings, Conversion
Conditions and Special Permit apply in the following zoning districts: RM, CN, CR, MDD, MTC, MVC
Conversion of existing non-residential buildings into multi-unit dwellings is a permitted use in all zoning districts
where multi-unit dwellings are a permitted use subject to approval of a special permit and the conditions
below. Note that such conversions are NOT subject to the use conditions for Multi-Unit Dwellings found in
Sec. 5.1-8.G.
1. Utilities: The building must be connected to the public sewer and water system.
2. Dimensional Requirements: Where an addition or expansion is proposed, all lot area and yard
requirements for the underlying zone must be met. Additions or expansions may extend into a required
setback where such additions or expansions are necessary to comply with the state Fire Code or the
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) and where such intrusion represents only what is necessary
to have the building meet these requirements. For example, an applicant must not extend the living
space of a building to the setback line and then further add on ADA access structures.
3. Laundry Facilities: Conversions without individual laundry facilities in each unit will provide one or
more common indoor laundry facilities. At least one (1) washer/dryer set will be provided for every
ten (10) dwelling units.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 5-36
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
4. Solid Waste/Recycling: Outdoor solid waste/recycling storage areas will be screened on all sides by
a solid fence or wall and meet the design standards of Section 8.1-7.
5. Number of Dwelling Units: So long as all requirements can be accommodated on site and any
expansion does not include more than 10% of the area of the existing building, there is no minimum
or maximum allowed number of dwelling units under these zoning regulations. Otherwise, the density
of the underlying zone shall apply.
6. Parking and Circulation: Clearly demarcated and direct pedestrian routes should extend from any
onsite parking areas and public frontage sidewalks to building entrances.
7. Partial Conversions: Any conversion that maintains some non-residential use is permitted only if
residents have access to their dwelling without needing to pass through non-residential floor areas.
8. Recreation/Community Space: Where possible, based on existing building layout and parking
requirements, the developer should provide recreation/community space amenities onsite. The areas
may be located inside or outside, and should include suitable recreation equipment, socialization
amenities, and facilities.
5.1-8.I Residential Life Care Communities
Conditions and Special Permit apply in the following zoning districts: R, RS, RU, RM, CN, CR, MTC, MVC, IM
Residential Life Care Communities are permitted uses subject to a special permit and the conditions below.
Nursing Homes are allowed as an accessory use when incorporated into a Residential Life Care Community
in the above zones. Such accessory Nursing Homes are subject to the same special permit and the conditions
below. Individual nursing homes are permitted as a standalone use in the RM, CN and CR districts subject to
a site plan approval.
Purpose: The purpose of Residential Life Care Communities is to provide housing and/or health care facilities
for elderly persons and/or those persons of any age having permanent and/or temporary handicaps. The
communities are designed to meet the needs of its residents through various stages of the aging process
by, for example, incorporating universal design features as defined in these regulations and other measures
appropriate to the type of residential life care community being proposed at a site. Residential Life Care
Communities are to be designed as harmonious units, promote semi-independent living of residents, provide
appropriate services to accommodate the needs of the residents, and are consistent with the character and
scale of the neighborhood. This provision recognizes housing and care facilities for elderly persons and persons
of any age having permanent and/or temporary handicaps as having less impact than other higher density
housing options, and therefore meriting unique consideration.
Residential Life Care Communities are permitted uses subject to approval of a special permit and the conditions
listed below and may not be constructed within coastal flood hazard areas unless, at a minimum, it can be
demonstrated that hazards to life and property are minimized and all potential flood hazard impacts have
been mitigated to the maximum extent practicable.
1. Minimum Lot Width: 250 feet.
2. Permitted Number of Dwelling Units: When located in the R, RS or RU zoning districts, the possible
maximum number of dwelling units permitted in the Residential Life Care Community is determined
per Section 4.2-3 Residential Density Calculations.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 5-37
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
3. Minimum Lot Area per Dwelling Unit: The minimum respective lot area per dwelling unit is in
accordance with the permissible density standards in the case of the RM, MTC, MVC, and CN zones,
and as follows for other zones:
a. Congregate Living Facility: 5,500 SF per dwelling unit
b. Assisted Living Facility: 3,000 SF per dwelling unit
c. Nursing Home Facility: 1,500 SF per patient accommodation or bed or three (3) acres, whichever
is greater.
4. Setbacks: No building containing a dwelling unit or related facilities may be located within 75 feet of
any property line or within 150 feet of any existing residential structure in an R, RU or RS zone, except
in the case of areas of the site that contain individual, single unit dwellings when the setback may be
reduced to the required setback for the underlying zone for this area of the site. This section does not
supersede other, more restrictive requirements and standards of the Zoning Regulations.
5. Maximum Coverage: The maximum coverage of all buildings on the lot may not exceed 20%.
6. Minimum Floor Area: The minimum floor area for dwelling units is as follows:
a. Congregate Living: 400 SF per dwelling unit
b. Assisted Living: 300 SF per dwelling unit
In the case of the above congregate or assisted living units, the minimum area per dwelling unit
requirements as noted in Table 4.2 (Lot, Yard and Building Requirements by Zoning District) do not
apply; for all other types of dwelling units, the provisions of Table 4.2 control.
7. Age Restrictions: Residential Life Care Communities are primarily intended for senior citizens and are
restricted to persons 55 years of age and older subject to the following exceptions: If a couple resides
in one unit, one member of the couple must meet this age requirement. Persons having permanent or
temporary handicaps are eligible to reside in such facilities. At any time, the total number of dwelling
units occupied by persons under 55 years of age cannot exceed 20% of the total number of units. Age
restrictions specified in this section shall not apply to duly licensed and authorized nursing homes.
8. Building Height: Building height shall be regulated by the height requirements of the zone in which
the facility is to be located, in accordance with Table 4.2 of these regulations. However, if the proposed
building is to be located in an R, RU, RS or IM zone, it may exceed the underlying height limits to no
more than three (3) stories or 40 feet, whichever is less. In order to achieve this increase in height over
30 feet in the R, RU, RS or IM zones, the proposed building(s) must be set back from its front, side,
and rear lot lines one (1) additional foot for each foot in height over the allowed height of that zone.
9. Building Design: Information must be submitted to the PZC during site plan review noting that the
exterior walls of the proposed facility provide for variation with respect to surface treatment and/or
variation in the plane of the exterior walls and roof areas, to provide visual relief. Compliance with the
standard for visual relief requires that the design, arrangement, size, mass and bulk, and location of
buildings or other created or natural elements are sufficiently consistent in scale, character, and siting
with its surroundings, to avoid abrupt or severe differences in scale.
10. Kitchen Facilities: All congregate living facility dwelling units and assisted living facilities shall provide,
at minimum, a kitchenette for all living units. A kitchenette will include a sink, refrigerator, and counter
space for a microwave or toaster oven.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 5-38
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
11. Design for Socialization: The community shall be designed to promote mobility and socialization
of residents, provide appropriate recreation/community facilities and amenities for the intended
community, and provide for a variety of common and shared spaces to provide a social support system
for residents.
12. Detached Accessory Structures: Detached accessory structures shall be separated from any other
building by a minimum of ten (10) feet.
13. Water/Sewer Service: Public sewer and water systems must be available and used and must be
connected to systems before a certificate of occupancy can be issued.
14. Utilities: Utilities must be placed underground.
15. Solid Waste/Recycling: Outdoor solid waste/recycling storage areas will be screened on all sides by
a solid fence or wall and meet the design standards of Section 8.1-7.
16. Signage: A comprehensive plan for directional signage shall be provided to assure that major
pathways connect housing with on- and off-site activities and that visitors and residents can easily
orient themselves.
17. Management Plan: A management plan or community design package must be provided with the
application for special permit and site plan approvals to provide, in perpetuity, for the following service
enrichment as necessary for the projected population:
a. Congregate Facilities must, at a minimum, include the following:
• A communal dining room and kitchen which will provide at least one (1) meal/day for residents.
• Services including regular cleaning of resident spaces.
• Regular scheduled social activities.
• Regular scheduled transportation for residents to shopping, commercial services, doctors’
appointments, community facilities, and institutions.
• A 24-hour on-site presence of management staff.
• A Residential Services Coordinator to facilitate residents’ program needs and activities.
• All common spaces must conform to Connecticut Building Code requirements for accessibility.
• Universal design features must be as defined in these regulations, and additionally meet the
following universal design standards:
?? The required percentage of residential units and all common spaces must conform to
requirements for accessibility in accordance with the Connecticut Building Code.
?? All units must also be designed with an accessible means of egress, as defined by the
Connecticut Building Code (i.e. at least one means of level access into the area of the unit
that is used for living, eating, and sleeping).
?? All units must be designed for the ability for living, sleeping, and eating to be accommodated
on a single accessible floor.
?? All units must be designed with a full bath on the accessible floor that is compliant with
the provisions of the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, as amended, for accessibility.
?? All interior doorways must provide a minimum 32” wide unobstructed opening.
?? All residential units must be provided with alarms in bedroom and toilet areas to connect
to onsite management and an off-site emergency alarm organization.
?? Community and/or recreation space must be provided at 100 SF per dwelling unit. A
community building or indoor community space within the complex at 25 SF per dwelling
unit of the total 100 SF per dwelling unit must be in indoor community space. In no case
must the community building or indoor community space area be less than 1,000 SF in size.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 5-39
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
b. Assisted Living Facilities will, at a minimum, include all requirements as outlined for Congregate
Living Facilities (5.1-8.I.17.A above) plus the following:
• Services for the facility must be provided by an Assisted Living Services Agency licensed by the
State of Connecticut and include all services for a managed residential facility as required by
the State of Connecticut Department of Public Health.
• All units must meet the Connecticut Building Code requirement for accessibility.
• Food service requirements, management staff for nursing services, transportation services,
and assistance with daily living functions such as eating, dressing, bathing, medication
management, etc., must be administered in accordance with licensing requirements.
18. Parking: Parking must be provided in accordance with the provisions of Section 8.2. Clearly
demarcated and direct pedestrian routes should extend from any onsite parking areas and public
frontage sidewalks to building entrances.
5.1-9 RESTAURANT/DRINKING ESTABLISHMENT
5.1-9.A Drinking Establishment
Conditions apply in the following zoning districts: CN, CR, MTC
Conditions and Special Permit apply in the following zoning districts: MDD, MVC
A drinking establishment is a permitted use subject to the following conditions:
1. Setbacks: No outdoor patio area for customers is to be within 125 feet of any residential district
boundary.
2. Buffer: A buffer area having a minimum width of 25 feet must be provided where the use abuts a lot
zoned R, RS, RU or RM and in accordance with the provisions of Section 8.1-6.
5.1-9.B Restaurant, Mobile
Conditions apply in the following zoning districts: RU, RM, CN, CR, MDD, WW, MTC, MVC, IM, IG, GR, GC
Any mobile restaurant (aka “food truck”) is a permitted use subject to approval of an administrative site plan
and the following conditions (the following does NOT apply to mobile restaurants that are permitted under a
vendor’s license issued by the Police Department.)
RM, RU, MDD, GR, and GC: Allowed as accessory use only for a Temporary Event associated with a permitted
use and the following conditions.
CN, CR, MTC, MVC, IM, IG, and WW: Allowed with administrative site plan and the following conditions.
1. Location: Any mobile restaurant must be parked on private property and must not be located within
required parking or landscaped areas of a site.
2. Outdoor Patio: Any outdoor patio for a mobile restaurant is subject to the standards found in Section
5.1-1.E Outdoor Patio, Commercial.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 5-40
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
3. Dimensional Standards: The mobile restaurant is subject to all the dimensional standards for the
underlying zoning district as found in Table 4.2 Lot, Yard and Building Requirements by Zoning District.
4. Waste and Recycling: The site plan must include a detailed description of the number and location
of all waste and recycling bins or barrels, along with the process for removing waste from the area.
Recycling bins or barrels should be located close to trash receptacles and be clearly marked.
5. Maintenance Standards: The owner of the premises on which a mobile restaurant is located is
ultimately responsible for ensuring that all exterior conditions of the mobile restaurant, including any
seating, signs, and other associated components, are in good repair and in safe, attractive condition.
5.1-10 RETAIL
5.1-10.A Retail with Outdoor Sales and Storage; and Retail with Outdoor
Display
Conditions apply in the following zoning districts: CN, CR, MTC, MVC
Retail with Outdoor Sales and Storage and Retail with Outdoor Display are permitted as an accessory use to a
Retail Establishment subject to the following conditions:
For both Retail with Outdoor Sales and Storage and Retail with Outdoor Display
1. Location: Must not be located on any required parking area or in the public right-of-way.
2. Obstructions: Activity must not obstruct building exits, fire lanes and handicap parking spaces.
3. Pedestrian Flow: Activity must not obstruct pedestrian flow through the site or from abutting
properties and must provide not less than five contiguous feet of sidewalk clear of obstructions.
4. Size: Outdoor sales, display, and storage shall not collectively exceed 25% of the total retail floor area
for that use or business.
5. Hazardous Materials: Outdoor storage of any hazardous materials is prohibited, except for incidental
hazardous materials, as defined in Sec. 6.4-8.A.1 (Water Resource Protection District).
6. Temporary Sales and Display: For temporary outdoor sales and display, goods shall be returned
to the inside of the structure while the business is not in operation. Seasonal temporary outdoor
displays may be left out overnight for no more than a total of 90 days over the course of a calendar
year, whether consecutive or nonconsecutive. All sales and display are considered temporary unless
said goods are generally too heavy to be returned to the inside of the structure.
For Retail with Outdoor Display
7. Pedestrian Access: Pedestrian access to outdoor display areas shall be clearly delineated and
separated from any traffic flow or movements on the property either by permanent walls, barriers
or vegetation; or removable barriers that can create a safe barrier between pedestrians and vehicles.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 5-41
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
For Retail with Outdoor Sales and Storage
8. Screening: All outdoor storage areas shall be adequately screened from the front and side property
lines with a solid fence or wall that is six (6) feet tall, or eight (8) feet tall if what is stored is greater
than six (6) feet in height.
9. Storage: Storage shall be either on the side or rear of the building.
5.1-11 SERVICES
5.1-11.A Cemetery
1. New: A new cemetery is a permitted use in the RU and all industrial districts subject to a special
permit and the following conditions:
a. There is to be a minimum lot area of 15 acres.
b. The location of all buildings, structures, and burial plots is to adhere to the yard requirements of
the applicable zoning district.
2. Expansion of Existing: Expansion of cemeteries (defined as any expansion of the area set aside
for burials) existing at the time of the adoption of this regulation into a contiguous area is permitted
subject to a special permit and the following conditions:
a. The location of all buildings, structures, and burial plots is to adhere to the yard requirements of
the applicable zoning district.
5.1-11.B Elementary and Secondary School, College and University
Conditions apply in the following zoning districts: RS, R, RU, RM, MDD, MVC
Regularly organized elementary schools, secondary schools (including vocational schools), colleges, and
universities are permitted uses subject to the following conditions. For colleges or universities, these conditions
only apply to those schools that are located on a campus setting and/or in the RS, R, RU or RM zoning districts,
and not to those schools that locate in an existing non-residential building. They also apply to any child care
center accessory to an elementary or secondary school, college or university.
1. Lot Coverage: Lot coverage must not exceed 15% of the lot area, except for Colleges and Universities
which are subject to the standards of the underlying zoning district.
2. Lighting: Outdoor lighting shall not spill over beyond the site’s property lines and shall be the minimum
intensity necessary to adequately and safely light the facility and its parking lot and access drives. The
applicant must provide a photometric plan to demonstrate compliance with these regulations.
3. Circulation: Bus and other vehicular drop off areas should be separated from one another and
designed and located to minimize traffic congestion and to promote pedestrian safety using pavement
markings, signs, and designated walkways.
When located in a RS, R, RU or RM district, the following will apply in addition to items 1, 2, and 3
above:
4. Minimum Lot Area: There shall be a minimum lot area of five (5) acres or 1,000 SF for each student
based on enrollment capacity, whichever is greater. Enrollment capacity is based on the number of
seats/desks or other facilities available to students for educational purposes in a classroom situation.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 5-42
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
5. Building Setbacks: Any building must not be located within 75 feet of any side or rear property line.
6. Active Outdoor Area Setbacks: Any playground, field, outdoor classroom or other actively used
outdoor space must not be located within 50 feet of any property line.
When located in a MDD or MVC district, the following will apply in addition to items 1, 2, and 3
above:
7. Building Setbacks: Any new building must not be located within 30 feet of any side or rear property
line. Otherwise, building setbacks must meet the requirements of the underlying zoning district.
8. Active Outdoor Area Setbacks: Any playground, field or other actively used outdoor space must not
be located within 50 feet of any property line.
5.1-11.C Professional, Arts, and Educational Schools and Studios,
Non-Degree
Conditions apply in the following zoning districts: IM
Conditions and Special Permit apply in the following zoning districts: RU
Non-degree granting professional, arts, and educational schools and studios are permitted uses subject to the
following conditions:
1. Drop Off Areas: Drop off areas should be designed and located to minimize traffic congestion and to
promote pedestrian safety using pavement markings, signs, and designated walkways.
When located in the RU district, the following will apply in addition to item 1 above:
2. Minimum Lot Area: 60,000 SF.
3. Building Setbacks: Any building must not be located within 75 feet of any side or rear property line.
4. Active Outdoor Area Setbacks: Any playground, field, outdoor classroom or other actively used
outdoor space must not be located within 50 feet of any property line.
5. Parking: Located in the side or rear yard.
When located in the IM district, the following will apply in addition to item 1 above:
6. Circulation: The applicant must accommodate all pedestrian and vehicular traffic to and on site and must
clearly show safe pedestrian access from the parking spaces to the front door of the business served. To the
extent possible, parking stalls dedicated to the public should be located to preclude pedestrian crossing of
interior drives. Clearly demarcated and direct pedestrian routes should extend from any public sidewalks to
any sidewalks or pedestrian ways that front on-site buildings and along driveways.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 5-43
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
5.1-11.D Professional Offices
Conditions apply in the following zoning districts: WW
Conditions and Special Permit apply in the following zoning districts: RU
Professional offices, as defined in these regulations, are permitted uses subject to the following:
When located in an RU district: permitted with a Special Permit and the following conditions:
1. Minimum Lot Area: 60,000 SF
2. Setbacks: Any building must not be located within 75 feet of any rear or side property line.
3. Parking: Must be located in the side or rear yard.
4. Location: Such uses may only take vehicular access off public streets defined as collector roads or
higher.
When located in the WW district:
5. Water-Dependent Use: Professional Office permitted only when accessory to a water-dependent use.
5.1-11.E Self-Service Storage Facilities
Conditions apply in the following zoning districts: CR, IM, IG
Self-service storage facilities are permitted uses subject to the following conditions:
1. Minimum Lot Area: The minimum lot area on which a self-service storage facility is located will be
two (2) acres.
2. Loading: For multi-storied facilities, adequate loading spaces must be provided in the vicinity of
elevators and other points of access into the facility.
3. Interior Drives: Interior drives in and around buildings must be a minimum of 24 feet in width.
4. Barrier: A barrier will be provided around the rear and sides of the developed portion of the site.
Said barrier will be located within the property line and may consist of either the solid facades of the
storage structures or a fence. If the barrier used is a fence, it must be a minimum of six (6) feet in
height and be constructed of opaque materials such as brick, stone, architectural tile, masonry units,
wood or similar materials, but expressly prohibiting woven wire. The appearance of the barrier should
be in harmony with the existing uses and structures within the vicinity of the site.
5. Landscaping and Buffers: All areas outside of the barrier required in condition 4 must be landscaped
to provide appropriate visual screening from adjacent properties. Buffer areas required per Section
8.1-6 apply.
6. Limitation of Activities: These facilities are limited to dead storage use only, meaning the storage
of furniture, files or other unused or seldom used items for an indefinite period, as opposed to items
that are more frequently circulated or in use. No business activities, such as those for a contractor, are
allowed on the lot. No hazardous materials are permitted to be stored on site.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 5-44
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
7. Outdoor Storage: No outdoor storage is permitted other than the storage of recreational vehicles.
The storage areas must be shown on the approved site plan and additional parking must be calculated
based on this outdoor storage area.
5.1-12 TRANSPORTATION, COMMUNICATION & UTILITIES
5.1-12.A Telecommunication Towers and Facilities
Telecommunication Facility:
Conditions apply in the following zoning districts: RS, R, RU, RM, CN, CR, MDD, WW, MTC, MVC, IM, IG
Telecommunication Tower:
Conditions and Special Permit apply in the following zoning districts: RU, RM, CN, CR, IM, IG
Purpose: The purpose of this regulation is to provide guidance to the Connecticut Public Utility Regulatory
Authority (PURA) and to regulate the location and number of telecommunication towers and facilities, including
antennae; minimizing their adverse visual effect through careful design, siting, and vegetative screening;
and to encourage the shared or joint use of such facilities. These regulations are consistent with the Federal
Telecommunications Act of 1996 in that they do not discriminate among providers of functionally equivalent
services, prohibit or act to prohibit the provision of personal wireless services, or regulate the placement and
construction of personal wireless service facilities on the basis of environmental effects of radio frequency
emissions to the extent that such facilities comply with the FCC regulations regarding such emissions.
Telecommunication towers and facilities that are not under the jurisdiction of PURA are regulated herein.
PURA typically has jurisdiction over telecommunications towers owned or operated by the state, a public
service company, certified telecommunications provider or used in a cellular system. The following conditions
may be used as a guide for the Town to review and comment on any telecommunication towers under PURA
jurisdiction. Any other telecommunication towers, including antennae, are permitted uses subject to the
conditions below and approval of a special permit.
1. Shared Use: To discourage the proliferation of telecommunication towers, shared use of tower
structures is both permitted and encouraged. Placement of more than one tower on a lot may be
permitted if all setbacks, design, and landscape requirements are met for each tower. Applications
for new towers shall be accompanied by documentation that no existing or planned tower or other
structure can accommodate the applicant’s antenna or transmitter. The application shall include
documentation regarding the availability of any existing or approved telecommunication towers or
other structures within the transmission area that meets the needs of the applicant.
It is a condition of any special permit issued under this regulation that the permit holder shall exercise
good faith in allowing other providers to share space or co-locate on the site, provided that such shared
use does not impair the technical level or quality of service. In the event that a dispute arises as to
whether the permit holder has exercised good faith in accommodating other users, the Town may require
a third-party technical study at the expense of either or both the permit holder and the applicant.
2. Co-Location: Applications involving the co-location of antennae on existing telecommunication
towers or on other existing structures previously approved for telecommunication location are exempt
from the need for a special permit and shall only be subject to site plan approval from the PZC.
3. Historic Districts and Scenic Roads: Telecommunication towers are prohibited within existing Town
and National Register Historic Districts and along designated scenic roads.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 5-45
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
4. Minimum Lot Area: The lot on which a new telecommunication tower is constructed shall meet the
minimum lot area requirements for the underlying zone.
5. Height: The tower and/or antenna shall be erected to the minimum height necessary to satisfy the
technical requirements of the telecommunication facility. Documentation of the minimum height
needed, prepared by a professional telecommunication systems engineer, must accompany any
required application for special permit. Such documentation may include propagation modeling and/
or test results.
6. Setbacks: All new structures shall meet the setback requirements of the respective zone or be set
back from all property lines a distance equal to the height of the structure, whichever is greater. Guy
anchors shall meet the setback requirements of the respective zone.
7. Color: Towers and antennae shall be a subdued, non-reflective color which shall blend in with its
surroundings.
8. Buffers: Buffer area must meet the requirement of Section 8.1-6.
9. Lighting: Signal lights or illumination shall not be permitted unless required by the Federal
Communications Commission or the Federal Aviation Administration.
10. Signs: No advertising or signage, other than warning signs, is permitted on any tower.
11. Cessation of Use: All unused telecommunication towers shall be removed within 12 months of
cessation of use. If an unused tower is not removed within 12 months of cessation of use, the tower
and associated facilities may be removed by the Town and the cost of removal assessed against
the property. As a condition of site plan approval, the PZC may require a bond to insure removal of
abandoned towers where the cost of the removal of the tower may equal or exceed the value of the
lot on which it is located.
12. Signal Interference: No new or existing telecommunications service shall interfere with public safety
telecommunications or with any existing television or radio signal. All applications for facilities under
this regulation shall be accompanied by a study which provides a technical evaluation of existing and
proposed transmissions and indicates all potential interference problems.
13. Exemption: Satellite dishes under 10 feet in diameter are exempt from this regulation when ground
mounted or located on an existing building.
14. RU Zoning District: New towers may be placed on lots in RU zoning districts which already contain a
principal building, provided that all other conditions of this section are met.
5.1-12.B Utility Infrastructure
Conditions apply in the following zoning districts: RS, R, RU, RM, MDD, WW, MTC, MVC
Utility infrastructure is a permitted use subject to the following conditions:
1. Setbacks and Screening: As stipulated below based on the size of the structure.
a. Small Structures- between two (2) feet and eight (8) feet in height
• No setbacks are required
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 5-46
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
• Screening or landscaping around the structure is required (Sec. 8.1-6 for Buffers does not
apply)
b. Medium Structures – over eight (8) feet in height and 1,500 SF or less. Medium structures for this
section also include any free-standing solar panels of any height that are not accessory to a singleunit
or two-unit dwelling on the site.
• Must meet setbacks for underlying zone
• Screening or landscaping around the structure is required (Sec. 8.1-6 for Buffers does not
apply)
• A curb cut and designated parking area should be provided if no on-site or on-street parking.
c. Larger Facilities/Buildings.
• Provide a setback of 100 feet to the property line if the facility is in or adjacent to residential
districts.
• All other requirements of zoning, including landscaping and buffers, must be met.
• Parking must be provided to adequately serve the intended use of the facility or building, as
determined by the Zoning Official
5.1-13 VEHICLE & HEAVY EQUIPMENT
5.1-13.A Fuel Dispensing Station
Conditions apply in the following zoning districts: CN, CR, MTC, MVC, IM, IG
A Fuel Dispensing Station ONLY to service boats is allowed in the WW with a Special Permit (not subject to the
following Conditions).
1. Setbacks: All pumps or other devices for the dispensing of fuel must be located not less than 25 feet
from any front lot line and will adhere to the other setbacks for the underlying zoning district.
2. Canopy: Fueling areas must be covered with a canopy. The canopy must not drain into the fueling
area. All such canopies will be located not less than 15 feet from a front lot line. In order to reduce the
visual impact of the canopy structure and corresponding lighting, the maximum height of the canopy
will be 20 feet, the maximum width of the canopy fascia will be 30 inches, and any lighting will be from
the underside of the canopy. The canopy fascia must not be illuminated, except for allowed signage.
3. Containment: Concrete pads at fuel dispensing stations must have containment grooves that can
trap and facilitate the recovery of spilled gasoline or other hazardous materials, and these groves must
be covered by the canopy.
4. Access/Circulation: The intent of the specific access and circulation standards below is to ensure
safe and convenient internal circulation and access to and from the site, while minimizing the negative
visual impact of multiple curb cuts, discontinuous landscape, and excessive pavement.
a. No more than two (2) driveway access points are allowed for each fueling station, regardless of the
length or number of street frontages. Within integrated developments, shared access driveways
are preferred.
b. The internal circulation system must allow for vehicle stacking without blocking ingress and egress
on and off the site.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 5-47
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
5.1-13.B Marine Craft and Equipment Display and Sales
Conditions apply in the following zoning districts: MVC
The display and sales of marine craft and equipment is permitted subject to the following conditions when
located in MVC districts:
1. Location of Display: All displays must be in the side or rear yard and must not be located in the front
yard.
2. Repairs and Maintenance: Any minor repair or routine maintenance must be conducted inside the
building. Major repairs are not allowed.
5.1-13.C Vehicle Repair and Service, Minor
Conditions apply in the following zoning districts: CN, MTC, MVC
Minor vehicle repair and service are permitted subject to the following conditions when located in CN, MVC
or MTC districts:
1. Vehicular Access: Vehicular access into the building should be positioned so as not to be visible from
the public way.
2. Repair Activities: Limited repair activities must be conducted within the principal building and not
consist of any work defined herein as major vehicle repair and service.
3. Location: When located in a shopping center or co-located with a group of commercial structures on
the same lot, the use should be located to the side or rear of these commercial buildings.
4. Storage: All materials must be stored within the building. Vehicles that are not actively under repair
or vehicles that are used as a source for parts must not be stored on the site.
5.1-13.D Vehicle Washing Facility
Conditions apply in the following zoning districts: CN, CR, MTC, IM, IG
Automobile washing facilities are permitted subject to the following conditions:
1. Minimum Lot Size: For self-service type facilities: 25,000 SF. For automatic facilities: 35,000 SF.
2. Automobile Access: Automobile access into the building should be positioned so as not to be visible
from the public way.
3. Water Recycling: Water should be recycled on site.
4. Stacking Spaces: Adequate vehicle stacking space must be provided for all car wash facilities. For
self-service facilities: minimum of three (3) vehicles per bay at the entrance and one (1) vehicle per
bay at the exit. For automatic washing facilities: minimum of five (5) vehicles per bay at the entrance
and two (2) vehicles per bay at the exit, or one (1) vehicle per bay at the exit if the facility includes
automatic drying and no additional manual services past the exit.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 5-48
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
5. Water and Sewer: Public water and sewers must be provided to the facility.
6. Building Surfaces: Building surfaces should be faced with impact resistant materials such as brick or
other masonry surfaces.
7. Vacuuming Facilities: Vacuuming facilities may be outside the building but must not be located
within the front yard and must meet setback requirements if adjacent to a residential district
8. Storage: All storage must take place indoors, and any work materials such as racks, towels, etc. used
outdoors during business hours must be moved indoors during non-business hours.
9. Waiting Areas: All non-self-service facilities must have a safe waiting area for patrons, separated
from the stacking lanes and work areas.
5.1-14 STANDARDS FOR NON-RESIDENTIAL USES IN THE RU
ZONING DISTRICTS
The standards below apply to any non-residential use permitted in an RU zoning district. Where there are
conflicts with any standards for a particular use per Section 5, Use Standards, the stricter applies.
1. Retail Sales: Any retail sales are clearly subordinate to the primary use.
2. Hours of Operation and Deliveries: With the exception of Town of Groton services and Hospital
emergency rooms, no earlier than 7:00 a.m. and no later than 10:00 p.m.
3. Lighting: Outdoor lighting at the proposed facility must not spill over beyond the site’s property lines
and should be the minimum intensity necessary to adequately and safely light the facility and its
parking lot and access drives.
4. Outdoor Storage, Sales, and Display: Except for Town of Groton services, Commercial Nurseries
and Greenhouses, and Agricultural uses, outdoor storage, sales, and display are prohibited.
5. Parking: Any non-residential use in an RU zoning district will follow the parking requirements of
Section 8.2, Off-Street Parking and Loading, Bike Parking. Parking for any special event, class or other
such gathering that attracts more than the usual number of customers must be accommodated on site,
and must not spill over into the surrounding neighborhood, unless a specific parking plan is approved
by the Town through a site plan application process for the event.
6. Temporary Events: Any non-residential use in the RU district that hosts a temporary event is limited
to six (6) temporary events in any calendar year and must meet the requirements of Section 5.1-3.H.
7. Environmental Performance Standards: All non-residential uses, wherever they are located, are
also subject to Section 7.4, Environmental Performance Standards.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 6-1
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
SECTION 6: SPECIAL DISTRICTS AND
DEVELO PMENT OPTIONS
6.1 Coastal Area Management (CAM) Boundary
6.1-1 Applicability
The following requirements apply to all lots within the Town of Groton designated Coastal Area Management
(CAM) Boundary, as adopted.
Within the CAM Boundary, Chapter 444, Section 22a-93 of the Connecticut General Statutes will be followed
for all definitions not specifically listed in these regulations.
6.1-2 Coastal Site Plan
All activities or development within the CAM Boundary are subject to the requirements of Section 9.5-5,
Coastal Site Plan Review and to the requirements of Chapter 444, Sections 22a-90 through 22a-113 of the
Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
In addition to the requirements of Section 9.5-1, shoreline flood and erosion control structures require a
referral to the Land and Water Resource Division of CT DEEP.
6.1-3 Coastal Resource Setback
New development of the following types are not permitted within 50 feet of any of the following Coastal
Resource Areas, as defined by Chapter 444, Section 22a-93 of the Connecticut General Statutes and as shown
on a map entitled “Coastal Area Management Resource Map”: coastal waters, tidal wetlands, coastal bluffs,
escarpments, beaches or dunes:
• New building construction, including minor additions to or modifications of existing buildings
• Accessory buildings or structures, such as garages, utility sheds, in-ground and above ground pools,
and tennis or other courts
• Driveways, parking lots, and utility areas
This Section 6.1-3 Coastal Resource Setback does not apply to the Mystic Downtown District (MDD) where
Section 3.3-2.B.2.a applies, or to water-dependent uses as defined by Chapter 444, Section 22a-93 of the
Connecticut General Statutes.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 6-2
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
6.2 Historic /Institutional Reuse
Special Permit Required
6.2-1 Purpose
The purpose of this provision is to provide reuse opportunities for existing buildings that have historic,
architectural or aesthetic significance. These structures constitute a significant element in the visual historic
character of the community and therefore priority is put on their preservation and restoration.
6.2-2 Applicability
In order to utilize this provision, facilities need to be located on lots two acres or more in size; have historically
provided educational and/or other institutional uses to the community and/or neighborhood; and have been
most recently owned by the town and/or other institutional users.
6.2-3 Reuse Options
Reuse options for these facilities may be in addition to those permitted by the underlying zoning classification
only when it is determined by the PZC, through its special permit process, to be necessary to accomplish
the objectives and intent of this section. Proposed reuse options include residential, educational, cultural,
community, and/or other similar uses deemed appropriate by the PZC. The PZC may employ bulk and density
standards that are appropriate to the building and site conditions. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary,
the bulk and density standards contained in Table 4.2 of these regulations apply to one-unit, two-unit, and
multi-unit dwellings based upon the zoning district in which the facility is located.
6.2-4 Evaluation Criteria
In evaluating the appropriateness of the proposed new use, the PZC, in addition to the special permit criteria,
should consider the following items among others: the historic use of the site during its institutional use;
the character of the surrounding area; the topography of the area; the bulk of the buildings existing on the
site; and the extent of the benefit to the welfare of the community to be derived by preserving the existing
aesthetic appearance of the site.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 6-3
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
6.3 Open Space Subdivisions
6.3-1 Purpose Development under this provision is optional and is intended to promote imaginative, well designed
subdivisions which preserve open space, respect the physical qualities of the land, and reduce the overall
development and long-term maintenance costs of a subdivision.
The PZC has the authority to approve residential Open Space Subdivisions in the RS, R, and RU districts per the
Town’s Subdivision Regulations, provided the following conditions are met:
6.3-2 Land Area The minimum land area required for an Open Space Subdivision is 20 acres.
6.3-3 Permitted Dwelling Units The possible maximum number of dwelling units permitted in the Open Space Subdivision is determined per
Section 4.2-3 Residential Density calculations.
6.3-4 Permitted Uses All residential uses permitted in the underlying zoning district are permitted uses in an open space subdivision,
where lot area is provided as required below.
6.3-5 Minimum Lot Area In an Open Space Subdivision, the minimum lot area per dwelling and the minimum useable lot are determined
by the following table. In the context of an Open Space Subdivision, minimum usable lot area is defined as the
minimum lot area minus any wetlands, watercourses, and steep slopes in excess of 25% as defined by these
regulations. The minimum usable lot area must be contiguous.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 6-4
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
No development of land under this section shall take place unless the land is in fact subdivided into lots with
each structure having a separate lot described on an approved subdivision plan.
6.3-6 Dimensional and Building Requirements The following standards will apply to all proposed and future development within an open space subdivision
approved by the PZC under this Section.
6.3-6.A Minimum Required Yard Setback
1. Minimum Front Yard: 20 feet. Porches are allowed if in compliance with the underlying zoning
district.
2. Minimum Side Yard: 10 feet
3. Minimum Rear Yard: 25 feet
Table 6.3 – Minimum Lot Area for Open Space Subdivisions
Minimum Useable Lot Area
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 6-5
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
6.3-6.B Lot Frontage
Lot frontage shall be provided pursuant to Table 4.2 of these regulations.
6.3-6.C Minimum Lot Width
1. R-7, R-12, RS-12: 50 feet
2. RS-20, RU-20:
a. 25% of lots: 70 feet
b. Other 75% of lots: 50 feet
3. RU-40, RU-80:
a. 25% of lots: 80 feet
b. Other 75% of lots: 50 feet
6.3-6.D Maximum Building Coverage
30%.
6.3-7 Open Space Lands At least 20% of the gross area of the Open Space Subdivision shall be designated as common open space. The
plan shall provide for open space lands in a location deemed suitable by the PZC as per the Town of Groton
Subdivision Regulations.
6.3-8 Utilities The subdivision must connect to a municipal or public water and sewer system that has the capacity to serve
the proposed development.
6.3-9 Design Requirements
In addition to the site plan objectives set forth in Section 9.5, an Open Space Subdivision shall comply with the
following specific design requirements:
6.3-9.A Architectural Variety
Within the subdivision, a variety of architectural styles must be constructed.
6.3-9.B Foundation Plantings
A minimum of six (6) foundation plantings must be provided on each lot.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 6-6
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
6.3-9.C Shade Trees
Shade trees, in accordance with the specifications of Section 8.1, must be provided along all streets. Removal
of existing trees on a lot should be minimized. A minimum of one (1) shade tree is required to be planted along
a side or rear property line if all trees are removed along the corresponding side or rear property line.
6.3-9.D Driveways
Driveways must be paved or covered with a surface of crushed stone or equal material compacted to a depth
of 4 inches and must meet the driveway standards of Section 8.2-12.
6.3-9.E Garages
Garages should be set behind the front façade of the dwelling unit.
6.3-9.F Drainage Plans
Drainage plans must address proper drainage between lots (cross-lot drainage). The need for private drainage
easements should be minimized.
6.3-9.G Grading Plans
Grading plans should minimize elevation changes between lots and the need for retaining walls.
6.3-9.H Design for Visitability
In any Open Space Subdivision, dwelling units are encouraged to be developed to incorporate the three
“visitable” features defined in Section 29-269 of the Connecticut General Statutes:
1. Interior doorways that provide a minimum 32-inch-wide unobstructed opening;
2. An accessible means of egress, as defined in Appendix A to 28 C.F.R. Part 36, including a ramp complying
with the International Residential Code portion of the State Building Code intending to allow access by
a wheelchair; and
3. A full or half bathroom on the first floor that is compliant with the provisions of the Americans with
Disabilities Act of 1990, as amended, 42 USC 12101.
6.3-10 Common Area Maintenance
Open Space Subdivisions are required to implement a mechanism that ensures the continued care and
maintenance of open space lands, per the Town of Groton’s Subdivision Regulations.
6.3-11 Zoning Map
Approval of an Open Space Subdivision will be referenced on the Town of Groton’s Open Space Subdivision
Map. All approved Open Space Subdivisions will be identified and marked on the map for the purpose of
knowing in the future which development standards, including dimensional and building standards, apply.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 6-7
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
6.4 Water Resourc e Protection District
6.4-1 Statement of Intent Creation of this district is essential to protect drinking water supply sources in the Town and is supported
by Connecticut General Statutes 8-2 and 8-23(d). As ground waters and surface waters have been shown to
be easily, and in many cases, irrevocably contaminated by many common land uses, it is imperative that all
reasonable controls over land use, waste disposal, and material storage be exercised within this district. This
district is designed to protect existing and future water supply resources including extensive stratified drift
aquifers, surface water reservoirs, and areas of future water supply.
If there is a conflict between this Section 6.4 and any other Section of the Zoning Regulations, Section 6.4 takes
precedence for land within the Water Resource Protection District (WRPD).
6.4-2 Establishment of District The Water Resource Protection District (WRPD) is established as an overlay district. The boundaries of this
district are those shown on the map entitled Town of Groton Zoning on file with the Town Clerk and the Office
of Planning and Development Services. The district includes all land over and upgradient of the current and
future water supply resources as defined by the watershed drainage boundaries.
6.4-3 Divided Lots and Determination of Applicability
6.4-3.A Applicability
If the boundary line of the WRPD divides a lot or parcel, the requirements established by this regulation apply
only to the portion of the lot or parcel located within the WRPD.
6.4-3.B Separation
Where a lot is divided by the WRPD boundary line, applicants must demonstrate, through the use of site plans,
that development activity outside of the boundary will not be connected to land within the boundary in such a
way that could lead to the contamination of groundwater, wetlands, or watercourses within the WRPD.
6.4-3.C Determination of Applicability
If an applicant questions the accuracy of the WRPD boundary as shown on the Zoning Map, the applicant may
request an interpretation of the map from the Zoning Official per section 3.8 or may apply to amend the zoning
map per section 9.3 of these regulations.
6.4-3.D Application
Where an applicant files for a zoning map change to move the WRPD boundary, the burden of proof is on
the applicant to demonstrate an error or omission on the zoning map. An application shall be submitted
in accordance with the process for Zoning Amendments in Section 9.3 and must include a plan signed by a
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 6-8
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
professional engineer or State of Connecticut registered Land Surveyor. The plan(s) will be used to accurately
determine the boundaries of the district with respect to individual parcels of land and must include the
following information.
1. General Plan Information:
a. Name and address of the applicant and current owner as listed on the Town’s tax rolls.
b. Date, north arrow, and numerical and graphical scale on each map.
c. The property address and/or parcel identification number.
d. Location Map.
2. Vicinity Map: Applications must include an accurate scale vicinity map showing the subject property
and all property and streets within 1,000 feet of any part of the subject property, and the following
information:
a. All lots and lot lines.
b. All zoning district boundaries including the WRPD.
c. All existing streets and roads with associated names.
3. Proposed WRPD Boundary Plan: Plan(s) must be prepared at the extent and scale required to
demonstrate the justification for a determination of applicability and must include the following
information within 200 feet from the boundary of the subject property:
a. Existing and proposed WRPD boundary lines.
b. Topography field survey information shown with a minimum of two-foot contours and with details
necessary to support requested modification.
c. Arrows indicating the direction of overland flow that demonstrate the need to adjust the
applicability of the WRPD on the subject site.
d. All existing drainage structures and direction of stormwater flow.
6.4-4 Use Regulations
6.4-4.A Allowed Uses
Allowable uses within the WRPD are all those listed as allowed in the underlying zone in the Table of Permitted
Uses per Section 4.1 of these regulations that do NOT have any WRPD prohibitions or specific conditions
associated with the use.
All development, re-development, or expansion of allowable uses within the WRPD is required to meet the
General Performance Standards for:
• Erosion and Sediment Control (6.4-5)
• Stormwater Management (6.4-6)
• Site Design (6.4-7)
• Hazardous Materials (6.4-8)
6.4-4.B Exempt Uses and Activities
The following uses and activities are specifically exempt from the General Performance Standards related to
the WRPD overlay district, contained in sections 6.4-5 through 6.4-8.
1. Pollution Treatment Facilities: Pollution treatment facilities exclusively designed for the temporary
treatment of contaminated ground water, wetlands, or watercourses.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 6-9
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
2. Water Control Devices: Normal operation and maintenance by water companies (as defined by CGS
16-1) of existing watercourses and dams, and other water control, supply and conservation devices
related to reservoirs and public drinking water supply.
3. Drinking Water Supply Facilities: Construction, maintenance, repair, and enlargement of ancillary
drinking water supply related facilities such as, but not limited to, wells, pipelines, aqueducts, and
tunnels. This exemption does not include new or expanded buildings, parking lots, or facility site
construction activities.
4. One- and Two-Unit Dwellings: The construction of one-unit or two-unit dwellings, either within a
subdivision or on lots not subject to subdivision review.
6.4-4.C Prohibited Uses and Activities
1. Categorical Prohibited Activities: The following activities are prohibited in the WRPD across any
and all use categories, including exempt uses and activities listed in Section 6.4-4.B:
a. The establishment of any industrial, commercial, or other enterprise in which the manufacture,
use, storage, transport, process or disposal of hazardous material is a principal activity.
b. Discharge to the ground, watercourse, or wetlands of non-sanitary or significantly heated
wastewater including industrial and commercial process wastewater, unless specifically exempt
for temporary treatment of contaminated ground water, wetlands or watercourses.
c. Establishment of septic processing and other waste treatment lagoons.
d. The application of sodium chloride for the removal of snow or ice on roads, parking areas,
sidewalks, or any other surface is prohibited with the WRPD.
e. Outdoor stockpiling of sodium chloride, calcium chloride, chemically treated abrasives, or other
chemicals used for the removal of snow or ice on roads is prohibited. Such storage is only allowed
by a public agency in a secure, watertight structure with an impervious floor.
f. Stockpiling or disposal of snow or ice containing sodium chloride, calcium chloride, chemically
treated abrasives or other chemicals used for the removal of snow or ice on roads which has been
removed from highways and streets located outside of the WRPD.
2. Prohibited Uses: Uses specifically prohibited in the WRPD are listed in Table 6.4.
6.4-4.D Conditional Uses
Table 6.4 lists uses that are allowed in the WRPD if certain conditions are met and that use is also allowed
in the underlying zoning district. These conditions may require that the use be connected to a municipal
sewer line or that specific conditions as listed in Section 6.4-9 for each use can be met. All development,
re-development, or expansion of conditional uses within the WRPD is also required to meet the General
Performance Standards for:
• Erosion and Sediment Control (6.4-5)
• Stormwater Management (6.4-6)
• Site Design (6.4-7)
• Hazardous Materials (6.4-8)
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 6-10
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
Table 6.4: WRPD Prohibited Uses and Uses with Specific Conditions
Key: S = Use Allowed if connected to a municipal sewer line
C = Use Allowed with Specific Conditions (See Section 6.4-9 for Conditions)
X = Use Prohibited
A = Permitted as an Accessory for an Allowed Use (Conditions Still Apply)
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 6-11
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 6-12
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 6-13
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 6-14
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 6-15
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
6.4-5 Erosion and Sediment Control Performance  		St andards
All uses and activities within the WRPD must comply with the following performance standards unless
specifically exempt under Section 6.4-4.B.
6.4-5.A Large Scale Disturbances
The requirements of Section 7.1 Erosion and Sediment (E&S) Control Plan apply to any proposed construction
activity that will disturb more than 2,000 square feet of a site.
6.4-5.B Small Scale Disturbances
If an applicant proposes to disturb 2,000 square feet of land or less, the applicant must specify the manner in
which E&S controls will be used during construction through Site Plan Review. The Town will approve these
measures where site plans show E&S control measures located appropriately and where the selection of best
management practices is consistent with the Measure Selection Matrix provided in the 2002 Connecticut
Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control (as amended). (See Appendix A.1)
6.4-6 Stormwater Management
All uses and activities within the WRPD must comply with the following performance standards unless
specifically exempt under Section 6.4-4.B.
6.4-6.A Stormwater Management Objectives
The Town of Groton herein requires stormwater management practices for the WRPD specifically designed
and maintained to achieve the following objectives:
1. Best Management Practices: To achieve the pre-construction hydrologic conditions on-site through
the use of stormwater Best Management Practices (BMPs) to the maximum extent practicable.
2. Watercourses and Wetlands: To minimize impacts to the quality of watercourses and wetlands
within the WRPD.
3. Ground Water: To minimize impacts to the quality of ground water within the WRPD.
6.4-6.B New Development and Redevelopment/Expansion
1. New Development: All new development must conform in its entirety with the standards and
requirements provided in Subsections 6.4-6.C, 6.4-6.D and 6.4-6.E, below. If 75% or more of a
previously developed area of a site is disturbed, the site will be considered “new development” for
compliance with this Section 6.4-6.
2. Redevelopment or Expansion: The redevelopment or expansion of an existing site must comply
with the standards below.
a. New Impervious Cover: All new impervious cover on the site must meet the standards and
requirements for new development in Subsections 6.4-6.C, 6.4-6.D and 6.4-6.E.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 6-16
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
b. Existing Impervious Cover: If the redevelopment or expansion of the site results in more than a
20% increase in impervious cover the existing impervious surface:
• Must comply with all standards and requirements in Subsection 6.4-7.C. 2,3&4.
• Should also comply with Subsection 6.4-7.D to the extent practicable and the applicant
should demonstrate how the water quality treatment of the existing impervious cover may
be increased.
6.4-6.C Runoff Discharge
1. Peak Rate of Runoff: Stormwater management systems must be designed to ensure there is no net
increase in the peak rate of runoff over pre-developed conditions for the 1, 2, 5, 10, and 25-year storms.
2. Underground Drywells/Leaching Trenches: The use of underground drywells or leaching trenches
for stormwater from all areas is prohibited except from rooftops in conformance with Section 6.4-7.D.
3. Stormwater Discharges from Rooftops: Stormwater discharges from rooftops must not be directed
to impervious surfaces. The stormwater must discharge to the ground or to other stormwater facilities
in compliance with section 6.4-7.D.
4. Site Plans: Site Plans must identify the wetlands, watercourses, and sensitive WRPD surface waters
that directly receive stormwater runoff from the site predevelopment. All stormwater must be
directed to the same wetland or watercourse system that received the stormwater in predevelopment
conditions to the greatest extent practicable. The intent is to ensure development does not redirect
water to different wetlands and watercourses, and that the wetlands and watercourses reliant on
recharge from the site remain healthy. Applicants shall bear the burden of proof that site design and
stormwater management practices maintain the hydrologic budget and discharge rates to wetlands
and watercourses to the maximum extent practicable. Applicants shall not be allowed to redirect any
discharge of stormwater from the WRPD to areas outside of the WRPD.
5. Termination of Stormwater Discharges: Stormwater discharges must terminate at least 100’ from
all sensitive WRPD surface waters and their directly adjacent wetlands in the watershed, unless a
modification is approved by the PZC due to the geometry of the lot, topographic conditions, or other
physical constraints and where the applicant can clearly demonstrate that this reduction complies
with other stormwater management standards and is consistent with the stormwater management
objectives of the WRPD.
6.4-6.D Water Quality Treatment
1. Best Management Practices: Stormwater discharges to wetlands or watercourses must be treated
first by a sequence of Best Management Practices (BMPs) and/or Best Available Technologies (BATs)
designed to remove 85% of total suspended solids, 30% of phosphorous and 30% of nitrogen from
runoff generated from the first inch of rainfall. Pollutant removal efficiencies will be determined using
Appendix A.2 of the Zoning Regulations and compliance information must be submitted with the
application. Where proprietary structural BMPs are proposed, performance data for those BMPs must
be submitted as part of an application and must be approved by the Town.
2. Separators: Grease, oil, and other floating liquid/solid separators must be incorporated into the
stormwater management system for all impervious parking lots and for any other areas of the site
that have a piped stormwater system and the potential for such pollution.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 6-17
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
3. Drainage Design: Unless otherwise specified in Section 6.4-9 (Conditions for Specific Uses), the drainage
design must maximize overland flow of stormwater prior to discharge to wetlands or watercourses. This
may be accomplished by the elimination of curbing, provision of leak-offs, the use of grassed swales and/
or use of other best management practices to promote stormwater renovation, reduce point discharges,
and reduce the discharge of heavy metals and nutrients. Vegetated stormwater best management
practices (consistent with the guidance provided in the 2004 Connecticut Stormwater Quality Manual,
as amended) shall be integrated into the treatment sequence to the maximum extent practicable.
4. Sodium Chloride: The application of sodium chloride for the removal of snow or ice on roads, parking
areas, sidewalks, or any other surface is prohibited within the WRPD and should be noted on all plans.
6.4-6.E Selection of BMPs
Stormwater management facilities must be selected to meet the Stormwater Management Objectives listed in
Subsection 6.4-6.A above, and to achieve compliance with Subsections 6.4-6.B through 6.4-6.D. The selection
and design of stormwater management practices must be consistent with the guidance provided in the 2004
Connecticut Stormwater Quality Manual, as amended, particularly including all criteria for water supply
aquifers. The project narrative must explain how and why the BMPs were selected and evaluate consistency
with the following sections of the 2004 Connecticut Stormwater Quality Manual (Appendix A.3):
1. Stormwater Management Effectiveness (Table 8-1, Pg 8-3)
2. Land Use Selection (Table 8-2, Pg 8-4)
3. Physical Feasibility (Table 8-3, Pg 8-7)
4. Downstream Resource (Table 8-4, Pgs 8-8 & 8-9)
6.4-7 Site Design
All lots within the WRPD are subject to the following site design standards unless the use is specifically
exempt under Section 6.4-4.B. Specifically, for this subsection, in the instances where the underlying zone
requirements are different, the more stringent will apply.
6.4-7.A Impervious/Pervious Surface
1. Maximum Coverage: Total impervious surface area must not exceed 70% of total lot area.
2. Pervious Surfaces: Pervious pavement, porous asphalt, gravel surfaces or other similar practices
must not be used except for the following circumstances.
a. Areas used exclusively for pedestrian traffic or activities, or for non-motorized vehicles.
b. Town-owned parks, recreation, and school sport facilities.
c. Parking lots with ten or fewer parking spaces.
6.4-7.B Vegetated Area
1. New Development: On newly developed sites, a minimum of 20% of total lot area must be retained
in its natural state with no more than minor removal of existing trees and vegetation in accordance
with the criteria below.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 6-18
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
a. Disturbance of Vegetated Area: Areas within this 20% minimum that should not be disturbed
include 100-year flood plains, slopes in excess of 25 percent, and non-disturbance areas for
sensitive WRPD surface waters and their directly adjacent wetlands. An applicant may propose
minor disturbance or removal of existing vegetation in the area retained in its natural state where
damaged or dead vegetation is present in significant quantity, where the removal/management
of invasive or otherwise harmful plant species is proposed, or where limited disturbance, clearing,
pruning, or similar activities will improve the health and condition of vegetation left in place. A
revegetation plan that specifies native plants, to the extent practicable, and non-invasive plants is
required where any removal of vegetation is proposed.
b. Landscape and Buffer Requirements: All lots must comply with the landscaping, screening, and
buffer standards of Section 8.1. Areas used for the buffering required by Section 8.1-6 may count
toward the 20% vegetated minimum required within the WRPD so long as they are left in their
natural state, as described above, and meet Section 8.1-6.C. Areas used to meet the requirements
of Sections 8.1-3 through 8.1-4 for front yards and Section 8.1-5 for parking areas, including all
lawns, manicured plantings, new trees, planter boxes, and other such landscaping, may not count
toward the 20% vegetated minimum.
c. Restoration: On those sites where previous land disturbance has occurred, this 20% minimum
may include restored land that is re-vegetated with non-invasive plant species appropriate for the
site and soil conditions in keeping with the intent of this regulation.
2. Existing Development:
a. Sites with existing development where at least 20% of the area is in a natural state or suitable
for restoration must comply with the requirements for vegetated area for new development in
Section 6-4.7.B.1.
b. Sites with existing development where currently less than 20 % of the area is in a natural state or
suitable for restoration must comply with the following:
• There must be no decrease in the amount of landscaped or naturally vegetated area currently
on the site.
• A restoration and landscape plan must be submitted that addresses removal of invasive
species and re-vegetation with native species, to the extent practicable, and enhancement
of all existing landscaped areas and natural areas with additional plantings and with best
management and technology practices that use site stormwater for enrichment of these areas.
6.4-7.C Non-Disturbance Area
A minimum 100-foot non-disturbance area must be maintained between sensitive WRPD surface waters and
their directly adjacent wetlands and the developed land area. This non-disturbance area shall be measured
from the edge of the sensitive WRPD surface water or from the edge of its directly adjacent wetland, whichever
provides a greater area of non-disturbance.
1. Modification or Reduction: A modification or reduction of this 100-foot non-disturbance area may
be requested by the applicant in either of the following circumstances:
a. Where the placement of the 100-ft non-disturbance area on a lot would cause the developable
portion of the lot to be reduced to 75% or less of the lot area, the non-disturbance area may be
reduced to 50-feet in width. (For this section, the developable portion of the lot is measured by
subtracting the sensitive WRPD surface water, the associated wetlands, and the non-disturbance
area from the lot area).
b. Where significant topographic, vegetative, or other natural resource irregularity exists along the
sensitive WRPD surface water and directly adjacent wetland boundary, the non-disturbance area
may be modified or reduced by the PZC to less than the 100-ft in width or the modified 50-ft width
as described in 6.4-7.C.1.a.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 6-19
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
The applicant must identify and justify specific site design measures that will minimize the impact
of a modified or reduced non-disturbance area. The PZC must find that the proposed modified
design measures will provide substantially the same protection of the WRPD resources as would
have been provided by the required non-disturbance area.
Possible modified site design measures may include, but are not limited to the following:
• Direct site drainage away from these areas through the use of grading, berms, under drains,
swales or other conveyance structures, as long as compliance with Section 6.4-6.C.4 is
maintained,
• Increase non-disturbance areas in other sections along the sensitive WRPD surface water
and directly adjacent wetland boundary where such an increase is likely to better protect the
water resource, or
• Enhance the proposed non-disturbance area with native and non-invasive plantings that can
be demonstrated to better capture and filter runoff.
•
2. Septic System: All components of on-site septic systems, including septic reserve areas, must be
located 100 feet from the edge of any sensitive WRPD surface waters and their directly adjacent
wetlands.
3. Pre-Existing Access Ways or Development:
a. Access Ways: The required non-disturbance area may be encroached upon where pre-existing
access ways will remain in use and/or require maintenance and/or improvements to meet or
maintain the minimum road safety standards for the type of road (private, local, state or federal).
b. Development: Pre-existing lawful development is allowed to remain and be maintained in
the required non-disturbance area. Enlargement of the development is not allowed with the
exception that a stormwater management system, to treat existing impervious surface in this nondisturbance
area, shall be allowed if no other treatment alternative is practical outside of this
non-disturbance area.
4. Inland Wetlands and Watercourses: Nothing in this Section diminishes an applicant’s separate
responsibility for addressing CGS Sections 22a-36 to 22a-45 for inland wetlands and watercourses, and
the Town’s Inland Wetlands Regulations.
6.4-7.D Equipment
Equipment for heating, ventilation, air conditioning (HVAC) or other similar functions must provide containment
for any liquid or solid hazardous materials associated with this equipment
6.4-7.E Solid Waste Storage, Non-Hazardous
Accessory storage of solid waste (including but not limited to dumpsters), must be done according to the
following standards:
1. Design of Storage Containers: Solid waste storage must occur within a building, structure, or a
container with an impermeable cover and designed to prevent the generation of contaminated runoff
or leachate. All dumpsters must be leak-tight with tight fitting lids and doors. Kitchen and restaurant
wastes (e.g. fats, oils, and grease) must be disposed of in special recycling containers that prevent
contents from coming into contact with stormwater runoff.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 6-20
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
2. Design of Environment around Storage Containers: Containers must be on an impervious
surface such as a concrete pad and located away from the stormwater system catch basins. A locked
fence around the dumpster is also recommended, when practical. Rainwater surface runoff near the
dumpster must not flow toward any stormwater system catch basins.
3. Maintenance of Storage Containers: Dumpsters or other waste receptacles must not be washed
or hosed out, unless a diversion drain is installed to divert dumpster wash water into a sanitary sewer.
Lids, doors, and drain plugs must be kept closed and locked to prevent access by rainwater, animals,
and unauthorized users as well as discharge from the container.
6.4-8 Hazardous Materials
6.4-8.A Hazardous Materials – Incidental
1. Materials: The following use of hazardous materials is considered incidental in the WRPD:
a. Cleaning Agents: household hazardous materials in prepackaged original containers used for
cleaning and maintenance of the site and not used in any processing or manufacturing or for any
other uses on the site.
b. Retail Sales: household hazardous materials that are for retail sale and are kept in prepackaged
original containers of a typical size for household use.
2. Requirements: The incidental use of hazardous materials in the WRPD must meet the following
requirements:
a. Hazardous Materials must be sold and/or stored within an enclosed building on an impermeable
surface.
b. The area where hazardous materials are sold and/or stored must meet the requirements of
Section 6.4-8.B.4 for floor drains.
c. A spill containment kit(s), sign(s), and information for spill response procedures must be provided
within the retail areas and storage areas where hazardous materials are located. Information for
typical spill containment kits, signs, and spill response procedures may be found in Appendix A.4.
d. A Large-Scale Retail use must also meet the requirements of Section 6.4-8.B.6 for Loading/Transfer
Areas.
6.4-8.B Hazardous Materials – Non-Incidental
Any other use, storage, or production of Hazardous Materials in the WRPD is considered non-incidental and
must comply with the following standards:
1. Enclosed Building: Hazardous materials must be used and stored within an enclosed building.
(Exception: See Outdoor Storage Yards for Nurseries, Greenhouses and Garden Supply Stores in
Section 6.4-9.B.2)
2. Floor Surface: The floor where hazardous materials and/or waste are used or stored must be
impermeable and constructed or treated to protect the surface of the floor from deterioration due to
spillage of any such material.
3. Containment: Hazardous materials must be stored within an impermeable containment area which
is capable of containing at least 110 % of the volume of the largest container of hazardous material
present in such an area or 10% of the total volume of all such containers in such area, whichever is
larger, without overflow of released hazardous material from the containment area. Containment
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 6-21
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
measures may include dikes, sumps, doorway lips, or similar structures to inhibit the ability of spilled
material to pass through the opening.
4. Floor Drains: Floor drains are not allowed in areas where hazardous materials are sold, used, or
stored unless the site design shows specific compliance with the following:
a. Floor drains must connect to the sanitary sewer system or to an on-site holding tank or tanks when
the discharge contains petroleum-based oil, grease or other harmful or hazardous substances.
Such tanks must have a 1,000 gallon minimum capacity and be installed in accordance with RCSA
§22a-449(d)-1.
b. Interceptors and separators must be provided when floor drains connect to the sanitary sewer
system.
c. Floor drains must not be connected to a storm sewer, a storm drainage system or a storm building
drain.
d. Floor drains must have trap seals.
e. Floor drains that only accept animal fecal waste and first discharge into a settling tank prior to
release into a septic system may be allowed.
f. Floor drains allowed by CT DEEP (in accordance with the “Non-Stormwater Discharges” section
of a General Permit for the Discharge of Stormwater Associated with Industrial Activity) shall be
allowed.
5. Discharge: Discharge of production wastewater or any wastewater that may contain hazardous
materials must meet the following requirements:
a. All wastewater generated by the use is lawfully disposed through a municipal sewer system.
b. If there is no sewer system the following must be met:
• A zero discharge/closed loop system must be employed where possible and where required
by Section 6.4-9.B.1.b related to Screen Printing.
• Where such a system is not possible, liquid hazardous materials or waste must be collected
in tight tanks and removed periodically by a licensed professional. The tanks must be above
ground and comply with design and containment standards of this section.
6. Loading/Transfer Areas: Any area that may be used for transfer of hazardous materials must be
designed to prevent contaminated storm water runoff and ground water intrusion. Such loading docks
(excluding those that allow a vehicle to enter the building) must be protected with a permanent roof
or other structure that protects the loading dock from direct rainfall.
Depressed loading docks or other sub-grade facilities must be designed to ensure that hazardous
materials are properly collected and disposed of, using appropriate technology such as oil-water
separators, subsurface tight tanks, or equivalent. Such tanks must have a 1,000-gallon minimum
capacity and be installed in accordance with RCSA §22a-449(d)-1.
7. Security: Hazardous materials must be stored in an area that is secured against unauthorized entry
by the public.
8. Fire Protection: Where a use containing hazardous materials of greater than an incidental amount
(as described in Section 6.4-8.A.1) poses a significant threat to water quality in the event of total loss
of the structure due to fire, fire protection measures are required including, but not limited to, public
water supply, installation of sprinklers, or chemical extinguishers.
9. Materials Management Plan: All facilities must submit to the Town and maintain a Materials
Management Plan that clearly describes the location and methods for the use, storage, recycling and
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 6-22
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
disposal of any hazardous materials on the site. Where any hazardous materials are hauled off-site by
a contractor, the facility shall maintain the name and contact information for that contractor. Examples
of issues to address in a materials management plan may be found in Appendix A.5.
10. Spill Preventions and Response Plan: All facilities must submit to the Town and maintain a
Spill Prevention and Response Plan detailing the measures taken to avoid the unintentional spilling
of any hazardous materials and, in the event a spill does occur, the measures that will be taken to
adequately respond. Examples of issues to address in spill prevention and response plans may be
found in Appendix A.5.
A spill containment kit(s) and signs for spill notification must be provided within areas where hazardous
materials are used and stored (Appendix A.4).
11. Sewer Lines: Where potential exists for sewers to be used for wastes other than domestic
sewerage, or where the sewer line passes through or adjacent to a sensitive resource area including
a watercourse, wetland or stratified drift aquifer, the sewer line shall be constructed to a higher-class
standard to prevent pollution from sewer line failure. Standards shall be determined by the Public
Works Department.
12. Other Requirements: Requirements for hazardous materials are intended to supplement and not
to supersede any other applicable requirements of federal, state or local law, including applicable
requirements of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976.
6.4-8.C Hazardous Materials: Underground Storage Tanks
Underground Storage Tanks (USTs) are not allowed in the WRPD with the exception of the following:
1. Propane Tank: Propane tanks are encouraged to be located above ground, but are allowed to be
placed underground within the WRPD with the following conditions:
a. Underground propane tanks must be designed for underground use and be installed and
maintained according to manufacturer specifications.
b. Underground propane tanks must be designed with cathodic protection or another method to
help prevent tank corrosion.
c. The outer surface of the underground propane tank must have a protective coating and be covered
with a material that will not be harmful to the shell of the tank.
2. Fuel Dispensing Station: Underground tanks for an approved Fuel Dispensing Station are allowed if
design standards in Subsection 6.4-8.C.4 are met.
3. Replacement Tank: For all other uses, no new USTs are allowed, however, the replacement of existing
USTs with the same capacity tank is allowed if the design standards in Subsection 6.4-8.C.4 are met.
4. Design Standards: All new USTs must meet the following design standards:
a. The facility must have an appropriate method of leak detection.
b. Fill-pipes on tanks must have means to collect spills from delivery hoses.
c. The tanks must have overfill protection, such as automatic shutoff devices which activate at 90%
UST capacity and restrict flow during deliveries.
d. Tanks and/or piping installed must be double-walled with continuous interstitial monitoring.
e. These requirements for USTs are intended to supplement and not to supersede any other
applicable requirements of CT’s Underground Storage Tank Regulations.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 6-23
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
6.4-9 Conditions for Specific Uses
6.4-9.A AGRICULTURAL, PLANT, AND ANIMAL
1. Agriculture, Commercial:
a. All Commercial Agriculture uses must meet the 100 foot non-disturbance area requirements of
Section 6.4-7.C. for all crop fields and animal structures/fields/pastures.
b. All outdoor pasture/recreation areas must provide fencing along the non-disturbance area border
to prevent the escape of the animals into watercourses or wetlands.
c. All animal excrement must be properly stored and disposed of, so as not to contaminate nearby
watercourses and wetlands (e.g., composting in enclosed bins or transporting offsite).
2. Kennel, Commercial:
a. Dipping is prohibited outside of the building.
b. Outside runs must be roofed. Outside runs and fenced recreation areas are not allowed in flood
zones and must meet the 100 foot non-disturbance area requirements of Section 6.4-7.C.
c. Excrement must be removed from each run and recreation area at least once daily.
d. Swales or drains are required to direct stormwater away from runs.
e. A list of chemicals and cleaning agents to be used must be provided. Handling of these chemicals
and cleaning agents shall be managed in accordance with Section 6-4.8 for hazardous materials.
3. Nurseries and Greenhouses, Commercial:
(See Outdoor Storage Yards in Section 6.4-9.B.2)
4. Pet Grooming Establishment:
a. A list of chemicals and cleaning agents to be used must be provided. Handling of these chemicals
and cleaning agents shall be managed in accordance with Section 6-4.8 for hazardous materials.
b. Should any activities with animals be conducted outside, they must follow the other conditions for
Commercial Kennels under Section 6.4-9.A.2.
5. Riding or Boarding Stable:
a. All aspects of such uses must meet the 100 foot non-disturbance area requirements of Section
6.4-7.C.
b. Manure must be collected daily then contained and covered. Such manure, temporarily stored prior
to removal off-site, must be covered with a waterproof cover on an impermeable surface to prevent
liquid waste runoff and discharge to the ground. Manure storage areas must be designed to hold all
manure collected prior to disposal and must be located outside of the non-disturbance area.
c. Roof water must be directed away from stable areas.
d. Uncontaminated surface runoff must be directed away from stables, riding arenas, manure storage
areas, and exercise areas.
e. Wash-down and runoff from stables must be directed to adequately designed septic tank systems
or connected to a sewer system.
6. Veterinary Services:
a. A list of chemicals and cleaning agents to be used must be provided. Handling of these chemicals
and cleaning agents shall be managed in accordance with Section 6-4.8 for hazardous materials.
b. Should any activities with animals be conducted outside, they must follow the other conditions for
Commercial Kennels under Section 6.4-9.A.2.
c. Any interior activities producing hazardous or sanitary waste must discharge to sanitary sewers
or, if floor drains are used, must follow the conditions for floor drains found in Section 6.4-8.B.4.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 6-24
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
6.4-9.B INDUSTRIAL
1. Light Industrial:
a. All stormwater runoff must be treated per Section 6-4.6.D.1 before any overland flow over pervious
surfaces.
b. For Screen Printing uses, a zero discharge/closed loop system must be employed.
2. Outdoor Storage Yards:
a. Outdoor Storage Yards as a primary use are prohibited.
b. Allowed uses in the WRPD may include outdoor storage of their products and supplies as an accessory
use, per all other stipulations of these Regulations. Such storage must not include dismantling,
shredding, compressing, or salvaging.
c. Outdoor storage of any hazardous materials, other than as described in Subsection 6.4-9.B.2.d below,
is prohibited.
d. Outdoor storage accessory to nurseries, greenhouses, retail garden supply stores and similar uses or
activities must comply with the following:
• All stormwater runoff must be treated per Section 6-4.6.D.1 before any overland flow over
pervious surfaces.
• Runoff from areas where plants are regularly watered must be recaptured and recycled or directed
to areas where the water will be pre-treated before disposal to mitigate impacts from pesticides,
fertilizers, or other harmful constituents.
• Where such runoff is directed to outdoor stormwater management facilities, the applicant must
demonstrate that the runoff volume and pollutant removal calculations account for the addition
of this source.
• Outdoor storage of hazardous materials is only allowed for bulk storage of fertilizers, pesticides,
herbicides and other similar products. These products must remain in their original package, and
must be stored in a contained area, under permanent cover, and on an impermeable surface with
no floor drains. The storage area must be designed so that any drainage from the area does not
enter the storm drainage system or any wetlands or watercourses.
3. Warehouse and Distribution:
a. No outdoor storage of any kind is allowed.
b. All stormwater runoff must be treated per Section 6-4.6.D.1 before any overland flow over pervious
surfaces.
6.4-9.C TRANSPORTATION, COMMUNICATIONS, AND UTILITIES
1. Transit Stations and Hubs:
a. Passenger train stations are allowed so long as there is no outdoor storage or maintenance of vehicles,
trains, and other equipment.
b. All stormwater runoff must be treated per Section 6-4.6.D.1 before any overland flow over pervious
surfaces.
6.4-9.D VEHICLE & HEAVY EQUIPMENT
1. Construction, Farm & Heavy Equipment Sales:
a. Repair work or changing of fluids must take place inside on impervious floors and is prohibited outside.
Such uses should pay particular attention to Section 6.4-8.B.4 related to floor drains and hazardous
materials.
b. Washing of vehicles or equipment must take place inside with all wash water collected and recycled
onsite and is prohibited outside.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 6-25
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
c. No washing of vehicles is allowed that would allow wash waters to enter any storm drainage
system or surface waters. Rinsing with only plain water (no detergents or chemicals) of vehicles
and equipment is allowed.
d. No more than 50% of the number of vehicles and equipment in the inventory may consist of used
vehicles or equipment.
e. All stormwater runoff must be treated per Section 6-4.6.D.1 before any overland flow over pervious
surfaces.
2. Fuel Dealer:
a. All fuel dealers are prohibited with the exception of those that meet the definition of “Fuel Dealer
without Storage.”
b. All stormwater runoff must be treated per Section 6-4.6.D.1 before any overland flow over
pervious surfaces.
3. Fuel Dispensing Station:
a. Concrete pads at fuel dispensing stations must have containment grooves that can trap and
facilitate the recovery of spilled gasoline or other hazardous materials.
b. Fueling areas must be covered with a roof or canopy to prevent stormwater runoff from washing
away pollutants. The cover must not drain into the fueling area.
c. The area around the fueling island must be graded or curbing installed to prevent stormwater
from flowing onto the area and becoming contaminated.
d. Fueling areas must not be cleaned with water, but with dry methods such as such as spot cleaning
with absorbents or mechanical sweepers.
e. All stormwater runoff must be treated per Section 6-4.6.D.1 before any overland flow over
pervious surfaces.
f. Any Fuel Dispensing Station that also includes Vehicle Service and Repair, Minor must follow the
conditions for that use in addition to these conditions.
4. Marine Craft & Equipment Display and Sales; Vehicle Dealers (New); and Vehicle Repair &
Service, Minor:
a. The facility must be tied in to and use a sewer system.
b. All stormwater runoff must be treated per Section 6-4.6.D.1 before any overland flow over
pervious surfaces.
c. Repair work or changing of fluids must take place inside on impervious floors and is prohibited
outside. Such uses should pay particular attention to Section 6.4-8.B.4 related to floor drains and
hazardous materials.
d. Washing of vehicles or equipment must take place inside with all wash water collected and
recycled onsite and is prohibited outside.
e. No washing of vehicles is allowed that would allow wash waters to enter any storm drainage
system or surface waters. Rinsing with only plain water (no detergents or chemicals) of vehicles at
Vehicle Dealers (New) and marine craft at Marine Craft & Equipment Display and Sales is allowed.
f. No more than 50% of the number of vehicles and equipment in the inventory may consist of used
vehicles or equipment.
5. Vehicle Dealers:
(See Section 6.4-9.D.4. for Marine Craft & Equipment Display and Sales; Vehicle Dealers (New); and
Vehicle Repair & Service, Minor)
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 6-26
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
6. Vehicle Repair & Service, Minor:
(See Section 6.4-9.D.4. for Marine Craft & Equipment Display and Sales; Vehicle Dealers (New); and
Vehicle Repair & Service, Minor)
7. Vehicle Washing Facility:
a. The facility must be tied in to and use a sewer system or all wash water must be collected and
recycled onsite.
b. Washing of vehicles must take place inside and is prohibited outside.
c. No washing of vehicles is allowed that would allow wash waters to enter any storm drainage
system, wetlands, watercourses, or ground waters.
d. All stormwater runoff must be treated per Section 6-4.6.D.1 before any overland flow over
pervious surfaces.
6.4-10 Nonconforming Uses
6.4-10.A Expansion of Prohibited Uses
Any lawfully established use that was made prohibited by the adoption or subsequent amendment of the
WRPD is allowed to expand subject to approval of a special permit and site plan approval by the PZC, or
administrative site plan approval by the Office of Planning and Development Services (OPDS) staff, whichever
is appropriate, and the following conditions:
1. Increase of Expansion: The proposed expansion must not exceed an increase of more than 50% of
the developed area of the parcel previously dedicated to the prohibited use, whether indoor gross
floor area, outdoor developed area, or both.
2. New or Increase in Non-Conformity: The proposed expansion must not create any new dimensional
non-conformity nor increase an existing dimensional non-conformity.
3. Increased Threat: The applicant must demonstrate that the proposed expansion does not pose more
of a threat to the existing or future water supply source than does the existing nonconforming use.
4. Other Requirements: All other requirements contained in the general and/or specific performance
standards of these WRPD regulations must be met by the proposed expansion applied for under this
provision and pose the same or less of a threat to the existing or future water supply source than does
the existing prohibited use due to enhanced employment of best management practices.
6.4-10.B Relocation of Non-Permitted Uses
Any lawfully established use that was made prohibited by the adoption or subsequent amendment of the
WRPD is allowed to relocate to other sites in the WRPD which have access to municipal sewer subject to
approval of a special permit and a site plan approval by the PZC, or administrative site plan approval by OPDS
staff, whichever is appropriate, and the following conditions:
1. Increase in Area: The proposed relocation must not result in an increase of more than 50% of the
developed area of the parcel previously dedicated to the prohibited use, whether indoor gross floor
area, outdoor developed area, or both.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 6-27
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
2. Decrease in Threat: The applicant must demonstrate that the proposed relocation poses less of a
threat to the existing or future water supply source than does the existing prohibited use due to the
new site’s physical characteristics, location, and employment of best management practices.
3. Other Performance Standards: All other general and specific performance standards of the WRPD
must be met by the proposed relocation applied for under this provision. Once the non-permitted
use is relocated, prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy at the new site, the non-permitted
use at the old site must cease. In no way must this regulation result in the establishment of or the
continued maintenance of a prohibited use at the old site.
4. Soil Test: After grant of special permit and prior to approval of the site plan by the PZC or staff, soils
at the old site must be tested by a state certified laboratory and test results reported to the Town and
DEEP.
5. Site Clean Up: The old site must be cleaned of any soil contamination found, and debris and other old
underground tanks must be removed, prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy at the new
site. If the removal operation is under way but not completed at the time the use is ready to open for
business at the new site, a bond may be posted for the remaining cleanup effort prior to issuance of a
Certificate of Occupancy subject to PZC approval.
6. Land Records Statement: Upon recording of the special permit in Land Records, a statement must
be recorded in Land Records, indexed by the address of the old site, stating that during the time the
WRPD overlays the site, the old site cannot be converted back to a prohibited use.
7. Property Owner’s Statement: The application must include a statement from the owner of the
property where the old use is located noting the owner’s understanding that once the use is relocated
to the new site, the old site cannot be converted back to a prohibited use while overlain by the WRPD.
6.4-10.C Alteration of Prohibited Uses
Alteration includes any repair or replacement of an existing site element that will change provisions for
hazardous materials storage (without increasing the amount of storage) or trigger the need for additional
erosion and sediment control measures per Section 6.4-5, and/or stormwater management measures per
Section 6.4-6 (without increasing the footprint or intensity of the use). Alteration does not include the
expansion of a prohibited use as regulated in 6.4-10.A.
1. Site Plan Approval: Any lawfully established use that was made prohibited by the adoption or
subsequent amendment of the WRPD is allowed to alter specific site elements subject to Site Plan
Approval from the PZC.
2. Increased Conformity: The alteration must be performed in a manner that brings that part of the
site into greater conformity with the applicable general and/or specific performance standards related
to the WRPD.
3. New or Increased Non-Conformity: The proposed alteration must not create any new dimensional
non-conformity nor increase an existing dimensional non-conformity.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 7-1
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
SECTION 7: SPECIAL REGULATIONS
7.1 Erosion and Sediment (E&S) Control Plan
7.1-1 Applicability A project disturbing more than one-half acre (21,780 SF) must include an Erosion and Sediment Control Plan
(E&S Plan) for Certification with any site plan application. The E&S Plan will present, in mapped and narrative
form, the measures taken to control erosion and sedimentation both during and after construction.
Minor projects that do not require an E&S Plan for Certification should provide items in Section 7.1-2 as part
of a Site Plan or Administrative Site Plan application.
The E&S Plan should be developed using the principles, methods, and practices outlined in the Connecticut
Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control (2002) (E&S Guidelines), as amended, including its Low
Impact Development Appendix (2011). The E&S Plan must result in a development that minimizes erosion and
sedimentation.
Alternative methods and practices may be used with approval of the PZC, based on recommendation of
Office of Planning & Development Services staff or the Town Engineer. Any such proposed alternative must be
certified by the applicant’s professional engineer.
A single-unit dwelling that is not a part of a subdivision of land shall be exempt from this regulation.
The clearing of vegetation for any development that requires approval under Section 9.5 Site Plan and Coastal
Site Plan, is not allowed until such approval has been granted by the PZC.
7.1-2 Minor Erosion Control Plan A Minor Erosion Control Plan must include:
• A narrative description of the project
• Area of disturbance
• Location and installation details of erosion control measures
• Temporary and permanent stabilization measures
7.1-3 Erosion and Sediment Control Plan for  		Certi fication
The Erosion and Sediment Control Plan for Certification must include the following:
7.1-3.A Narrative
A narrative that is specific to the project and includes, but is not limited to:
1. Description: A description of the development
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 7-2
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
2. Schedule: A schedule for grading and construction activities for each phase which includes at a
minimum:
a. Start and completion dates
b. Requirement for a pre-construction meeting with Town staff prior to any disturbance on the site.
c. Requirement for site inspections by Town Staff for the following:
• After installation of clearing limit lines (Clearing limit lines should be established prior to tree
and vegetation cutting or disturbing of any soil).
• After installation of E&S controls (Installation of E&S controls should occur prior to any
disturbance of the soil on the site. Tree and vegetation cutting may occur prior to installation
of E&S controls if no soil is disturbed.)
d. Sequence of grading and construction activities including the sequence for initial tree and
vegetation cutting, clearing, and grading of the site for access and for utility construction, site
inspections by Town Staff prior to clearing of site, and after installation of E&S controls.
e. Sequence for installation and/or application of soil erosion and sediment control measures.
f. Sequence for final stabilization of the project site.
g. Name and contact information of person responsible for implementation of the E&S plan.
3. Design Criteria: The design criteria for proposed E&S control measures and storm water management
facilities
4. Procedures: The installation and/or application procedures for proposed E&S control measures and
storm water management facilities
5. Operation and Maintenance: The operation and maintenance program for proposed E&S control
measures and storm water management facilities
7.1-3.B Plan
The E&S Plan must be at a scale sufficient to identify existing and proposed site drainage patterns and
conditions, and should include, but not be limited to, the following:
1. Location: The location of the proposed development and adjacent properties
2. Topography: The existing and proposed topography shown at contour intervals no greater than two
feet, unless approved by the Director of Planning and Development Services, as well as the location
of wetlands, watercourses, flood zones, floodways, exposed ledge and other natural and man-made
features
3. Alterations: The proposed alterations including cleared, excavated, filled or graded areas, proposed
structures, utilities, roads, driveways, parking areas, and storm water facilities and the clearing limit
lines clearly identified
4. Location and Design: The location of and design details for all proposed E&S control measures and
storm water management facilities
5. Sequence: The sequence of grading and construction activities, temporary stabilization measures,
installation of E&S control measures, and final stabilization of all areas of the site
6. Construction Details: The construction details for proposed E&S control measures and storm water
management facilities
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 7-3
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
7. Erosion Control Plan: An erosion control plan for initial clearing and grading that includes material
processing area, stockpile area, clearing limit lines, temporary sediment control measures, and
deposition of excess material, boulders and stumps
8. Low Impact Development: For any of the above, as relevant, demonstrate adherence to the Low
Impact Development Appendix to the CT Guidelines for Soil Erosion & Sediment Control
9. Additional Requirements: A more complex E&S Plan may be required by the PZC for projects
where proposed development will directly impact any of the following:
a. Soils having severe or very severe erosion hazard;
b. Sensitive coastal resources;
c. Slopes over twenty-five (25) percent;
d. Lands located within a public water supply watershed; or
e. A cumulative area of greater than five acres regardless of the land’s attributes
This complex E&S Plan may include, but not be limited to, the requirement to phase the development,
limitations on the amount of soil exposed at any given time, seasonal limitations for construction or
certification of the E&S Plan by a Certified Erosion Control Professional.
7.1-4 E&S Plan Certification
After review of the E&S Plan by the PZC or its designee, the PZC will certify the E&S Plan if it is in compliance with
these regulations. The PZC can deny certification where a plan fails to comply with the methods or practices
contained in the State DEEP’s 2002 guideline, as amended, including its Low Impact Development Appendix
(2011), unless alternatives are approved by the PZC pursuant to Section 7.1-1 of these regulations. Any decision
to deny certification should consider written recommendations from the Office of Planning & Development
Services staff and Town Engineer and any other relevant information. Certification will be included as part of
the PZC’s vote to approve a site plan or to approve a site plan with modifications. Site development must not
begin unless the E&S Plan is certified and those control measures that are scheduled for installation prior to site
development are installed, functional, and have been inspected by Office of Planning and Development staff.
7.1-5 Construction Pro ject Inspection
The PZC, through its staff, agents, or consultants will periodically inspect construction projects for which
site plans have been approved to verify that E&S control devices are properly installed and maintained. The
PZC may require the developer to verify through progress reports that the E&S control measures have been
installed according to the certified E &S Plan and are being properly operated and maintained.
7.1-6 Bonding
The PZC may require that a bond be posted in a form acceptable to the PZC in an amount adequate to ensure
the installation and maintenance of erosion and sediment control devices as shown on the certified E&S Plan.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 7-4
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
7.2 Flood Protection Regulations
See Section 2.2 for Flood Protection Definitions
7.2-1 Purpose , Conflicts and Limitations The purpose of this section is to apply special regulations to land identified as being prone to flooding by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) and in order to permit the Town of Groton to participate in
the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP). These special regulations are designed to: a) prevent or minimize
loss of life, injuries, property damage, and other losses, both private and public; b) promote the health, public
safety and general welfare of the people; and c) help control and minimize the extent of floods and reduce the
depth and violence of flooding. The provisions of this section shall apply in any zoning district which is located
within a flood hazard area, floodway, or coastal high hazard zone. Permitted uses are allowed, provided they
meet the following additional requirements, and/or those of the Connecticut State Building Code dealing with
construction in floodplains and coastal high hazard areas, whichever is more restrictive.
This regulation is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed
restrictions. However, where this regulation and another ordinance, regulation, easement, covenant or deed
restriction conflict or overlap, the more stringent shall prevail.
The degree of flood protection required by this regulation is considered the minimum reasonable for regulatory
purposes and is based on scientific and engineering consideration and research. Larger floods can and will
occur on rare occasion. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This regulation does
not imply or guarantee that land outside the special flood hazard area or uses permitted in such areas will be
free from flooding or flood damages. This regulation shall not create liability on the part of the Town of Groton
or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this regulation or
any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. The Town of Groton, its officers and employees shall
assume no liability for another person’s reliance on any maps, data or information provided by the Town of
Groton.
7.2-2 Identification of Areas Flood Hazard Areas include all special flood hazard areas (SFHA) identified by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) in its flood insurance study (FIS) for New London County, Connecticut, dated
August 5, 2013, and accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM), dated August 5, 2013 (Panels
09011C0363J, 09011C0364J, 09011C0388J, 09011C0389J, 09011C0502J, 09011C0504J, 09011C0506J,
09011C0507J, 09011C0508J, 09011C0509J, 09011C0516J, 09011C0517J, 09011C0526J, 09011C0527J,
09011C0528J, 09011C0536J) and July 18, 2011 (Panels 09011C0368G, 09011C0369G), and other supporting
data applicable to the Town of Groton, and any subsequent revisions thereto, are adopted by reference and
declared to be a part of this regulation. Since mapping is legally adopted by reference into this regulation it
must take precedence when more restrictive, until such time as a map amendment or map revision is obtained
from FEMA. The SFHA includes any area shown on the FIRM as Zones A, AE, AO, AH, Coastal AE and VE, including
areas designated as a floodway on a FIRM. Zones VE and Coastal AE are also identified as a coastal high hazard
area. Areas of special flood hazard are determined utilizing the base flood elevations (BFE) provided on the
flood profiles in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for a community. BFEs provided on a flood insurance rate map
(FIRM) are only approximate (rounded up or down) and should be verified with the BFEs published in the FIS
for a specific location. The FIRM and FIS are on file with the Town Clerk, Planning Office, and Building Office.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 7-5
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
7.2-3 Flood Hazard Areas In all special flood hazard areas the following provisions shall apply.
7.2-3.A Permit Review
Permit applications will be reviewed to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from
flooding. Proposed development shall be reviewed to assure that all necessary permits have been received
from those governmental agencies from which approval is required by Federal or State law, including section
404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1344.
7.2-3.B Base Flood Elevation
In addition to meeting any other applicable requirements, the land use permit application for any development
subject to these flood protection regulations shall provide base flood elevation data.
7.2-3.C Construction Standards
Permits shall be required for all new construction, substantial improvements (including the placement of
manufactured homes), repair to structures that have sustained substantial damage, and other development
and shall 1) be constructed with materials and utility equipment that are flood-damage resistant and conform
to the provisions of FEMA Technical Bulletin 2, Flood Damage-Resistant Material Requirements. This includes,
but is not limited to, flooring, interior and exterior walls, wall coverings and other materials installed below
the base flood elevation plus one (1.0) foot.; 2) be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure; 3) be constructed with materials and utility equipment
resistant to flood damage; and 4) be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
7.2-3.D Utility System Design
New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood
waters into the system; and 1) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or
eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the system into flood waters; and 2)
On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination
from them during flooding.
7.2-3.E Utility Service Equipment
The bottom of all electrical, heating, plumbing, ventilation and air conditioning equipment, appliances,
fixtures and components, HVAC duct work and duct systems, and any other utility service equipment, facilities,
machinery, or connections servicing a structure shall be elevated one (1) foot above the base flood elevation.
This includes, but is not limited to, furnaces, oil or propane tanks, air conditioners, heat pumps, hot water
heaters, ventilation duct work, washer and dryer hook-ups, electrical junction boxes, and circuit breaker boxes.
Systems, fixtures, equipment and components shall not be mounted on or penetrate through breakaway walls
intended to fail under flood loads. Connections or other equipment that must be located below the BFE plus
one (1) foot elevation are permitted only when no other elevation alternative is available and provided they
are designed and installed to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components and to resist
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and stresses, including the effects of buoyancy, during the occurrence of
the base flood event. Electrical wiring systems that must be located below the BFE plus one (1) foot shall
conform to the standards for wet locations.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 7-6
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
7.2-3.F Storage Tanks
In all flood zones, underground tanks shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, and lateral movement
under conditions of the base flood. In VE and Coastal AE zones, above-ground storage tanks which are located
outside or inside of a structure must be elevated one (1) foot above the base flood elevation (BFE). Where
elevated on platforms, the platforms shall be cantilevered from or knee braced to the building or shall be
supported on elevated foundations that conform to the standards for the particular flood zone as described in
Sections 6.6-4 through 6.6-7 below. In A and AE zones, above-ground storage tanks which are located outside
or inside of a structure shall be elevated one (1) foot above the base flood elevation (BFE) or shall be securely
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement under conditions of the base flood. Anchored
tanks must have the top of the fill pipe located at least one (1) foot above the BFE and have a screw fill cap that
does not allow for the infiltration of flood water.
7.2-3.G Portions of Structures in the SFHA
If any portion of a structure lies within the Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA), the entire structure is considered
to be located within the SFHA and must meet the construction requirements of the flood zone. The structure
includes any structurally attached additions, garages, decks, porches, sunrooms, patios or any other structure
attached to the main structure.
7.2-3.H Two or More Flood Zones
If a structure lies within two or more flood zones, the construction standards of the most restrictive zone apply
to the entire structure (i.e., VE zone is more restrictive than AE zone; structure must be built to the highest
BFE). The structure includes any structurally attached additions, garages, decks, porches, patios, sunrooms, or
any other structure attached to the main structure.
7.2-3.I Equal Conveyance
Within the floodplain, except those areas which are tidally influenced, as designated on the Flood Insurance
Rate Map (FIRM) for the community, encroachments resulting from filling, new construction or substantial
improvements involving an increase in footprint of the structure, are prohibited unless the applicant provides
certification by a registered Professional Engineer demonstrating, with supporting hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis performed in accordance with standard engineering practice, that such encroachments shall not
result in any (0.00 feet) increase in flood levels (Base Flood Elevation). Work within the floodplain and the land
adjacent to the floodplain, including work to provide compensatory storage shall not be constructed in such a
way so as to cause an increase in flood stage or flood velocity.
7.2-3.J Compensatory Storage
The water holding capacity of the floodplain, except those areas which are tidally influenced, shall not be
reduced. Any reduction caused by filling, new construction or substantial improvements involving an increase
in footprint to the structure, shall be compensated for by deepening and/or widening of the floodplain.
Storage shall be provided on-site, unless easements have been gained from adjacent property owners; it shall
be provided within the same hydraulic reach and volume not previously used for flood storage; it shall be
hydraulically comparable and incrementally equal to the theoretical volume of flood water at each elevation,
up to and including the 100-year flood elevation, which would be displaced by the proposed project. Such
compensatory volume shall have an unrestricted hydraulic connection to the same waterway or water body.
Compensatory storage can be provided off-site if approved by the municipality.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 7-7
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
7.2-4 Flood Hazard Areas - A Zones In all special flood hazard areas designated as A zones, the following shall additionally apply:
7.2-4.A A Zone Requirements
The Zoning Official shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and floodway data
available from a Federal, State, or other source as criteria for requiring the following:
1. Residential Construction: All new construction, substantial improvements, and repair to structures
that have sustained substantial damage which are residential structures shall have the bottom of
the lowest floor, including basement, elevated one (1.0) foot above the base flood elevation (BFE).
Electrical, plumbing, machinery or other utility equipment that service the structure must be elevated
one (1.0) foot above the BFE.
2. Commercial, Industrial or Non-residential Structures: All new construction, substantial
improvements, and repair to structures that have sustained substantial damage which are commercial,
industrial or non-residential structures shall:
a. Have the bottom of the lowest floor, including basement, elevated one (1) foot above the base
flood elevation (BFE); or
b. In lieu of being elevated, non-residential structures may be dry flood-proofed to one (1) foot
above the BFE provided that together with all attendant utilities and sanitary facilities the areas of
the structure below the required elevation are watertight with walls substantially impermeable to
the passage of water, and provided that such structures are composed of structural components
having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy.
A registered professional engineer or architect shall review and/or develop structural design
specifications and plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of
construction are in accordance with acceptable standards of practice for meeting the provisions of
this section. Such certification shall be provided to the Zoning Official on the FEMA Floodproofing
Certificate, Form 81-65.
c. Electrical, plumbing, machinery or other utility equipment that service the structure must be
elevated one (1) foot above the BFE.
3. Floodway Data for Watercourses without FEMA-published Waterways: The Town may request
floodway data of an applicant for watercourses without FEMA-published waterways. When such data
is provided by an applicant, or whenever such data is available from any other source (whether or not
in response to the Town’s request), the Town shall adopt a regulatory floodway based on the principal
that the floodway must be able to convey the waters of the base flood, without increasing the water
surface elevation more than one (1) foot at any point along the watercourse.
7.2-4.B Fully Enclosed Areas Below The Base Flood
Elevation Of Elevated Buildings
All new construction, substantial improvements, or repair to structures that have sustained substantial
damage, whether residential or non-residential, that include fully enclosed areas formed by a foundation
and other exterior walls shall have the lowest floor elevated to one (1) foot above the base flood elevation
(BFE). The elevated building shall be designed to preclude finished living space below the lowest floor and be
designed to allow for the entry and exit of flood waters to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on
exterior walls (wet flood-proofing). Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 7-8
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
registered professional engineer or architect as meeting the requirements of ASCE 24 Section 2.6.2.2, or meet
the following minimum criteria listed in sections 1 - 8 below:
1. Required Openings: Provide a minimum of two (2) openings (hydraulic flood vents) having a total net
area of not less than one square inch for every one square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding.
The enclosed area is measured on the exterior of the enclosure walls. These hydraulic openings must
be located on at least two different exterior walls of each enclosed area. If the structure has more
than one enclosed area, openings must be installed in the exterior walls of each enclosed area so that
flood waters can enter directly from the outside.
2. Foundation Requirements: The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot above
the higher of either the final interior grade or floor elevation, or the finished exterior grade adjacent to
the outside of the foundation wall. At least one entire side of the structure’s fully enclosed area must
be at or above grade. Fill placed around the foundation walls must be graded so that the elevation
inside the enclosed area is equal to or higher than the adjacent outside elevation on at least one
side of the building. The finished floor of the enclosed area shall be no lower than the bottom of the
foundation openings. The foundation slab of a residential structure, including the slab of a crawlspace,
must be set equal to the outside finished grade on at least one side of the building.
3. Openings Design: The openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or
devices provided they permit the automatic entry and exit of flood waters in both directions without
any external influence or control such as human intervention, including the use of electrical and other
non-automatic mechanical means. These coverings must not block or impede the automatic flow of
floodwaters into and out of the enclosed area. Other coverings may be designed and certified by a
registered professional engineer or approved by the Zoning Official.
4. Openings Location: Openings shall not be less than three (3) inches in any direction in the plane of
the wall.
5. Finished Living Space Prohibited: The area cannot be used as finished living space. Use of the
enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary and shall only be used for the parking of vehicles,
building access or limited storage. Access to the enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to
allow for the parking of vehicles (garage door) or limited storage of maintenance equipment used in
connection with the premises (standard exterior door) or entry to the living area (stairway or elevator).
The enclosed area shall not be used for human habitation.
6. Areas Below One Foot Above BFE: All interior walls, floor, and ceiling materials located below
one (1) foot above the BFE shall be unfinished and flood damage-resistant in accordance with FEMA
Technical Bulletin 2, Flood Damage-Resistant Requirements.
7. Utility Equipment: Electrical, plumbing, HVAC duct work, machinery or other utility equipment and
connections that service the structure (including, but not limited to, furnaces, oil or propane tanks, air
conditioners, heat pumps, hot water heaters, ventilation, washer and dryer hook-ups, electrical junction
boxes, circuit breaker boxes and food freezers) are prohibited in the fully enclosed area below the BFE
plus one (1) foot. Utilities or service equipment located in this enclosed area, even if elevated to one (1)
foot above the BFE in the space, may subject the structure to increased flood insurance rates.
8. Attached Garages: A residential building with a structurally attached garage having the floor slab
below the BFE is considered an enclosed area below the BFE and must meet the standards of Sections
7.2-4.B.1-8. A garage attached to a residential structure, constructed with the garage floor slab below
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 7-9
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
the BFE, must be designed to allow for the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters in both directions.
Flood openings or vents are required in the exterior walls of the garage or in the garage doors. Garage
doors that must be manually opened do not meet the flood vent opening requirements in Section
7.2-4.B.1-3. In addition to the automatic entry of floodwaters, the areas of the garage below BFE
plus one (1) foot must be constructed with flood damage-resistant materials per the requirements
of FEMA Technical Bulletin 2. Garages attached to non-residential structures must also meet the
aforementioned requirements or be dry floodproofed as per the requirements of Section 7.2-4.A.2.
7.2-4.C Flood Insurance Risk Premium Rates
For the purpose of the determination of applicable flood insurance risk premium rates, 1) the applicant shall
provide the as built elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new
or substantially improved structures and whether or not such structures contain a basement; 2) the applicant
shall obtain, if the structure has been floodproofed, the as built elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to
which the structure was floodproofed; and 3) a record of all such information shall be maintained with the
Building Official.
7.2-4.D Riverine Areas
In riverine situations, the applicant shall notify adjacent communities and the State Coordinating Office
(Department of Energy and Environmental Protection, Inland Wetlands and Water Courses Program) prior to
any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit copies of such notification to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency.
7.2-4.E Maintenance of Flood Carrying Capacity
Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained.
7.2-4.F Mobile Manufactured Homes
All mobile manufactured homes to be newly placed or undergoing a substantial improvement shall be elevated
so that the bottom of the frame is located one (1) foot or more above the base flood elevation. That mobile
manufactured home must also meet all the construction standards per Section 7.2-3. This includes mobile
manufactured homes located outside a mobile manufactured home park or subdivision, in a new mobile
manufactured home park or subdivision, in an existing mobile manufactured home park or subdivision, in
an expansion of an existing mobile manufactured home park or subdivision, or on a site in an existing mobile
manufactured home park in which a mobile manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as a result
of a flood. All mobile manufactured homes shall be placed on a permanent foundation which itself is securely
anchored and to which the structure is securely anchored so that it will resist flotation, lateral movement and
hydrostatic pressures. Anchoring may include, but not be limited to, the use of over-the-top or frame ties to
ground anchors. All mobile manufactured homes shall be installed using methods and practices that minimize
flood damage. Adequate access and drainage should be provided. Elevated construction standards include
piling foundations placed no more than ten (10) feet apart, and reinforcement provided for piers more than six
(6) feet above ground level. Recreational vehicles placed on sites shall either be on the site for fewer than 180
consecutive days and be fully licensed and ready for highway use or meet all the general standards of Section
7.2-3 and the elevation and anchoring requirement listed above for a mobile manufactured home. A recreation
vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick
disconnect type utilities and security devices and has no permanently attached additions. The foundation and
anchorage of manufactured homes to be located in floodways shall be designed and constructed in accordance
with ASCE 24.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 7-10
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
7.2-4.G Evacuation Plan
An evacuation plan indicating alternate vehicular access and escape routes shall be filed with appropriate
Disaster Preparedness Authorities for manufactured home parks and manufactured home subdivisions located
in A zones.
7.2-5 Flood Hazard Areas – AE
In all special flood hazard areas designated as Zone AE, the following additionally shall apply:
7.2-5.A Residential Structures
All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures shall follow the standards above
in 7.2-4.A.1 (A Zones).
7.2-5.B Non-residential Structures
All new construction and substantial improvements of non-residential structures shall follow the standards
above in 7.2-4.A.2 (A Zones)
7.2-5.C Fully Enclosed Areas Below The Base Flood Elevation Of Elevated
Buildings
All new construction, substantial improvements, or repair to structures that have sustained substantial
damage, whether residential or non-residential, that include fully enclosed areas formed by a foundation and
other exterior walls shall follow the standards above in 7.2-4.B (A Zones).
7.2-5.D Floodproofing
Where floodproofing is utilized for a particular structure in accordance with this section, a Connecticut
registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the floodproofing methods are adequate to
withstand the flood depths, pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces, and other factors associated with
the base flood, and a record of such certificate indicating the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level)
to which such structures are floodproofed shall be maintained with the Building Official.
7.2-5.E Mobile Manufactured Home Parks and Subdivisions
New mobile manufactured home parks and subdivisions, or expansions to existing mobile manufactured
home parks and subdivisions, or existing mobile manufactured home parks and subdivisions where the repair,
reconstruction, or improvement of the street, utilities, and pads equals or exceeds 50% of the value of the
streets, utilities, and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement has commenced, and for mobile
manufactured home placement not in existing mobile manufactured home parks and subdivisions, then 1)
stands or lots shall be elevated on compacted fill or on pilings so that the bottom of the frame of the mobile
manufactured home is located one (1) foot above the base flood elevation; 2) adequate surface drainage and
access for a hauler shall be provided; and 3) in the instance of elevation on pilings, lots shall be large enough
to permit steps, piling foundations shall be placed in stable soil no more than 10 feet apart, and reinforcement
shall be provided for pilings more than 6 feet above the ground level.
All other mobile manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved within an existing mobile
manufactured home park or subdivision shall be elevated so that the bottom of the frame is located one (1)
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 7-11
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
foot above the base flood elevation and is securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to
resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
The foundation and anchorage of manufactured homes to be located in floodways shall be designed and
constructed in accordance with ASCE 24.
7.2-5.F Additional Requirements
When base flood elevations have been determined within Zone AE on the community’s Flood Insurance Rate
map but a regulatory floodway has not been designated, no new construction, substantial improvements or
other development, including fill, shall be permitted which will increase the water surface elevation of the
base flood more than one (1.0) foot at any point within the community when all existing and anticipated
development is considered cumulatively with the proposed development.
7.2-6 Floodway In the designated floodway, the following shall additionally apply:
7.2-6.A Encroachments
No encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, and other developments shall
be permitted unless certification, with supporting technical data, by a Connecticut registered Professional
Engineer is provided demonstrating, through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis performed in accordance
with standard engineering practice, that encroachments shall not result in any (0.00 feet) increase in flood
levels during occurrence of the base flood discharge published by FEMA. Buildings and structures meeting
the standard above and located in whole or in part in the floodway shall be designed and constructed in
accordance with ASCE 24. Fences in the floodway must be aligned with the flow and be of an open design.
7.2-6.B Manufactured Homes
The placement of any manufactured home shall be prohibited.
7.2-7 Coastal High Hazard Zones
In the coastal high hazard zones Coastal AE and VE, the following provisions shall additionally apply:
7.2-7.A Elevation
The applicant shall provide the elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the bottom of the lowest structural
member of the lowest floor (excluding pilings and columns) of all new and substantially improved structures,
regardless of whether such structures contain a basement. A record of all such information shall be maintained
with the Zoning Official.
7.2-7.B Connecticut Coastal Jurisdiction Line
All new construction shall be located landward of the reach of the Connecticut Coastal Jurisdiction Line as
defined in CGS 22a-359, as amended by Public Act 12-101.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 7-12
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
7.2-7.C Construction Requirements
1. All new construction, substantial improvement and repair to structures that have sustained substantial
damage shall be elevated so that the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member (excluding
pilings, pile caps, and columns) is elevated at least one (1.0 foot) above the base flood elevation (BFE).
Basement floors that are below ground on all sides are prohibited
2. The bottom of all electrical, plumbing, machinery or other utility equipment that service the structure
must be elevated one (1) foot above the BFE and cannot be located below the structure. Any service
equipment that must be located below the BFE must be floodproofed to prevent water from entering
during conditions of flooding. Electrical, mechanical and plumbing system components are not to be
mounted on or penetrate through walls designed to breakaway under flood loads
3. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the structure is securely anchored
to adequately anchored pilings or columns in order to withstand velocity waters and hurricane wave
wash, and
4. The space beneath the lowest floor shall be free of obstruction, or be constructed with a non-supporting
breakaway wall, lattice work or mesh screening provided it is not part of the structural support of the
building and is designed so as to break away, under abnormally high tides or wave action, without
damage to the structural integrity of the building on which it is to be used, and provided the following
design specifications are met: Design safe loading resistance of each wall shall not be less than 10
nor more than 20 pounds per square foot; or if more than 20 pounds per square foot, a registered
professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design wall collapse would result from a water
load less than that which would occur during the base flood event, and the elevated portion of the
building and supporting foundation system shall not be subject to collapse, displacement, or other
structural damage due to the effects of wind and water loads acting simultaneously on all building
components during the base flood event. Maximum wind and water loading values to be used in this
determination shall each have one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given
year (100-year mean recurrence interval). Further, areas enclosed by breakaway walls shall contain
hydraulic flood vents per the requirements of Section 7.2-4.B.1-4 above.
7.2-7.D Use of Fill
No use of fill for structural support of buildings shall be permitted. Minor grading and the placement of minor
quantities of non-compacted fill shall be permitted for landscaping and drainage purposes under and around
buildings, and for support of parking slabs, pool decks, patios and walkways installed at current grade. The
fill must wash out from storm surge, thereby rendering the building free of obstruction, prior to generating
excessive loading forces, ramping effects, or wave deflection.
7.2-7.E Mobile Manufactured Homes
The placement of mobile manufactured homes, except in existing mobile manufactured home parks and
subdivisions, is prohibited. Placement of mobile manufactured homes in existing mobile manufactured home
parks and subdivisions shall be elevated so that the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member is
located one (1) foot above the base flood elevation. Such mobile manufactured homes must also meet the
standards in this Section 7.2-7. Recreational vehicles shall either be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive
days and be fully licensed and ready for highway use or shall meet all the standards of Section 7.2-3 and the
Coastal AE and VE zone construction requirements of this Section 7.2-7. A recreational vehicle is ready for
highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities
and security devices and has no permanently attached additions.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 7-13
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
7.2-7.F Sand Dunes
Man-made alteration of sand dunes which would increase potential flood damage is prohibited.
7.2-7.G Access to Lowest Floor
An exterior door shall be installed at the top of the stairs that provides access to the lowest (habitable) floor
of the structure.
7.2-7.H Chimneys and Fireplaces
The base of a chimney or fireplace shall not extend below the BFE plus one foot. When vertical support is
required, a chimney or fireplace shall be vertically supported on pile or column foundations embedded at least
as deep as the rest of the structure foundation or deeper where needed to support the chimney against water
and wind loads. The chimney and fireplace system shall be designed to minimize transfer of water and wind
loads to the structure or structure foundation.
7.2-8 Specific Situation Variances 7.2-8.A Buildings on an Historic Register
Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National
Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places provided the proposed reconstruction,
rehabilitation or restoration will not result in the structure losing its historical character.
7.2-8.B Functionally Dependent Uses
Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvement and other development necessary
for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided the structure or other development is protected by
methods that minimize flood damage, create no additional threat to public safety, and meet the following
requirements:
1. Variance, Minimum Necessary: Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and in the instance
of a historical building, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary as not to destroy
the historic character and design of the building.
2. Use of Variances: Variances shall only be issued upon:
a. a showing of good and sufficient cause,
b. a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship, and
c. a determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights,
additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on
or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
3. Variance Grantees: Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice
specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation to which the structure is
to be built and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk
resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation up to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance
coverage. The Town shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the
Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request in its biennial report.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 7-14
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
7.3 St ormwater Management Plan and Low
Impact Development
7.3-1 Applicability
In addition to the required erosion and sediment control plan, grading plan and other required plans and
application submittals, a separate Stormwater Management Plan must be submitted with any site plan
application that will result in the cumulative disturbance of one acre or more. At a minimum, site development
plans should comply with the design criteria and objectives identified in the 2004 Connecticut Stormwater
Quality Manual, as amended, including its Low Impact Development Appendix.
7.3-2 Site Design
The following LID techniques should be incorporated into the planning and design of development plans to
preserve pre-development hydrologic conditions and minimize stormwater run-off:
• Avoid installation of roof drains that discharge to impervious surfaces.
• Direct flows to vegetated areas.
• Direct flows from paved areas to stabilized vegetated areas.
• Break up flow directions from large paved surfaces.
• Encourage sheet flow through vegetated areas.
• Locate impervious areas so that they drain to permeable areas.
• Maximize overland sheet flow.
• Lengthen flow paths and increase the number of flow paths.
• Maximize use of open swale systems.
• Increase or augment the amount of vegetation on the site.
• Restrict ground disturbance to the smallest possible area.
• Reduce pavement and impervious surface areas.
• Avoid compaction or disturbance of highly permeable soils.
• Minimize removal of existing trees.
• Reduce the use of turf and use more natural land cover.
• Maintain existing topography and drainage divides.
• Locate structures, roadways on Type C soils where feasible.
• Provide source controls to prevent or minimize the use of and potential introduction of pollutants into
stormwater run-off.
Sites within the Water Resource Protection District should adhere to the requirements of Section 6.4, and LID
site design techniques may be incorporated if also consistent with Section 6.4-6.
7.3-3 Stormwater Management Plan
A Stormwater Management Plan must be prepared by a Professional Engineer, licensed by the State of
Connecticut, including the following:
7.3-3.A Site and Activity Description
1. Existing natural features and proposed site improvements
2. Site topography, pre- and post- development drainage patterns
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 7-15
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
3. Existing and proposed stormwater discharges and known sources of on-site stormwater pollutants
and sediment loading
7.3-3.B Water Quality Classification
State DEEP water quality classification of on-site and adjacent water bodies, which will receive project stormwater.
7.3-3.C Pollutant Sources
Identification of potential pollutant sources including:
1. Description: Description of all potential pollution sources such as erosive soils, steep slopes, vehicle
fueling and maintenance, and materials storage
2. Identification: Identification of the types of anticipated stormwater (i.e. from pervious and/or
impervious areas)
3. Peak Flows: A summary of calculated pre- and post-development peak flows, per the Town of Groton
Road and Drainage Standards, unless otherwise specified in these Zoning Regulations (i.e. as to land
and uses subject to the WRPD overlay zone requirements).
7.3-3.D Pollutant Controls
Description of controls to reduce pollutants, including Low Impact Development strategies, such as:
1. Proposed stormwater system retrofits
2. Methods to retain sediments on site
3. Methods to control water flowing onto and from the construction site
4. Methods to minimize disturbed areas
5. Post-construction stormwater management measures that will be installed during the construction
process to control pollutants in stormwater discharges after construction operations have been completed
7.3-3.E Other Information
Calculations, plans, data and other information intended to support the design and operation of structures
and other proposed methods to reduce pollutants
7.3-3.F Maintenance and Inspection
Maintenance and inspection procedures including:
1. Inspection protocols and related requirements
2. Repair and maintenance documentation
3. Identification of responsible individual(s)
7.3-3.G Good Housekeeping Procedures
Good Housekeeping Procedures which at a minimum will address:
1. Material Handling and Waste Management
2. Building Material Staging Area operations
3. Equipment and Vehicle Fueling and Maintenance
4. Spill Prevention Plan requirements
5. Long Term Maintenance of Stormwater Facilities
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 7-16
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
7.4 Environmental Performance St andards
7.4-1 Applicability
7.4-1.A Applicability
The performance standards of this Section shall apply to all lands, buildings, structures, and uses in all zones,
whether a permitted use, a special permit use, an accessory use or a nonconforming use (Exemption: These
performance standards do not apply to the activities typically associated with a residential use).
7.4-1.B Compliance
Initial and continued compliance with these performance standards shall be required of every building,
structure, and use.
7.4-1.C Federal, State, and Local Regulations
Nothing in this section diminishes the separate responsibility for a use of land, buildings, or structures in the
Town of Groton to meet all requirements of Federal, State, and other local regulations.
7.4-1.D Town’s Rights
The Town has the right but not the obligation to address items within these performance standards that
reference and are regulated by other Federal, State, or local agencies.
7.4-2 General Standard
No building or use shall create any dangerous, injurious, noxious, or otherwise objectionable fire, explosive,
or other hazard; noise or vibration; smoke, dust, odor or other form of air pollution; heat, cold, dampness,
electromagnetic or other substance, condition or element in such manner, or in such amount, as to adversely
affect the reasonable use of the surrounding area or adjoining premises.
7.4-3 Standards for Dangerous and Objectionable  		Elements
7.4-3.A Air Emissions
Air emissions shall be treated in a manner that prevents any nuisance or hazard to neighboring uses. Nuisance
from emissions may include, but is not limited to, soiling of the ground or building surfaces, or damage or death
of vegetation. Hazards from emissions may include, but are not limited to, particulates inhaled by people that
may be harmful to their health.
7.4-3.B Waste
All wastes must be properly stored and disposed of in a manner to maintain sanitary and nuisance free
conditions satisfactory to the Director of Health.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 7-17
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
7.4-3.C Flammable and Explosive Materials
All activities and all storage of flammable and explosive materials at any point shall be provided with adequate
safety devices against fire and explosion and adequate fire-fighting and fire-suppression devices and equipment,
as approved by the local fire marshal.
7.4-3.D Vibration
No vibration that is detectable without instruments at a lot line should be transmitted outside of the lot
where it originates, except vibration necessarily involved in the construction or demolition of buildings and
structures.
7.4-3.E Heat
Heat, defined as thermal energy of a radiative, conductive or convective nature, emitted at the lot line by any
use or facility shall not exceed the temperatures tolerable to plant or animal life.
7.4-3.F Radioactivity and Electrical Disturbance
No activities are permitted that emit dangerous radioactivity at any point and no electrical disturbances are
permitted that adversely significantly affect the operation of any equipment, other than that of the creator of
such disturbance.
7.4-3.G Discharges
No discharge shall be permitted into a private sewer system, stream, the ground or a municipal sewage disposal
system that releases any material in such a way or of such a nature or temperature as can contaminate any
running stream, water supply or otherwise cause the emission of dangerous or objectionable elements and
accumulation of wastes conducive to the breeding of rodents or vector arthropods.
7.4-3.H Odors
No use shall cause or permit the emission of any substance or combination of substances which creates
or contributes to an odor, in the ambient air, that constitutes a nuisance, so as to significantly impair the
reasonable use of any other property.
7.4-3.I Noise
Unless otherwise specified in these Zoning Regulations, the State of Connecticut Noise standards apply, per
the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies, Title 22a. Environmental Protection, inclusive of Sec. 22a-69-1
through 22a-69-7.4. Maximum noise levels for day time and night time are as follows:
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 8-1
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
SECTION 8: SITE STANDARDS
8.1 Landscaping, Screening and Buffer Areas
8.1-1 Purpose The following standards are intended to enhance the appearance and natural beauty of the Town and to protect
property values through preservation of existing vegetation and planting of new screening and landscaping
material. Specifically, these standards are intended to reduce excessive heat, glare and accumulation of dust,
to provide privacy from noise and visual intrusion, and to prevent the erosion of the soil, excessive run-off of
drainage water, and the consequent depletion of the ground water table and the pollution of water bodies.
8.1-2 Applicability
8.1-2.A Applicability
The standards listed in Section 8.1-3 apply to non-residential and multi-unit residential uses in all zoning districts.
8.1-2.B Single unit and two-unit homes
Single unit and two-unit homes are required to landscape front yard areas and maintain such landscaping in
good condition, per Section 8.1-3.H. In no case will the landscaping be required to exceed 30 feet from the
front lot line. Any other landscape features associated with single unit and two-unit homes, such as fences,
walls, walkways, and other features, must be maintained by the property owner. Plantings along the street
must be installed in accordance with the Subdivision Regulations and maintained.
8.1-3 General Requirements for Landscaping and  		Screening
8.1-3.A Areas to Landscape
All areas of a site that are not rendered impervious through the development of structures, parking features,
circulation features, or other hardscape features should be landscaped with vegetation, and must follow the
requirements of Section 7.3, Stormwater Management Plan and Low Impact Development. Sites within
the Water Resource Protection District must also comply with the standards of Section 6.4, Water Resource
Protection District.
8.1-3.B Native and Invasive Species
Native species should be used wherever possible. No tree, shrub, or any other plant shall be installed that has
been identified as an invasive species by the State of Connecticut Invasive Plants Council.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 8-2
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
8.1-3.C Best Practices and Maintenance
Landscaping, trees, and plants required by these regulations must be planted in a growing condition according
to accepted horticultural best practices and they shall be maintained in a healthy growing condition. Any
landscaping, trees, and plants which are in a condition that does not fulfill the intent of these regulations must
be replaced by the property owner during the next planting season for the particular plant material.
8.1-3.D Functional Design and Selection of Materials
1. All-Season: Landscaping should be designed to remain functional and attractive during all seasons
through a thoughtful selection of deciduous, evergreen, berrying, and flowering plant varieties.
2. Turf: Turf must not be planted in strips less than five (5) feet wide.
3. Lawns: Lawn seed mixes should be drought resistant. To achieve a high level of drought tolerance,
lawn mixes may include, but not be limited to, a predominance of fine fescues.
4. Plant Hardiness: Plant varieties should be selected for resistance to drought, moisture, salt, urban
conditions, or insects and other pests depending on the location of landscaping and the specific
stressors anticipated for different areas of the site.
5. Minimal Care: Plants should be selected so that landscaping can be maintained with minimal care
and the need for watering, pesticides, or fertilizers can be minimized or eliminated.
8.1-3.E Maintenance of Fence, Wall or Other Landscape Materials
Any fence, wall or other landscape materials required by these regulations or shown on a site plan approved
by the PZC must be maintained by the property owner in good condition throughout the period of the use on
the lot.
8.1-3.F Protection of Landscaped Areas
All landscaping, trees, and planting material adjacent to parking areas, loading areas, or driveways must be
properly protected by barriers, curbs, distance offsets, or other means from damage by vehicles.
8.1-3.G Existing Trees, Vegetation and Unique Site Features/Stonewalls
To the extent possible, existing trees, vegetation, and unique site features such as stone walls must be retained
and protected. Existing healthy, mature trees, if properly located, will be fully credited against the requirements
of these regulations. Stonewalls along property lines should remain and walls that are removed within the site
should be relocated onsite or incorporated into the landscape design for the site.
8.1-3.H Front Landscape Area
A front landscape area is required for all uses in all zoning districts. The purpose of the landscaping is to
enhance the appearance of the use on the lot and not to screen the use from view.
1. Required Materials: The required landscaped area must be covered with grass, ground cover, or
other decorative landscape materials and include appropriate trees and shrubs.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 8-3
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
2. Area Between the Front Lot Line and the Edge of the Street: In cases where the edge of the
pavement within a public right-of-way does not coincide with the front lot line, the property owner
must landscape the area between the front lot line and the edge of the street that is not covered by
sidewalk with the use of turf, pavers, or other natural materials approved by the PZC.
8.1-3.I Street Trees
At a minimum, one street shade tree having a caliper of 2 inches and a height of 6 feet must be planted for
each 50 feet or fraction thereof of lot frontage. Street trees should be from the list in the Town of Groton Road
and Drainage Standards, unless an alternative is approved by the Town Tree Warden or a licensed arborist.
8.1-3.J Substitutions
On an already developed site where the following exists:
• The building is within 10 feet of the front lot line and there is an existing or proposed sidewalk within
this area, or
• There is existing parking within this front area that cannot be relocated to other areas of the site the
Commission may allow the required front landscaped area to be met through the substitution of
planters, plant boxes or pots containing trees, shrubs, and/or flowers in lieu of in-ground planting.
In determining such substitution, the Commission shall consider: (a) the lot size and shape and the location of
existing structures and parking areas; (b) the availability of other areas where any such parking may be located
on the lot; (c) the number, size, location, and quality of the planter boxes to be used; (d) the design of the
building and uses that face the street and the need for visual buffering of such buildings and uses; (e) the need
for street trees within this location.
8.1-3.K Long Term Maintenance of Improvements
No Certificate of Site Plan Compliance or Certificate of Occupancy will be issued without conditions for long
term maintenance of all improvements shown on the approved site plan, including regular irrigation and
maintenance of landscaping, replacement of diseased or dead vegetation, regular removal of litter and debris,
etc. Should these conditions not be met any time after the issuance of a CSPC or CO, this will be considered a
zoning violation subject to enforcement action.
8.1-4 Front Landscape Areas In addition to the requirements of Section 8.1-3, the following apply in RM, Mixed Use, Commercial, Industrial,
and Green districts.
8.1-4.A CR, CN, WW, IM and IG Districts
1. Front Lot Line Area: A landscaped strip along and contiguous to the front lot line(s) must be provided
at a minimum width of 10 feet.
2. Front of Buildings: A minimum five (5) foot wide landscape area must abut the front of the buildings
on the site using one of the following options:
a. Provide a continuous landscape strip at least five (5) feet wide along the entire length of the
building frontage (except areas for doorways).
b. Provide an area of landscaping equivalent to that required in Section 8.1-4.A.2.a along the building
frontage that covers a minimum of 50 percent of the length of the building.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 8-4
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
3. Parking in Front of Buildings: Parking in front of a building must be designed to meet Section 8.2-11
for pedestrian safety and Item 2 above for front of building landscape requirements.
8.1-4.B MTC, MVC, NMDD and MDD Mixed Use Districts
1. Front Lot Line Area: A landscaped strip along and contiguous to the front lot line(s) must be provided
in accordance with the following minimum widths:
a. MTC, MVC and NMDD: 10 feet or as prescribed in the standards for the district, whichever is
greater.
b. MDD: Five (5) feet or the area in front of an existing buildings if the existing building is less than
Five (5) feet from the front property line.
2. Front of Buildings: A minimum of five (5) feet wide landscape area must abut the front of the
buildings on the site using one of the following options:
a. Provide a continuous landscape strip at least five (5) feet wide along the entire length of the
building frontage (except areas for doorways).
b. Provide an area of landscaping equivalent to that required in Section 8.1-4.B.2.a along the building
frontage that covers a minimum of 50 percent of the length of the building.
3. Parking in Front of Buildings: Parking in front of a building must be designed to meet Section 8.2-11
for pedestrian safety and Item 2 above for front of building landscape requirements.
8.1-4.C RM Multi-Unit District
In addition to the requirements of Section 8.1-3, all uses other than single-unit or two-unit development in the
RM districts must provide a landscaped strip along and contiguous to the front lot line(s) at a width of 10 feet
and meet Section 8.1-5 for landscaping in parking and vehicle accessway areas.
8.1-5 Landscaped Parking and Vehicle Accessway  		Areas
The following landscaping standards apply to all uses except for those proposed in the MTC District, which has
distinct standards in Section 3.3.-2.D.
8.1-5.A Interior Parking Lot Landscaping
All uses requiring ten (10) or more off-street parking spaces must comply with the following:
1. Minimum Landscaping: A minimum of 10 SF of interior landscaping within the paved portion of the
parking area for each parking space.
2. Landscaping Purpose: Landscaped areas (islands) are required to indicate and assure safe and
efficient channelization of both pedestrian and vehicular traffic and to separate the major vehicle
accessways through the parking area from parking aisles.
3. Landscaping Requirements: Each separate landscaped area (island) must contain a minimum of 100
SF, with a minimum dimension of at least 8 feet, be constructed with sub-surface drainage, incorporate
compaction resistant soil, be planted with grass or shrubs, and include at least one deciduous shade
tree of not less than 2-inch caliper, at least 6 feet in height. Any landscape area that is continuous
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 8-5
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
along a major accessway within the parking lot should include at least one deciduous tree of not less
than 2-inch caliper, at least 6 feet in height, for every 50 lineal feet within this landscaped area.
8.1-5.B Perimeter Parking Lot and Entrance Driveway Landscaping
All uses requiring five (5) or more off-street parking spaces must comply with the following:
1. Landscaped Area: A landscaped area must be provided along the perimeter of any parking area or
entrance driveway except where the parking area is functionally integrated with an adjoining parking
area on an abutting lot.
2. Landscaped Area Requirements: The landscaped area must have a minimum dimension of 5 feet, be
planted with grass or shrubs, and include at least one deciduous shade tree of not less than 2-inch caliper,
at least 6 feet in height for every 50 feet along the perimeter of the parking area or entrance driveway.
8.1-6 Buffer Area 8.1-6.A Purpose
The purpose of the buffer area is to provide privacy from noise, headlight glare, and visual intrusion to existing
and potential residential uses.
8.1-6.B When Required
A buffer area is required along and within all boundaries of a lot for any of the following:
1. A use in a commercial or industrial district where the lot is abutting or directly across a local street
from any lot in a residential district.
2. A non-residential use on any lot in the MVC or MTC that is abutting or directly across a local street
from any lot in a residential district.
3. A conditional use on a lot that is in or abutting any residential district.
8.1-6.C Design Standards
A required buffer area must comply with at least one of the following minimum design standards (1, 2 or 3)
with details provided to support the option chosen. The PZC will make the ultimate determination on which
option will be used.
1. Buffer Width and Landscape Planting: The buffer must be designed to provide both the minimum
width and landscape plantings.
a. Width: The minimum width of buffer areas is as follows:
• All commercial districts abutting a residential district - 15 feet
• All Industrial districts abutting a residential district - 30 feet
• All non-residential uses in the MVC or MTC abutting a residential district – 10 feet
• Conditional uses in or abutting any residential district - 25 feet
b. Landscape Plantings: At a minimum, the plantings must consist of evergreen trees a minimum
of 6 feet in height planted at intervals that will create a contiguous screen of vegetation while
providing enough space for the tree to thrive. Non-evergreen planting may be included to
supplement evergreen planting, but not to take its place.
2. Berm/Fence/Wall and Landscape Planting: The buffer must be designed to include both a berm/
fence/wall and landscape plantings. A minimum buffer width is not required with this option.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 8-6
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
a. Berm/Fence/Wall: A six (6) to eight (8)-foot-high earthen berm or a six (6) to eight (8)-foot-high
solid and opaque wall or fence where the berm, fence, or wall is at a location and of a design and
materials deemed by the PZC to be sufficient to accomplish the purposes of this Section as stated
in Section 8.1-6.A above.
b. Landscape Plantings: Landscaping, including trees and shrubs, must be provided to enhance and
soften the area of the berm, fence, or wall.
3. Natural Vegetation: This buffer option may be used where the existing landscaping/vegetated area
provides adequate buffering between the two properties and meets the following:
a. The existing vegetation includes a healthy stand of trees that will be maintained
b. The width of the existing vegetation is a minimum of 1.5 times the required buffer width in Section
8.1-6.C.1 above.
8.1-7 Design and Screening for Solid Waste  		E nclosures, Servic e Areas, Mechanical
Equipm ent, and Utilities
8.1-7.A Purpose
1. To reduce the visual and physical impacts of service areas, mechanical equipment, trash and recycling
containers, and other similar site functions on other on-site uses, the street environment, public open
spaces, and adjacent properties, while maintaining accessibility for service providers and users.
2. To mitigate the off-site visual impacts of service and mechanical equipment areas when siting alone
does not adequately mitigate impacts.
8.1-7.B Design Standards
1. Applicability: The following design standards apply to all development except single-unit and twounit
residential development.
2. General Location: Services and outdoor storage areas, large utility cabinets and mechanical equipment,
and waste receptacles (dumpsters, compactors, and mechanical equipment) must be located away
from highly visible areas, such as streets and pedestrian walkways, to minimize visual, noise or physical
impacts on the site, street environment, adjacent public open spaces, and adjacent properties.
3. Solid Waste/Recycling Enclosure: All solid waste receptacles and recycling bins not located within
parking garages or other indoor facilities must be located on a concrete base, in a freestanding
enclosure that is architecturally consistent with the primary structure(s) or other walls on the site.
Chain link fencing with slats may be used if not prohibited by the underlying zone and if the enclosure
is not located within the front yard. The enclosure should be located in an area convenient for on-site
use and accessible for collection.
4. Service and Outdoor Storage Areas: Service areas (loading docks, compactors, large utilities) and
outdoor storage areas should not face or be highly visible from a public street. Where not feasible
due to situations such as multiple street frontages, limited lot size or existing development on the
site, the area should be screened from view with a solid visual barrier, using materials and colors
consistent with the design of the primary structure(s) on the site. Utility cabinets and small-scale
service elements may be screened with landscaping or structures.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 8-7
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
5. Mechanical Equipment: All mechanical equipment, including air conditioners, heaters, vents, and
similar equipment, rooftop and ground-mounted, must be screened from public view (both on and
offsite) and from adjacent residential and green districts except for any equipment less than 30-inches
in height that is located on the ground or any permitted renewable energy generation equipment that
is for individual single or two-unit residential use on a private property. Screening must be located so
as not to interfere with operation of the equipment. All screening for mechanical equipment must
meet the following standards:
a. Screening Materials: The screening materials should be of material requiring minimal maintenance
and must be as high as the equipment being screened.
b. Ground Mounted: For ground-mounted equipment, landscaping may be used if a solid screen can
be provided typically within two (2) years of the time of planting.
c. Roof-Top: For rooftop equipment, all screening devices should be well integrated into the architectural
design through such elements as parapet walls, false roofs, roof wells, clerestories or equipment rooms.
Screening walls or unit-mounted screening is allowed but less desirable. Wood generally should not be
used. Louvered designs are acceptable if consistent with building design style.
6. Utility Meters: All banks of more than 10 utility meters should be screened from view from a public
right-of-way by use of a structure, landscaping or both. If meters are enclosed in cabinets visible from
public rights-of-way, exterior surfaces should be finished with material compatible and complementary
to the architecture of the building.
7. Materials: The design and selection of landscaping and structural materials should be of sufficient
size, quantity, and height to effectively screen service elements and to make those elements meet
the requirements above. Landscaping should be incorporated into the design wherever possible to
enhance the visual appearance of the screen.
8.2 Off -Street Parking and Loading , Bike
Parking
8.2-1 Applicability Off-street parking and loading must be provided in accordance with this section for any building or use
hereafter erected, established, enlarged, increased, or exchanged. The number of parking and loading spaces
required shall be based on construction or development activity after the effective date of these regulations.
This section does not apply to reoccupation of an existing building where there is no change of use or any
physical alteration (placement of a new sign, per Section 8.4, Sign Regulations, is not considered a physical
alteration) so long as the existing parking is maintained.
8.2-2 Obligation The property owner’s obligation to maintain these off-street parking spaces and off-street loading
accommodations will continue so long as there are buildings and/or uses subject to these requirements. It is
unlawful for the owner of any building or use subject to the provisions of this section to discontinue, change,
or dispense with, or to cause the discontinuance of any vehicle parking or loading space to a level that violates
the requirements of this section or the specific conditions of an individual permit. It is unlawful for any firm or
corporation to occupy a building without providing parking spaces and loading accommodations which meet
with the requirements of and are in compliance with these regulations.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 8-8
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
8.2-3 Determination of Compliance The Zoning Official is responsible for determining compliance with the parking space standards of Section 8.2-
4 and the interpretation of required spaces of Section 8.2-5.
8.2-4 Parking Spaces The number of off-street parking spaces provided shall be in accordance with the following schedule of
requirements. To identify which specific uses fall under each category below, see the Table of Permitted Uses
in Section 4.1.
See Section 8.2-6 for additional parking and loading requirements in the MDD.
Table 8.2-4 Parking Space Requirements
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 8-9
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 8-10
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 8-11
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 8-12
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
8.2-4.A Measurements
1. Patron Floor Area: Where a parking calculation is based on “Patron Floor Area”, the parking
requirements shall apply to all floor areas of the facility (including outside areas such as patios,
decks, and the like) that are accessible to a customer, client, participant, visitor or guest of the facility
except for hallways, stairwells, bathroom areas, and those areas of the building used exclusively by
the employees of the establishment. This area shall include, but not be limited to, the entire area for
seating, standing, assembling, queuing, ordering, and service.
2. Public Assembly Areas: For any Public Assembly Area use in which any portion of the seating consists
of benches, pews or other such seating, each 18 inches of such seating shall be counted as one seat.
3. Employees: For requirements stated in terms of employees, the calculation shall be based upon the
maximum number of employees likely to be on the premises during the largest shift.
8.2-5 Interpretation of Required Parking Spaces
8.2-5.A Storage of Trucks
The parking required in Section 8.2-4 is in addition to space for storage of trucks or other vehicles used in
connection with a business, commercial, or industrial use.
8.2-5.B Fractional Spaces
Where fractional spaces result, the parking spaces required are construed to be the next highest whole number.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 8-13
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
8.2-5.C Uses Not Listed
The parking requirement for a use not specifically listed in this section will be determined by the Zoning
Official based on the parking demand for a listed use with similar characteristics.
8.2-5.D Mixed Uses in the Same Building
In the case of mixed uses within the same building, the parking spaces required for that building shall equal the
sum of the requirements of the various uses computed separately. (For example, the parking for a warehouse
that also includes office space will be determined by taking the gross floor area for warehouse space and the
gross floor area for office space, calculating the parking spaces for each, and then adding them together.) If
the same space is designed for multiple uses, parking will be calculated for the use that requires the greatest
number of parking spaces.
8.2-5.E Location
Required and/or additional parking facilities must be located on the same lot as the building or other use
which they serve except where off-site parking may be allowed elsewhere in these regulations.
8.2-6 Parking and Loading Requirements in the MDD
There shall be an ongoing obligation for a use in the MDD to maintain the required number of on-site
spaces or participation in a validation program or off-site parking option, as set forth in this Section 8.2-6.
Any diminishment of the number of parking spaces, termination of a lease, or not participating in a parking
validation program shall require review and appropriate action, including revocation or termination of the
permit, by the Office of Planning and Development Services and/or the appropriate commission
8.2-6.A Onsite Loading
Loading accommodations onsite are encouraged but are not required in the MDD.
8.2-6.B Activities Not Requiring Additional Parking
The following activities can occur without any requirement for additional parking spaces on any lot in the MDD
provided the same number of parking spaces exists on the lot at the time of the activity when compared with
the number of spaces that existed on October 1, 2019.
1. Reoccupation: Reoccupation of an existing building, including any change of use, except as described
in subsection 8.2-6.C.
2. Physical Alterations: Any physical alterations to existing buildings or to a site that do not increase
gross floor area for the use by more than 200 SF.
8.2-6.C Activities Requiring Compliance
The following activities will require compliance with the parking requirements of this Section 8.2 of the
regulations.
1. New Construction: Any new construction of a vacant site.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 8-14
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
2. Increase in Floor Area: Any physical alterations to existing buildings or to a site that increase gross
floor area for the use by more than 200 SF or that include the addition of an outdoor patio. Where
floor area is used to determine parking requirements, the calculation will be based on the total floor
area after such physical alteration is made.
3. Change of Use: Any change of use from a non-restaurant or drinking establishment use to a restaurant
or drinking establishment use.
4. Residential Use: The addition of any residential use will require compliance with the standards for
any additional residential units.
8.2-6.D Reduction in Parking
Parking space requirements for a use in the MDD shall be 50% of the requirements for that use under Section 8.2-4.
8.2-6.E Validation Program
A commercial use may substitute the continuous participation in a parking validation program for 100% of the
parking space requirements provided:
1. Signage: The commercial use provides signage at all times that clearly demonstrates participation in
the parking validation program in the front window or entrance, on all menus for a restaurant, at all
registers, and at all outdoor seating areas.
2. Proof of Participation: Annual proof of participation in the validation program shall be provided to
the Office of Planning and Development each January for the previous year.
8.2-6.F Offsite Parking
Required parking for uses within the MDD zone may be provided on sites other than the sites which they
serve provided that:
1. Location: Said spaces are within 500 feet walking distance of the lot or use which they serve and are
within the MDD.
2. Ownership: Such spaces shall preferably be in same ownership as the use which they serve. However,
evidence of a lease of such spaces for a minimum term of one (1) year, with automatic annual renewals,
shall be acceptable. Such lease shall be submitted to the Town prior to the filing of the site plan in
the Land Records and copies of annual renewals shall also be provided to the Office of Planning and
Development Services. Further, the obligation to maintain the required number of spaces as set forth
in Section 8.2-4 is not diminished by the leasing option permitted under this section.
8.2-7 Shared Parking 8.2-7.A Applicability
The PZC may reduce the parking requirements of Section 8.2-4 of these regulations to allow for shared parking.
Reductions below the minimum parking requirements are permitted by the PZC only where the following
conditions exist:
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 8-15
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
1. Differences in Operating Hours: In a mixed-use development (in any zoning district where mixeduse
development is permitted), there are two or more land uses which have differences in their
principal operating hours, thereby allowing utilization of the same parking spaces with minimal or no
conflict;
2. Uses Geared to Same Users: In a mixed-use development (in any zoning district where mixed-use
development is permitted), although not having similar operating hours, different uses will in fact be
geared to the same users, thus reducing the overall demand for parking spaces; or
3. Location: Where a use is located within 1,000 feet walking distance of another use that is generally
not in operation during the same hours or days as the first use, and where such use is willing to
formally make its parking available to the first use.
8.2-7.B Shared Parking Calculations
Notwithstanding any other parking requirements set forth in this section for individual land uses, when any land
or building meets the conditions above in Section 8.2-7.A, the minimum number of parking spaces required
to serve the combination of all uses may be reduced according to Table 8.2-7, Shared Parking Generation and
the following conditions:
1. Location: Shared parking spaces located off-site must be located within 1,000 feet of the primary
entrance of all uses served, unless remote parking shuttle service is provided.
2. Calculation: To calculate the minimum shared parking space requirement, multiply the minimum
parking requirements for each individual use as set forth in Section 8.2-4 by the appropriate percentages
as set forth below in Table 8.2-7, for each of the five (5) designated time periods, and then add the
resulting sums from each vertical column (Where the computation results in a fractional number, the
parking space requirement is the next highest whole number. The column total having the highest
total value is the minimum shared parking space requirement for that combination of land uses. The
“Uses” in Table 8.2-7 correlate with the major use categories in Table 4.1 Table of Permitted Uses.
Table 8.2-7 Shared Parking Generation
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 8-16
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
3. Option: The applicant may request approval of shared parking based on the latest Urban Land
Institute Parking Study or equivalent study as an alternative to the parking demand rates provided
in Table 8.2-7. The applicant must provide evidence to the satisfaction of the PZC that the alternative
parking demand rates more accurately represent the parking demand and peak parking demand for
the development.
4. Agreement: A shared parking and access agreement shall be included at site plan review.
8.2-7.C Site Plan Contents
An applicant seeking a reduction of parking spaces below the minimum shall provide the following information
to the PZC as applicable:
1. Size and Type: of all proposed development and composition of tenants/uses.
2. Calculations: that demonstrate the aggregate number of parking spaces for any mixed-use
development does not fall below the minimum shared parking space requirement based on Table 8.2-
7 or for the single most intensive time period if Section 8.2-7.B.3 is used.
3. If Table 8.2-7 is not used: the applicant must provide:
a. Anticipated rate of parking turnover, and the anticipated peak parking and traffic loads for all uses
that will be sharing off-street spaces.
b. Evidence that different uses within a mixed-use development are designed to serve the same
customers.
c. Calculations or other evidence that demonstrate how different uses proposed to share parking
spaces will not compete based on typical peak usage, hours of operation, or other similar
information.
4. Maps: that show walking routes between the subject parcel and any proposed off-site parking and
linear foot measurements of that walking route.
8.2-7.D Revocation
The PZC may revoke the application of this shared parking provision where, after notice to the property owner
and permit holder and the opportunity to be heard, it determines that a change in use will result in the demand
for more parking than what is supplied. Where additional parking cannot be supplied, the Commission may
require the reduction/elimination of uses based on the provision of parking required in Section 8.2-4.
8.2-8 Phased Parking Development The PZC may approve a phased development of the off-street parking area for a proposed or an existing
development, in accordance with the following conditions:
8.2-8.A Number of Spaces
The construction of the parking area and the installation of the spaces may be phased according to short term
requirements as designated on the plan, except that no less than 50% of the total spaces required will be
constructed as part of the short-term requirement. The PZC may approve the construction of less than 50% of
the total number of parking spaces where the applicant can demonstrate that doing so would be consistent
with the long-term plan for stormwater management on the site.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 8-17
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
8.2-8.B “Reserve Spaces”
The spaces not constructed are designated as “reserve spaces” on the site plan and laid out as an integral part
of the overall parking layout and must be located on land suitable for parking area development and either left
in its natural state or suitably landscaped.
8.2-8.C Additional Spaces Needed
If the Zoning Official determines that additional spaces identified as reserve spaces on the site plan may
be required, she/he shall notify the owner of the property concerning her/his findings and the owner shall
construct the required spaces within twelve (12) months of such notification.
8.2-9 Minimum Area /Materials For the purpose of this regulation, an off-street parking space is an all-weather surfaced area having a width
of not less than nine (9) feet and a length of not less than eighteen (18) feet. The length required shall be
measured on an axis parallel with the vehicle after it is parked. The required area is to be exclusive of driveways
and shall be permanently reserved for the temporary parking of one automobile. Areas reserved for parking
shall be connected with a street or public right-of-way by an all-weather surfaced driveway. In the case of
single-unit and two-unit dwellings, all-weather surfaces shall not be required.
Interior drives shall be of adequate width to serve a particular design arrangement of parking spaces, the
following being the minimum width permitted. 90° parking shall be used unless there is positive control of
traffic directions.
90° parking - 24 feet
60° parking - 18 feet
45° parking - 13 feet
30° parking - 11 feet
Parking Space and Interior Drive Minimum Area
8.2-10 Parking for People with Disabilities Parking shall be provided for people with disabilities in accordance with Article 21 of the Basic Building Code
of the State of Connecticut and Sec. 4. Subsection (h) of Section 14-253a of the Connecticut General Statutes.
Where provisions of this section of the Town’s regulations may be interpreted as having the effect of limiting
parking for people with disabilities, the provisions of state law shall govern.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 8-18
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
8.2-11 Pedestrian Safety Off-street parking spaces shall be separated from the building served by a minimum 6-foot wide concrete walk
with a 6-inch high concrete safety curb. In lots of 100 spaces or more, parking is prohibited adjacent to the
front of the building unless a minimum 20-foot-wide landscaped area is provided in addition to the minimum
6-foot wide concrete walk.
8.2-12 Entrance and Exit Driveways 8.2-12.A For single or two—unit dwellings
Driveways should not be less than nine (9) feet wide or more than 16 feet at the right-of-way line and should
not be less than 13 feet or more than 20 feet at the curb line.
8.2-12.B In multi-unit residential and all non-residential districts
The following shall apply:
1. Driveway Entrances/Exits: The design of driveway entrances/exits between the right-of-way line
and the curb line shall be as required by the Town of Groton Road and Drainage Standards if located
on a local street, or by the State Department of Transportation if located on a State Highway.
2. Number of Driveways: Each parcel may have a single driveway connected to each public right of way
on which the parcel has frontage unless the length of the frontage cannot accommodate a driveway.
Additional driveway entrances/exits may be approved by the PZC if warranted by the site location, lot
size, and circulation design requirements for the proposed use.
3. Limiting Curb Cuts: Property owners are strongly encouraged to design circulation on site in a
manner that limits curb cuts onto public roads.
*Note that more than one driveway on a frontage of a lot requires PZC approval per Sec. 8.2-12.B.2.
Entrance and Exit Driveways
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 8-19
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
4. Distance to Intersections or Other Properties’ Driveways: No driveway shall be permitted within
fifty (50) feet of the edge of pavement of a street intersection or within twenty-five (25) feet of a
driveway center line to an abutting property.
8.2-13 Marking All required parking spaces, except for single-unit or two-unit residences, must be marked by painted lines,
curbs, wheel stops or other means to indicate individual spaces.
8.2-14 Surfacing and Drainage Adequate storm water drainage shall be provided for all off-street parking areas. All parking areas and
related stormwater systems shall incorporate appropriate BMPs, low impact development features, and/or
other design elements consistent with the latest official version of the State of Connecticut Department of
Environmental Protection’s Stormwater Quality Manual, inclusive of its Low Impact Development Appendix.
The minimum required number of parking and truck loading facilities for all uses other than single or two-unit
dwellings shall have an all-weather surface of bituminous or concrete paving maintained in good condition and
capable of allowing free and safe movement of all vehicles using the facility. Unless otherwise permitted, the
perimeter of all parking areas should have a machine-formed curbing at least 5 inches high or precast concrete
bumpers, safety curbs, or other protective devices. The PZC may allow deviations from these standards for
curbing and surfacing of parking areas where:
• Materials other than bituminous or concrete paving are proposed as part of an acceptable stormwater
management strategy.
• Elimination or perforations in curbing are used as part of an acceptable stormwater management
strategy, allowing sheet flow to be conveyed to stormwater BMPs.
• Deviation from these standards in no way poses a significant threat to public safety, the health of
surface water resources, or the quality of underlying groundwater reserves.
8.2-15 Lighting Adequate lighting shall be provided in lots of more than 10 spaces, if off-street parking spaces are to be used
at night, and must comply with Section 8.5, Outdoor Lighting of these regulations.
8.2-16 Truck Loading Space Except where loading accommodations are specifically not required, site plans for non-residential uses must
provide the anticipated dimensions of delivery vehicles for each use and show curb radii, parking and/or
docking areas, and the circulation routes that will accommodate those vehicles.
8.2-16.A Free Movement
Loading spaces should be designed so that the free movement of vehicles and pedestrians over a sidewalk,
parking area, or street is not impaired.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 8-20
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
8.2-16.B Minimum Dimensions
Loading areas should have access to a public street and should have the following minimum dimensions:
1. Width: 12-feet
2. Length: 30 feet or based on typical delivery vehicle for proposed use, whichever is greater
3. Height: 14-feet
8.2-17 Bicycle Parking
Bicycle parking facilities are to be provided in any new development within a mixed-use zoning district (MTC,
MVC, NMDD, MDD) or commercial zoning district (CN, CR, WW) subject to the following standards:
8.2-17.A Minimum Space Required
All uses providing a minimum of 10 or more vehicular parking spaces must also provide the greater of two
(2) bicycle spaces or a total number of bicycle parking spaces equal to 5% of the number of vehicular parking
spaces provided.
8.2-17.B Location
Bicycle parking areas must be located within 100 feet of the main entrance to the building.
8.2-17.C Rack Construction
All bicycle racks must be anchored to the ground in a manner that will resist removal and
constructed of materials that will resist rust or corrosion.
8.2-17.D Internal Facilities
Multi-unit residential uses of five (5) or more units and professional office uses may provide the required
bicycle parking facilities within an internal, enclosed and/or secured facility.
8.3 Sidewalks
8.3-1 Applicability
Sidewalks are required in accordance with this section along the road frontage of all lots for any building or use
hereafter erected, enlarged, or intensified and thus requiring site plan approval, in all zones, except as noted in
Section 8.3-5. The PZC may require that provision be made to connect the sidewalk in front of the subject site
to sidewalks in the vicinity of the site or to a point where a pedestrian may continue to safely travel beyond
the subject site (See Section 8.3-3.C).
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 8-21
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
8.3-2 Frontage Sidewalks
Sidewalks, as required by this section, shall be constructed, at a minimum, along the entire road frontage of
a site and in accordance with the following standards unless otherwise stipulated within these regulations or
modified by the PZC.
8.3-2.A Minimum Width
The minimum width of a frontage sidewalk is five (5) feet. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to restrict
the PZC from requiring wider sidewalks considered necessary in conjunction with development of particular
sites such as schools, commercial centers, multi-family developments, institutional uses, and other, more
intense, pedestrian generators.
8.3-2.B Materials
The material for a frontage sidewalk shall be concrete unless a substitution is approved in accordance with
Section 8.3-5.B.
8.3-2.C Design
1. Accessibility: handicapped access must be provided at curb cuts and road intersections, in accordance
with current standards.
2. Temporary Sidewalk: Where a road is slated for reconstruction, the PZC may allow temporary
sidewalks built to a lesser standard.
3. Standards for Design:
a. Local Town Roads: The Town of Groton Department of Public Works Road and Drainage Standards
must be used for design.
b. State Roads: The more stringent design standards of either the Town of Groton Department of
Public Works Road and Drainage Standards or the Connecticut Department of Transportation
Highway Design Manual must be used.
4. Location: Where a location of a public sidewalk falls outside of the road right-of-way onto private
property, the applicant may choose one of the following options.
a. Deed property to the Town or State increasing the width of the right-of-way, or
b. Grant an easement to the Town allowing the public to pass and repass over the portion of the
sidewalk located on private property and to allow the Town to maintain and replace this same
portion of the sidewalk.
8.3-3 Extension of Sidewalks
The PZC may require that sidewalks constructed under this section be extended for a reasonable distance to
sidewalks existing along the road frontage on either side of the subject lot or to a point where a pedestrian
may safely return to the road travelway at locations where no other sidewalks exist.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 8-22
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
8.3-3.A Conditions for Requiring Extension of Sidewalks
In making such a determination, the PZC may require such extension of a frontage sidewalk under one or more
of the following conditions:
1. Existing Regulations and Conditions: The existing Zoning and Subdivision Regulations, and existing
developed conditions on abutting properties, make future development of sidewalks along these
property frontage(s) by the abutting property owner unlikely, as determined by the PZC.
2. Physical Conditions: Physical conditions along the frontage of abutting property(s) are such that
development of the sidewalk extension would not result in unreasonable development cost.
3. Linkage of Uses: Development of the subject site for the uses proposed, including but not necessarily
limited to schools, commercial centers, multi-unit developments, institutional uses or other, more
intense, pedestrian generators, would result in a reasonable need to link the use with living areas,
pedestrian systems, roads, recreational areas, educational, community or shopping facilities, or other
activity centers, to promote public safety and convenience. The Commission shall further take into
consideration the number of existing pedestrians and the number of new pedestrians to be generated
by the proposed use. Under no circumstances shall such extension be required to exceed 200 feet.
The ends of sidewalks not connected to an existing sidewalk system should be returned to grade at
the curb or gutter line.
8.3-4 Internal Sidewalks
8.3-4.A Connection to Frontage Sidewalk
The PZC may require public sidewalks along a site’s frontage to connect to the buildings and/or land uses on
the site by a system of internal sidewalks in any of the following circumstances:
1. On newly developed sites
2. On redeveloped sites that can reasonably accommodate an internal sidewalk network without major
impacts to the parking lot design
3. On sites where there will be pedestrian activity from the frontage sidewalk based on the proposed
onsite use
8.3-4.B On-site Parking Lot
This internal system of sidewalks should also function to serve people walking from on-site parking lots to the
main entrances of any building or any other point of on-site pedestrian destination.
8.3-4.C Connection to Adjacent Properties
The PZC may require internal sidewalks to connect to adjacent properties where there is evidence that
significant cross-movement of pedestrians will occur.
8.3-4.D Design
Internal sidewalks shall be constructed of concrete and shall be a minimum of four (4) feet wide. In cases where
parking abuts the internal sidewalk, the walk shall be six (6) feet wide. The PZC may consider and approve
alternative materials to concrete, such as rubberized materials, where such materials may help improve the
long-term durability of the sidewalk or help facilitate renewable energy generation.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 8-23
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
8.3-5 Options for Frontage Sidewalks
8.3-5.A Postponement
If, in the opinion of the PZC, frontage sidewalks do not appear to be warranted at the time due to lack of
existing/anticipated development in the area and/or resulting pedestrian traffic, the PZC may postpone the
installation of the frontage sidewalk to a later date, subject to the following:
1. Demonstration: The applicant must demonstrate, and the PZC must find, that the postponement of
installing the frontage sidewalk will not significantly endanger the health, safety and welfare of the
existing or anticipated pedestrian traffic along the frontage of the property.
2. Required Information: The approved site plan must provide all necessary information concerning
the future sidewalk including, but not limited to, location, grades, elevations, and other details
necessary for the future construction of said sidewalk.
3. Agreement: Prior to filing the approved site plan on which this option is exercised, the developer and
PZC shall enter into a written, binding agreement indicating that sidewalks will be installed at a later
date which 1) has been determined at the time of approval, or 2) will be determined at a future date
when conditions change (i.e. additional development or pedestrian activity in the area, Town-initiated
sidewalk extensions, etc.). This agreement shall be filed in Land Records.
8.3-5.B Substitution
The PZC may allow an alternative to frontage sidewalks, such as a bike path or running/walking trail. This option
is intended to provide alternative design and materials to frontage sidewalks in the following circumstances:
1. Impractical Conditions: Where the existing structures, vegetation, wetlands or topography make it
impractical to provide the concrete sidewalk, or
2. Alternative Design or Location: Where an alternative design or location will better serve the nonvehicular
transportation network in the area, or
3. Internal Sidewalks: Where a system of internal sidewalks connecting one property to another would
better serve the walking public.
Any alternative frontage sidewalk or internal sidewalk located on private property shall be maintained by the
property owner.
8.3-5.C Elimination
The PZC may eliminate the requirement for frontage sidewalks altogether where the applicant demonstrates
and the PZC finds one or more of the following:
1. Limited Pedestrian Movement: There will be no significant pedestrian movement to the site and/
or between the site and those adjacent to it and is not shown as an area for a proposed sidewalk on
the Town’s Bicycle, Pedestrian and Trails Master Plan.
2. Physical Limitations: Extreme topography or other physical limitations prohibit the reasonable
installation of said sidewalk.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 8-24
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
8.4 Sign Regulations
8.4-1 Purpose and Declaration
The purpose of this regulation is to promote and protect the public health, welfare, and safety by regulating
location, number, and size of all signs in all zoning districts. It is intended to protect property values, create an
attractive economic and business climate, and to enhance and protect the physical appearance and, where
applicable, the historic character of the Town. It is further intended to prevent signs or advertising forms which
present a public safety hazard due to their unsafe location or their potential distraction to motorists.
Commercial signs are not favored over non-commercial signs. The requirements below regulate the type of
signs allowed in certain locations, and their sizes, setbacks, etc. Each property is allowed a certain amount
of signage based on its zoning district and use. Whether a business or property owner utilizes that allowed
signage for commercial or non-commercial messages is not something regulated herein.
8.4-2 General Requirements 8.4-2.A Signs Allowed and Permit Requirements
1. Zoning Permit: No sign will be erected, structurally altered, or otherwise changed, until a Zoning
Permit has been approved by the Zoning Official unless a Zoning Permit is not expressly required under
Section 8.4. However, even signs that do not require permits are subject to these regulations.
2. Interior Signs: Signs located inside the interior of a building, with the exception of window signs, are
exempt from these regulations.
3. Allowed Sign Categories: Signs allowed in the Town fall under the following categories:
a. Signs Permitted in All Districts (Section 8.4-5): These signs do not require a zoning permit.
b. Signs Permitted in Residential Districts (Section 8.4-6): Certain signs in this Section may
require a zoning permit.
c. Signs Permitted in Non-Residential Districts (Section 8.4-7): Signs in this Section fall under
Permanent Signs that require a zoning permit or Temporary Signs that may require a zoning permit.
d. Signs Permitted in Green Districts (Section 8.4-8): Signs in this Section require zoning permits
if located along a public street frontage.
8.4-2.B Construction
Signs must be constructed in accordance with the structural and safety specifications of the Building Code. The
installation, alteration, repairing, maintenance, and inspection of all signs must conform to requirements of
local codes and ordinances.
8.4-2.C Illumination
1. External Lighting Fixtures: External lighting fixtures are permitted on indirectly illuminated signs,
provided such fixtures are not positioned more than six (6) feet beyond the sign structure and are so
attached that such illumination is directed upon the face of the sign and does not reflect directly into
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 8-25
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
adjoining property or public streets, or up into the sky. No lighting from illuminated signs must cause
glare to be reflected off the premises in which the sign is located.
2. Night Illumination: Signs that are illuminated at night (from sunset to sunrise) may not exceed a
maximum luminance level of seven hundred fifty (750) candela per square meter (cd/m²) or Nits,
regardless of the method of illumination.
3. Neon/Tube Lighting: Neon/tube lighting may be used on permitted signs in non-residential districts
only, provided that:
a. Such lighting does not outline buildings or structures or ornamental features by use of exposed
neon tubing, strings of lights, or otherwise.
b. Such signs are considered window signs and are placed only in the window of commercial
establishments.
c. Such signs do not exceed three per establishment.
d. The aggregate area of such signs does not exceed 25 percent of the aggregate window area of the
applicable façade, which counts toward the maximum allowable window sign area per Table 8.4-7A.
8.4-2.D Maintenance
The owner of the premises on which a sign is erected is directly responsible for keeping all signs and associated
components in good repair and in safe condition. All temporary signs must likewise be maintained. If the
Zoning Official deems any temporary sign to be faded, torn, or broken, the sign will be considered in violation
and must be removed, repaired or replaced.
8.4-2.E Permanent versus Temporary Signs
All sign permit applications must note whether a sign is permanent or temporary. Any permanent structure is
considered a permanent sign, whether or not that sign has changeable content.
8.4-2.F Labels for Temporary Signs
All permitted temporary signs will be issued a sticker label that must be displayed on the sign. Such stickers will
include the permit number, expiration date, and contact information for the applicant.
8.4-2.G Sight Lines
All signs must conform to the sight line standards of Section 4.2-2.N.
8.4-2.H Town of Groton Historic District
All signs proposed to be located within a Town of Groton Historic District must comply separately with any
applicable regulations of such District, prior to the installation of any signs.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 8-26
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
8.4-3 Sign Prohibitions
The following prohibitions apply to all signs in all zoning districts.
8.4-3.A Prohibited Attachments
No sign may be attached to any tree, fence, or utility pole (except for light pole banners meeting Table 8.4-7B
Requirements for Temporary Signs in Non-Residential Districts).
8.4-3.B Prohibited Projection
No sign may project beyond any property line.
8.4-3.C Changing Illumination
No sign may have blinking, flashing, fluttering, oscillating, rotating, or pulsating lights or other illuminating
devices which have a changing light intensity or color. Emergency lights are excluded.
8.4-3.D Confusing Signs
Signs that may be confused as official warning or control signs related to issues of public safety (e.g.,
construction) are prohibited.
8.4-3.E View Concealing Signs
Signs which conceal from view any traffic or street sign or signal are prohibited.
8.4-3.F Movable or Portable Signs
Unless otherwise allowed for in this Section 8.4, movable or portable signs, including any sign displayed on a
vehicle when such vehicle is used primarily for the purpose of such display, are prohibited.
8.4-3.G Other Prohibited Signs
The following types of signs, as defined herein, are specifically prohibited:
1. Air-Activated Graphic
2. Portable Message Center Sign
3. Projected Image Sign
4. Vehicle Sign. Such signs are prohibited when a vehicle is used primarily for the purpose of a stationary
sign display and is not regularly used for business activities
8.4-4 Non -Conforming Signs
Existing legal signs of a size or type not permitted in the district in which they are situated, or which do
not conform to all the provisions of these regulations, are considered non-conforming structures under this
section. Any increase in size is deemed to be an enlargement or extension producing an increase in nonconformity.
Non-conforming signs must not be relocated to any other location, unless such relocation results
in eliminating the non-conformity.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 8-27
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
8.4-5 Signs Permitted in All Districts The following signs are permitted in all districts without approval of a Zoning Permit, subject to the requirements
of Sections 8.4-2 and 8.4-3 and the following conditions:
8.4-5.A Construction Signs
1. Maximum Area: Signs directly associated with a construction activity location are allowed to a
maximum area of thirty-two (32) SF in any combination.
2. Location: Such a sign or signs must be located on the property in such a manner as to not block sight
lines in accordance with Section 4.2-2.N.
3. Time Frame: Such a sign or signs may be placed at the commencement of construction and must be
removed upon completion of the project.
8.4-5.B Public Signs
Signs of a non-commercial nature and in the public interest, erected by, or on the order of, a public officer in the
performance of his/her public duty, such as safety signs, memorial plaques, signs of historical interest and the like.
8.4-5.C Required Signs
Signs required by applicable building (e.g. address numbers), fire codes, or health and safety regulations (e.g.
OSHA), or other laws and regulations whether such sign is temporary or permanent.
8.4-5.D Integral Signs
Signs (traditionally names of non-commercial buildings, dates of erection, monumental citations,
commemorative tablets, and the like), when carved into stone, concrete, or similar material or made of bronze,
aluminum, or other permanent type construction and made an integral part of the structure.
8.4-5.E Private Traffic Direction
Signs used only for directing traffic movement onto a premise or within a premise, not exceeding three (3) SF in
area. Illumination of these signs shall be permitted in accordance with the section on illumination. Horizontal
directional signs on and flush with paved areas are exempt from these standards.
8.4-6 Signs Permitted in Residential Districts
Signs associated with different uses in residential districts are allowed as described herein and subject to
Sections 8.4-2 and 8.4-3:
8.4-6.A One and Two-Unit Dwellings
Zoning Permits are NOT required for the following:
1. Freestanding or Wall Sign, Permanent: Up to one (1) freestanding or wall sign not to exceed two
(2) SF in area. If a freestanding sign, it must not exceed six (6) feet in height and must be setback a
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 8-28
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
minimum of ten (10) feet from any property line.
Flag, Permanent: Up to two (2) flags per dwelling unit, not exceeding fifteen (15) square feet each,
provided such flag does not obstruct pedestrian movements in any public right-of-way.
2. Yard Sign, Temporary: Temporary yard signage for any one- or two-unit dwelling must comply with
the following:
a. Signage must not exceed eight (8) SF in cumulative area, with no one sign being larger than four
(4) SF.
b. Signs must be free-standing and a maximum of four (4) feet in height.
c. Signs may only be posted by the property owner or legal resident of any lot on which the signage
is posted, unless written permission is given by a property owner or legal resident for someone
else to post a temporary sign in her or his yard.
d. Signs must not block visibility at street and/or driveway intersections and must not affect the
orderly flow of traffic.
e. Signs must in all respects comply with the general standards of Section 8.4-2 of these regulations.
f. Voting Event: 30 days before and 15 days after a local, State or Federal voting event, additional yard
signs are allowed, provided each sign is limited to 4 SF and all other requirements in 3.b through 3.e
above are met. All signs under this standard must be removed 15 days after the voting event.
8.4-6.B Multi-Unit Dwellings
Zoning Permits are required for the following:
1. Free-standing Sign, Permanent: Up to two (2) free-standing signs per street frontage granting
access to the premises, not to exceed eight (8) SF in area or six (6) feet in height each, set back a
minimum of ten (10) feet from any property line.
2. Wall Sign, Permanent: Up to one (1) wall sign per street frontage granting access to the premises
not to exceed eight (8) SF.
Zoning Permits are NOT required for the following:
1. Flag, Permanent: Up to two (2) flags per building, not exceeding fifteen (15) square feet each
provided such flag does not obstruct pedestrian movements in any public right-of-way.
2. Yard Sign, Temporary: Temporary yard signage for any multi-unit dwelling must comply with the
following:
a. Signage must not exceed eight (8) SF in cumulative area, with no one sign being larger than
four (4) SF.
b. Signs must be free-standing and a maximum of four (4) feet in height.
c. Signs may only be posted by the property owner or manager of any lot on which the signage is
posted, unless written permission is given by a property owner or manager for someone else
to post a temporary sign in the lot.
d. Signs must not block visibility at street and/or driveway intersections and must not affect the
orderly flow of traffic.
e. Signs must in all respects comply with the general standards of Section 8.4-2 of these regulations.
f. Voting Event: 30 days before and 15 days after a local, State or Federal voting event, additional
yard signs are allowed, provided each sign is limited to 4 SF and all other requirements in 2.b
through 2.e above are met. All signs under this standard must be removed 15 days after the
voting event.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 8-29
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
8.4-6.C Other Uses
One freestanding and one wall sign is permitted for any other permitted use in residential districts (not
including home occupations) subject to the same approvals required for the principal use and provided each
sign does not exceed an area of twenty-four (24) SF and the freestanding sign does not exceed a height of eight
(8) feet above ground level, and is set back a minimum of ten (10) feet from any property line.
8.4-6.D Illuminated Signs
All illuminated signs, including digital or electronic signs, are prohibited in residential districts (R, RS, RU)
except for the following uses:
1. Schools, Public/Private (K-12)
2. Churches and other places of religious worship
3. Public (local, state, and federal) buildings
8.4-7 Signs Permitted in Non -Residential Districts Signs are permitted in all commercial, industrial, and mixed-use districts subject to the same approvals required
for the principal use and the requirements in the Regulations for Signs in Non-Residential Districts Tables.
8.4-7.A Allowable Sign Area
1. Permanent Signs:
a. Subject to Maximum Total Square Feet: Each business is allowed up to two (2) SF of permanent
sign area per linear foot of building frontage for its business, up to a total of 400 SF of permanent
signage. This may include any combination of the following permanent sign types described in
Table 8.4-7A below.
• Awning
• Flag
• Projecting
• Wall
b. Not subject to Maximum Total Square Feet: Free-standing Signs are not subject to the above
maximum square footage allowance and are allowed based on lot frontage and not building
frontage in accordance with Table 8.4-7A below.
2. Temporary Signs:
a. Subject to Maximum Total Square Feet: Each business is allowed up to two (2) SF of temporary
sign area per linear foot of building frontage for its business, up to a total of 150 SF of temporary
signage. This may include any combination of the following sign types described in Table 8.4-7B
below.
• Balloon
• Banner
• Blade
b. Not subject to Maximum Total Square Feet: The following signs are not subject to the above
maximum square footage allowance and are allowed in accordance with Table 8.4-7B below.
• Light Pole Banners
• A-Frame/T-Frame
• Window
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 8-30
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
8.4-7.B Yard Signs
Temporary yard signage in any non-residential zoning district is prohibited, with the exception of the following:
1. Voting Event: 30 days before and 15 days after a local, State or Federal voting event, yard signs are
allowed, provided each sign is limited to 4 SF and all other requirements listed in section 8.4-6.A.3.b
through 8.4-6.A.3.e are met. All signs under this standard must be removed 15 days after the voting
event.
8.4-7.C Off-Premise Signs
1. New Off-Premise Signs: A new off-premise sign is prohibited, unless all the following can be met:
2.
a. The sign is located in the State right-of-way along the street frontage of the use requesting the
sign.
b. The sign meets the requirements for a free-standing sign of Table 8.4-7A (except for the property
line setback) and the sign is in- lieu of the allowed onsite free-standing signage.
c. The business gets a lease from the State.
3. Existing Legal Off-Premise Signs: may remain as legal non-conforming structures.
8.4-7.D Digital Signs
Digital or electronic signs are allowed subject to receiving a zoning permit with the following requirements:
1. Free-standing: Digital signage is allowed only on free-standing signs, and must follow all other
standards for free-standing signs in terms of total number of signs, sign area, etc.
2. Size and Design: The digital portion of the sign must be integral to the full sign, not exceed twelve
(12) SF, and not include more than two (2) colors.
3. Frequency of Change: The digital message of the sign cannot change more than once every minute.
4. Flashing Prohibited: The sign must not have flashing components, nor play full motion videos or
film, and must follow the illumination standards of 8.4-2.C.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 8-31
PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
1 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
DEFINITIONS
2
Table 8.4-7A REQUIREMENTS FOR PERMANENT SIGNS IN NON-RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 8-32
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 8-33
PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
1 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
DEFINITIONS
2
Table 8.4-7B REQUIREMENTS FOR TEMPORARY SIGNS IN NON-RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 8-34
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 8-35
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
8.4-8 Signs Permitted in Green Districts
Signs are permitted in all green districts subject to the requirements of Sections 8.4-2 and 8.4-3 and the
following conditions:
8.4-8.A Zoning Permits Required
1. Free-standing Sign, Permanent: Up to two (2) free-standing signs per street frontage granting
access to the premises, not to exceed eight (8) SF in area or six (6) feet in height each, set back a
minimum of ten (10) feet from any property line.
8.4-8.B Zoning Permits NOT Required
1. Yard Sign, Temporary: Temporary yard signage must comply with the following:
a. Signage must not exceed eight (8) SF in cumulative area, with no one sign being larger than four
(4) SF.
b. Signs must be free-standing and a maximum of four (4) feet in height.
c. Signs may only be posted by the property owner of any lot on which the signage is posted, unless
written permission is given by a property owner for someone else to post a temporary sign.
Notations for Table 8.4-7 Requirements for Signs in Non-Residential Districts
(1) If a business has building frontage on two (2) streets, two (2) signs will be permitted, one (1) per street.
(2) If a business has building frontage on two (2) streets, four (4) signs will be permitted, two (2) per
street. See also Section 8.4-10.
(3) In the MDD and WW zones, for buildings having a frontage greater than 50 linear feet, one (1)
additional foot of wall sign height is allowed for every additional ten (10) feet of frontage over 50 feet,
the sign not to exceed ten (10) feet in height. Wall signs in the WW zone must follow the standards of
Section 8.4-9 below.
(4) In the IM and IG zones, businesses with more than one (1) building on a single lot may display one
(1) additional wall sign on each additional non-accessory building beyond the first building, and each
such additional sign shall not exceed 125 SF in size.
(5) Canopy and awning type signs shall be located on the canopy or awning face, shall not extend
beyond the canopy face in any direction, and shall be an integral part of the sign design.
(6) See Section 8.4-10 for provisions for special large commercial tenant building signage.
Requirements for Awning Signs
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 8-36
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
2. Internal Signs: Any signs internal to a park or open space, such as trail signs, historical markers,
interpretive signs, etc. are not governed by these regulations.
8.4-9 Waterfront Wall Signs in WW Zone
8.4-9.A Requirements
Wall signs are permitted in WW zones on the sides of water-related commercial businesses facing the water.
These signs will conform to the following requirements:
1. Permitted Number: 1 per business
2. Size Determination: 1 sq. ft. per linear foot of building (waterside) frontage
3. Maximum Size: 50 sq. ft.
4. Maximum Height Above Roof: N/A
5. Maximum Extension from Wall: 15 inches
6. Maximum Height: N/A
8.4-10 Special Large Commercial Building Signag E
Provisions
The purpose of this section is to: allow a different amount of wall signs for large commercial businesses offering
multiple services to encourage the effective use of signs to convey specific information to the public; and to
enable the use of wall signs to break up large expanses of horizontal and vertical building façades.
8.4-10.A Building Requirements
Wall signage meeting the standards of this Section may be approved in lieu of the sign area of Section 8.4-7.A.1
for large anchor businesses on lots zoned CR, CN, MTC, MVC, IM, and NMDD under the following conditions:
1. Size: Business must occupy in excess of 50,000 SF of building space; and
2. Frontage: Portion of the building that the business occupies must have 200 feet or more of continuous,
linear building frontage.
8.4-10.B Wall Sign Requirements
If the requirements of subsection A of this section are met, signage for these businesses may be allowed
subject to the following conditions:
1. Sign Area:
a. The maximum total sign area must not exceed 2 SF per linear foot of building frontage supporting
such signs
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 8-37
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
2. Sign Size:
a. The maximum of any one sign must not exceed 400 SF.
b. Signs that are 50 to 400 SF are considered primary wall signs.
c. Signs that are less than 50 SF are considered secondary wall signs.
3. Primary Building Frontage:
a. A business is allowed a maximum of eight (8) wall signs on its primary building frontage, which is
the side with the longer building frontage.
b. The primary building frontage is allowed a maximum of two (2) primary wall signs the combined
SF of which must not exceed 400 SF. All other wall signs are secondary signs.
4. Secondary Building Frontage:
a. If a business has building frontage on two (2) streets, the secondary building frontage is allowed a
maximum of two (2) wall signs on this frontage.
b. The secondary building frontage is allowed a maximum of one (1) primary wall sign not to exceed
200 SF. All other wall signs are secondary signs.
5. Other Provisions: All other provisions of 8.4-7, Signs Permitted in Non- Residential Districts apply.
8.4-10.C Sign Plan
Prior to the approval of wall signage under this section, staff will review and approve a sign plan presented by
the applicant through the Administrative Site Plan application process. The sign plan will include a conformance
table outlining all calculations supporting the request for additional signage under this section including: the
number of proposed wall signs, the size of each, the total sign area allowed under this section and the total
sign area proposed. In order to ensure consistency with the regulations, the sign plan may contain such other
information at the request of the Director of Planning and Development or designee, as the case may be.
8.5 Outdoor Lighting
8.5-1 Purpose
These Regulations are intended to provide standards with regard to exterior lighting in order to maximize
the effectiveness of site lighting, to enhance public safety and welfare, to raise public awareness of energy
conservation, to discourage the installation of lighting fixtures (luminaires) that emit objectionable illumination,
to avoid unnecessary upward illumination and illumination of adjacent properties, and to reduce glare.
8.5-2 Applicability
The standards herein shall apply to all new exterior lighting where Site Plan or Special Permit is required,
except for the following:
• Single-unit and two-unit dwellings
• Traditional seasonal lighting
• Temporary lighting associated with a fair, carnival or similar function authorized by the Town of Groton
• Temporary light used by Public Works, Police, Fire or Emergency Services
For existing development, the cumulative changing of more than 25% of the lights on the premises, including
the luminaires, their mounting heights, or their location, requires a site plan modification or administrative
site plan to determine that such changes do not increase any non-conformity and that new lighting complies
with the standards in this Section 8.5 to the extent practicable.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 8-38
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
Nothing in this section diminishes the separate responsibility for a use of land, buildings, or structures in the
Town of Groton to comply with all appropriate Building and Fire Code standards for lighting.
8.5-3 Standards
8.5-3.A General
For commercial, industrial, institutional, mixed-use or multi-unit developments, and for other non-residential
uses in residential districts:
1. Any externally-mounted, direct light source directed towards the property line must minimize the light
trespass at the property line at ground level or above (See Appendix D Lighting Guidelines); and
2. Lighting fixtures for all areas of vehicular and/or pedestrian access must be full cut-off type fixtures
or Illuminating Engineering Society of North America (IESNA) cut-off fixtures, as approved by the
Commission, or must be fully shielded/recessed fixtures where the lens is recessed or flush with the
bottom surface. (See examples in Appendix D Lighting Guidelines).
8.5-3.B Security, Aesthetics, and Display
Lighting fixtures for building security or aesthetics and any display purposes must, unless otherwise approved
by the PZC or these regulations, be:
1. Top downward (not upward or sideways); and
2. Full cut-off or IESNA cut-off fixtures, as approved by the Commission, or fully shielded/recessed. Any
application for use of IESNA fixtures should include “cut-sheets” with specifications and details of the
proposed fixture and pole. (See examples in Appendix D Lighting Guidelines).
The PZC may approve other lighting fixtures for aesthetics or display purposes as part of a site plan approval if
the lighting meets the lighting guidelines for vertical illuminance and the following standards:
• The proposed lighting must not emit objectionable illumination, must avoid unnecessary upward
illumination and illumination of adjacent properties, and minimize glare.
• The lighting must be configured with “photocell or time clock on – time clock off” operation and be
turned off after business hours.
8.5-3.C Outdoor Recreation and Activity Areas
Where outdoor playing fields or other special outdoor activity areas are to be illuminated, lighting fixtures
must be specified, mounted, and aimed so that:
1. The lighting is top downward (not upward or sideways); and
2. The lighting is full cut-off or IESNA cut-off fixtures, as approved by the Commission, or fully shielded/
recessed. Any application for use of IESNA fixtures should include “cut-sheets” with specifications and
details of the proposed fixture and pole.
8.5-3.D Light Poles
1. Height. The height of a light, except streetlights in public rights-of-way, must not exceed a height of:
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 8-39
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
a. 20 feet from the finished grade to the highest point of the fixture or pole in R, RS, RU, GC, GR,
MVC, and MTC Districts.
b. 24 feet in height from the finished grade to the highest point of the fixture or pole in any other
district.
2. Location. New light poles in parking lots must be located within landscaped islands/areas and their
foundations recessed at least three feet from any curb to avoid potential contact with vehicles.
8.5-3.E Fuel Station Canopies
Fuel Station Canopy Lighting must be recessed or flushed with the underside of the canopy. Specific horizontal
illuminance levels under the canopy must be provided as part of the Lighting Plan. The PZC will make the
determination on the appropriate horizontal illuminance level for the canopy area based on the fuel station
location in a specific zone and if the site is in or adjacent to a residential district, to meet the purpose and
intent of these regulations.
8.5-3.F Lighting Plan
A lighting plan is required for any site where new lighting is proposed and with a parking lot with more than
20 spaces or when required by the PZC depending on the scale of the development, the degree of changes on
the site, the sensitivity of adjacent land uses, and the degree of difficulty in evaluating potential light trespass
and/or glare. Guidelines for submitting a lighting plan are provided in Appendix D Lighting Guidelines.
8.6 Hazardous Materials
The following standards apply to all properties outside the Water Resource Protection District.
8.6-1 Hazardous Materials – Incidental
8.6-1.A Materials Considered Incidental
The following use of hazardous materials is considered incidental:
1. Cleaning Agents: household hazardous materials in prepackaged original containers used for cleaning
and maintenance of the site and not used in any processing or manufacturing or for any other uses
on the site.
2. Retail Sales: household hazardous materials that are for retail sale and are kept in prepackaged
original containers of a typical size for household use.
8.6-2 Hazardous Materials – Non -Incidental
Any other use, storage, or production of Hazardous Materials is considered non-incidental and must comply
with the following standards:
8.6-2.A Containment
Hazardous materials must be stored within an impermeable containment area which is capable of containing
at least 110 % of the volume of the largest container of hazardous material present in such an area or 10%
of the total volume of all such containers in such area, whichever is larger, without overflow of released
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 8-40
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
hazardous material from the containment area. Containment measures may include dikes, sumps, doorway
lips, or similar structures to inhibit the ability of spilled material to pass through the opening.
8.6-2.B Floor Drains
Floor drains are not allowed in areas where hazardous materials are sold, used, or stored unless the site design
shows specific compliance with the following:
1. Floor drains must connect to the sanitary sewer system or to an on-site holding tank or tanks when the
discharge contains petroleum-based oil, grease or other harmful or hazardous substances. Such tanks
must have a 1,000-gallon minimum capacity and be installed in accordance with RCSA §22a-449(d)-1.
2. Interceptors and separators must be provided when floor drains connect to the sanitary sewer system.
3. Floor drains must not be connected to a stream or other water body, storm sewer, storm drainage
system or a storm building drain.
4. Floor drains must have trap seals.
5. Floor drains that only accept animal fecal waste and first discharge into a settling tank prior to release
into a septic system may be allowed.
6. Floor drains allowed by CT DEEP (in accordance with the “Non-Stormwater Discharges” section of a
General Permit for the Discharge of Stormwater Associated with Industrial Activity) shall be allowed.
8.6-2.C Discharge
Discharge of production wastewater or any wastewater that may contain hazardous materials must meet the
following requirements:
1. With Sewer System: All wastewater generated by the use is lawfully disposed through a municipal
sewer system.
2. Without Sewer System: If there is no sewer system the following must be met:
a. Liquid hazardous materials or waste must be collected in tight tanks and removed periodically by
a licensed professional. The tanks must comply with the containment standards of this section.
8.6-2.D Loading/Transfer Areas
Any area that may be used for transfer of hazardous materials must be designed to prevent contaminated
storm water runoff and ground water intrusion. Such loading docks (excluding those that allow a vehicle to
enter the building) must be protected with a permanent roof or other structure that protects the loading dock
from direct rainfall.
Depressed loading docks or other sub-grade facilities must be designed to ensure that hazardous materials are
properly collected and disposed of, using appropriate technology such as oil-water separators, subsurface tight
tanks, or equivalent. Such tanks must have a 1,000-gallon minimum capacity and be installed in accordance
with RCSA §22a-449(d)-1.
8.6-2.E Security
Hazardous materials must be stored in an area that is secured against unauthorized entry by the public.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 8-41
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
8.6-2.F Materials Management Plan
All facilities must submit to the Town and maintain a Materials Management Plan that clearly describes the
location and methods for the use, storage, recycling and disposal of any hazardous materials on the site.
Where any hazardous materials are hauled off-site by a contractor, the facility shall maintain the name and
contact information for that contractor. Examples of issues to address in a materials management plan may be
found in Appendix A.5.
8.6-2.G Spill Preventions and Response Plan
All facilities must submit to the Town and maintain a Spill Prevention and Response Plan detailing the measures
taken to avoid the unintentional spilling of any hazardous materials and, in the event a spill does occur, the
measures that will be taken to adequately respond. Examples of issues to address in spill prevention and
response plans may be found in Appendix A.5.
A spill containment kit(s) and signs for spill notification must be provided within areas where hazardous
materials are used and stored (Appendix A.4).
8.6-2.H Other Requirements
Requirements for hazardous materials are intended to supplement and not to supersede any other applicable
requirements of federal, state or local law, including applicable requirements of the Resource Conservation
and Recovery Act of 1976.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 9-1
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
SE CTION 9: PROCEDURES,
A DMINISTRATION, AND ENFO RCEMENT
9.1 General Procedures
9.1-1 Purpose
This Section outlines the procedures and requirements for submitting and processing the most common
zoning applications.
9.1-2 Application Submittal Requirements : General
9.1-2.A PZC and ZBA
Applications to the Town Planning and Zoning Commission (PZC) and applications or appeals to the Zoning
Board of Appeals (ZBA) must be submitted to the Office of Planning and Development Services (OPDS).
9.1-2.B IWA
When an application involves activity regulated by the Inland Wetlands Agency (IWA), an application to the
IWA must be submitted prior to or concurrent with any application to the PZC.
9.1-2.C. Forms
Applications must be submitted on forms obtained from the OPDS for the respective type of application being
submitted.
9.1-2.D Fees
Applications must be accompanied at the time of filing by the appropriate fee(s) as established by the Town of
Groton, except that the Commission and the Town are exempt from application fees.
9.1-2.E Supporting Materials
Applications shall be submitted with all supporting plans, materials, and other information required by these
Regulations.
9.1-2.F Signature(s)
Applications must be signed by the applicant and the owner of the property, where applicable.
9.1-2.G Disclosures
Any person or entity making an application to the ZBA or PZC should disclose all property owners, whether
they be an individual, principal officer(s) of a corporation or limited liability corporation, general partner(s) of
a partnership or limited liability partnership, or equitable owner(s) or beneficiary(ies) of property held in trust,
which may be attached to the application, if necessary.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 9-2
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
9.1-2.H Approvals Needed
When a regulation amendment and/or a zone boundary change is required to permit a proposed development,
the PZC will not accept any applications for development (e.g., site plan, special permit) until or unless the
regulation amendment application(s) and/or zone change application necessary to permit the proposed
development activity has been approved and is effective.
9.1-3 Professional Responsibilities for Plans and  		Design
All site development plans will be prepared, signed, and sealed with a live signature/seal by a professional
engineer, architect or landscape architect, as appropriate, licensed to practice in the State of Connecticut,
unless a simplified site plan is determined to be appropriate by the Zoning Official for determining zoning
compliance or as part of an administrative site plan application. The following additional professional design
requirements will be required for applications and plans:
9.1-3.A Engineer
A Professional Engineer, licensed in the State of Connecticut, will provide, at a minimum, the design for all roads,
detailed drainage systems, sanitary sewer systems, water systems, and retaining walls over 4-feet in height.
In order to prevent unnecessary hardship in connection with small alterations or expansions, the PZC, with
recommendation from the Town Engineer, may determine that a professional engineered design is not required.
9.1-3.B Surveyor
A licensed Land Surveyor will provide a Class A-2 survey for all sites associated with a site plan. In order
to prevent unnecessary hardship in connection with small expansions or alterations, the PZC, upon the
recommendation of the Town Engineer and the Zoning Official, may, if mutually agreeable, determine that a
site does not require an A-2 survey to determine compliance with these regulations.
9.1-3.C Architect
Unless specifically waived by the PZC, relevant design professionals shall seal all architectural plans and detailed
plans involving new buildings (except single-unit and two-unit buildings) of more than one story or any new
building of more than 2,000 square feet.
9.1-3.D Landscape Architect
Unless specifically waived by the PZC, a landscape architect must design the landscaping for all site plans
involving:
1. New construction in excess of 10,000 SF of floor area within the MTC, MVC, and MDD, or
2. New construction in excess of 50,000 SF in all other zones, or
3. When the Commission determines that the site warrants a landscape architect design based on site
topography, significant required landscape buffering or planting in areas where the potential for plant
failure is significant (e.g. next to retaining walls, roadways, ledge, and on steep slopes).
The landscape architect shall monitor the installation and certify in writing that the landscaping is completed in
accordance with the approved plans prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy, unless a performance
bond for its completion is submitted in accordance with Section 9.1-12.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 9-3
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
9.1-4 Receipt of Applications 9.1-4.A Date of Receipt
The date of receipt of an application to the ZBA or PZC shall be the day of the next regularly scheduled meeting
of the ZBA or PZC immediately following the day of submission of the application to the OPDS or 35 days after
the day of submission, whichever is sooner.
1. Upon receipt, the ZBA or PZC will schedule a public hearing, if applicable, within the prescribed
time periods described in Section 9.1-10.B.
9.1-5 Incomplete Applications  9.1-5.A Review for Completeness
Each application will be reviewed by the OPDS and
other departments and agencies to determine whether
the respective application is substantially complete.
9.1-5.B Denial
An incomplete application may be received by the ZBA
or PZC and denied for lack of information or the required
fee.
9.1-5.C Fee
Town staff will not review or otherwise expend resources
on an application without receipt of the required fee.
9.1-6 Sequence of Public  		Hearings
Where a proposed development or activity requires
multiple applications, the PZC may conduct any required
public hearings simultaneously or in the order that they
deem appropriate, except as per Section 9.1-2.H.
9.1-7 Consultations On any application, the ZBA or PZC may:
9.1-7.A Advice and Opinion
Seek the advice and opinion of other Town staff, boards, agencies or commissions to assist it in evaluating
applications; retain an architect, landscape architect, professional engineer or other consultant to review,
comment on, and guide its deliberations on any application; and/or
Annotation
Can an Incomplete Application be Submitted
and Received?
Yes, an incomplete application can be
submitted and even officially received
by the Commission, although applicants
should strive to make their applications
as complete as possible. Except for very
simple applications and renewals, it is rare
that an application is approved exactly as
it is submitted. There is often incomplete
information due to lack of understanding,
difficulty in finding all pertinent regulations,
etc. that result in significant additions
and changes to an application prior to
Commission review. If required information
continues to be lacking and the Commission
has run out of statutory time and any
extensions thereof, they may deny an
application for being incomplete and/or
lacking information necessary for them to
complete their review.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 9-4
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
9.1-7.B Consulting Review
Determine that an application is complex and require that the applicant, to the extent authorized by the
Town of Groton Code of Ordinances (Section 2-86) deposit funds with the ZBA or PZC to cover the costs of any
consulting review fees.
9.1-8 Public Notice 9.1-8.A Notice by Newspaper
1. Publishing of Legal Notice: When a public hearing is required by these Regulations or scheduled
by the ZBA or PZC, the OPDS will publish a legal notice of the public hearing in a newspaper having a
substantial circulation in the Town of Groton.
2. Legal Notice will be Published:
a. At least twice before the public hearing at intervals of not less than two days between publications
b. The first notice not more than 15 days, nor less than ten days prior to date of the hearing
c. The last notice not less than two days before the date of the public hearing
3. Consequences of not Publishing: No public hearing will be conducted on any application or appeal
unless the required legal notice has been published in accordance with this Section.
9.1-8.B Notice by Mail
1. Required for Compliance: Any application to the ZBA or PZC for a Special Permit, variance or zoning
map amendment or an appeal of an order or decision of the Zoning Official (when this appeal is
associated with a specific property), must comply with the following:
a. Applicants for a Special Permit, variance or an appeal of an order or decision of the Zoning Official
are responsible for notifying the owners of property within 150 feet of the subject property of any
scheduled public hearing by mailing a copy of the legal notice and any other required information
(provided by the OPDS), not less than ten calendar days but not more than 30 days prior to the
scheduled public hearing;
b. Applicants for a Zone Map Amendment are responsible for notifying the owners of all property
within the area subject to the zone map amendment and all owners of property within 200 feet of
the boundaries of the area(s) proposed to be changed, of any scheduled public hearing by mailing
a copy of the legal notice and any other required information (provided by the OPDS), not less
than ten calendar days but not more than 30 days prior to the scheduled public hearing;
c. The applicant must obtain proof of mailing in the form of U.S. Postal Service Certificates of Mailing.
(Notices sent by Certified Mail - Return Receipt Requested are acceptable but are neither required
nor advisable); and
d. Prior to the commencement of the scheduled public hearing, the applicant must submit:
• The Certificate(s) of Mailing,
• A list of the property owners to whom the notices were sent, and
• A copy of the cover letter and legal notice and any enclosures sent to the property owners.
2. Zoning Map Amendments: Applications for zoning map amendment initiated by the PZC shall not
be required to comply with this Section.
3. Consequences of not Mailing: No public hearing shall be conducted on any application or appeal
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 9-5
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
unless the required notice has been mailed in accordance with this Section. The hearing may only be
opened and immediately continued for the purpose of receiving the certificate of mailing.
9.1-9 Applications , Notifications , and Referrals to  		other Ag encies
9.1-9.A Application Involving a Site located in a Flood Hazard Area,
Floodway, or Coastal High Hazard Zone
1. Consistency with Flood Protection Regulations: All applications involving development within a
flood hazard area, floodway, or coastal high hazard zone must be consistent with Section 7.2 Flood
Protection Regulations.
2. Building Official Review: The Building Official will review all final plans for compliance with Section
7.2 and FEMA construction requirements.
9.1-9.B Application Involving Inland Wetlands Agency (IWA) Regulated
Activity
1. IWA Activity: When an application involves activity regulated by the Inland Wetlands Agency (IWA),
the PZC must not act on the application until it has received a report from the IWA including a copy of
any permit issued for the regulated activity.
2. Considerations: The PZC will consider any report and permit from the IWA in making its decision.
9.1-9.C Notification of Abutting Municipalities
1. Notification of Adjoining Municipalities: In accordance with CGS Section 8 -7d(f), the ZBA or PZC
will notify the clerk of an adjoining municipality of any application or appeal for which:
a. Any portion of the property that is the subject of the application or appeal is within 500 feet of the
boundary of the adjoining municipality,
b. A significant portion of the traffic to a completed project would use streets within the adjoining
municipality to enter or exit the site; and/or
c. A significant portion of the sewer or stormwater drainage from a completed project would flow
through and significantly impact the stormwater drainage or sewer system within the adjoining
municipality.
2. Certified Mail: Such notice will be made by the OPDS by Certified Mail - Return Receipt Requested
and will be mailed within seven days of the day of the receipt of the application or appeal to the OPDS.
3. Response from Adjoining Municipality: The adjoining municipality or its agent(s) may provide a
report or appear before the ZBA or PZC at any public hearing on an application or appeal.
4. Considerations: The ZBA or PZC will consider any report from the adjoining municipality in making
its decision.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 9-6
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
9.1-9.D Referral to the Southeastern CT Council of Governments
1. Trigger for Referral: The PZC will refer an application to the Southeastern CT Council of Governments
(SCCOG) for review and comment when any portion of land that would be affected by a zoning regulation
or zoning map amendment is located within 500 feet of the boundary of another municipality.
2. Delivery: The referral will be made either by Certified Mail - Return Receipt Requested or by email to
SCCOG not later than 30 days before the public hearing.
3. Submission of SCCOG Report: SCCOG may submit its report on the referral to the PZC at or before
the public hearing.
4. Considerations: The PZC will read any report on the referral from SCCOG into the record of the public
hearing and consider it in making its decision.
5. Failure to Respond: Failure by SCCOG to respond within 30 days will be considered a favorable report.
9.1-9.E Referral to a Water Company
For property located within a public water supply watershed of a water company, the applicant must provide
written evidence of notification to the water company and the CT Commissioner of Public Health, as required
pursuant to CGS Chapter 124, Section 8-3i, or as amended.
9.1-9.F Notification of Conservation or Preservation Restrictions
For property encumbered by a conservation or preservation restriction, the application must include written
evidence that the applicant has made notification or provide other verification of compliance as required by
CGS Chapter 822, Section 47-42d, or as amended.
9.1-10 Time Periods for Acting on Applications and  		Appeals
9.1-10.A Site Plan Application
1. Standard Time Frame: When approval of a site plan application is the only approval required, a
decision must be made within 65 days after receipt of the application in accordance with Section 9.1-4.A.
9.1-10.B Applications with Public Hearings
Except as provided below, the ZBA or PZC must process applications or appeals, where a public hearing is held,
within the following time periods:
1. Commencement: Public hearings must commence within 65 days after official receipt of the
application or appeal in accordance with Section 9.1-4.A;
2. Closing: Public hearings must be closed within 35 days after the public hearing commences; and
3. Timing for Decisions: All decisions must be made within 65 days after the close of the public hearing.
4. Exceptions: The provisions of this Section will not apply to applications initiated by the ZBA or PZC.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 9-7
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
9.1-10.C Extensions
An applicant or their agent may consent to one or more extensions of any time period specified in Subsections
A or B above, provided that the time period of all extensions does not exceed a total of 65 days.
9.1-10.D Application with Inland Wetland Agency Regulated Activity
If an application involves an activity regulated by the IWA, and the time period for a decision by the ZBA or PZC
would lapse prior to the thirty-fifth day after a decision by the IWA, the time period for a decision by the ZBA
or PZC will be extended to 35 days after the decision of the IWA.
9.1-10.E Withdrawal of Application
An applicant or their agent may withdraw an application at any time prior to action by the ZBA or PZC.
9.1-11 Action Documentation 9.1-11.A Decision
A notice of decision will be provided for any action by the ZBA or PZC on an application or appeal.
9.1-11.B Notice to Applicant
The OPDS will mail the notice of the decision to the applicant or appellant by Certified Mail within 15 days of
the decision.
9.1-11.C Notice to Newspaper
1. Timing: The OPDS will publish the notice of the decision in a newspaper having a substantial circulation
in Groton within 15 days of the decision.
2. Failure to Publish: If notice is not published within the 15-day period after a decision, the applicant
or appellant may provide for the publication of the notice within ten days thereafter.
9.1-11.D Effective Date
Unless specified by the ZBA or PZC at the time of a decision, the effective date of any decision will be 15 days
after the publication of the legal notice.
9.1-12 Bonding Requirements Bonding for site plans and other instances where a bond may be required by these Regulations must conform
to the following procedures.
9.1-12.A Performance Bonds
Bonds may be required by the PZC for the following:
1. Financial Guarantee: The PZC may, as a condition of approval of a site plan or modified site plan,
require a financial guarantee in the form of a bond, a bond with surety or similar instrument to ensure:
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 9-8
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
a. The timely and adequate completion of site improvements that will be conveyed to or controlled
by the Town of Groton, and
b. The implementation of any erosion and sediment controls required during construction activities.
2. Performance Bond: In certain instances, as outlined in Sections 9.1-13 and 9.5-2.F, OPDS may accept
a performance bond prior to the issuance of a Conditional Certificate of Site Plan Compliance (CSPC)
or a Certificate of Occupancy (CO) for completion of site improvements.
3. Facilities Required to Post a Performance Bond: Prior to issuing a CO for a telecommunications
tower, wind generation tower or any other facility required by these regulations to post a performance
bond for their removal upon abandonment or expiration, the applicant will provide a performance
bond in an amount approved by the OPDS to be sufficient for that purpose.
9.1-12.B Bond Amount
The required bond amount shall be consistent with the Town’s bond estimate unit costs and based on an
estimate prepared by a licensed design professional containing the type, estimated quantities, and costs of
materials needed to complete the required improvements. The amount of the bond shall be sufficient to cover
the cost of any proposed or required site improvements, including but not limited to:
1. Grading, paving, recreational amenities, lighting, and signage;
2. Installation of curbs, gutters, storm drainage facilities, landscaping, sidewalks, lighting monuments,
and culverts;
3. Erosion and sedimentation control measures; and
4. All other such improvements that the PZC determines to be necessary to promote public health and
safety and to safeguard the Town.
9.1-12.C Acceptable Forms of Bonds
All bonds shall be accompanied by a completed bond application acceptable to the Town and shall be in one
or more of the following forms:
1. Cash or certified check deposited with the Town;
2. Letter of Credit;
3. Passbook; and/or
4. Performance Surety Bond naming the Town as sole beneficiary, provided that the terms and conditions
of the surety bond must be acceptable in form and substance to the Town. A Surety Bond will only be
accepted for bonds over $100,000 and 10% of the value of the bond must be in the form of a cash or
certified check.
9.1-12.D Release of Bonds
1. Partial Release: At the written request of the applicant upon completion of required improvements
totaling 50 percent or more of the cost of the bonded improvements, the OPDS may release at least
50 percent of a performance bond upon submittal of documentation by the applicant and verification
by Town staff that an equivalent portion of the required improvements have been completed in
accordance with approved plans.
2. Full Release: At the written request of the applicant, the OPDS may release all or the balance of
a performance bond, provided that the applicant has provide appropriate documentation that all
required improvements and conditions of the PZC’s approval have been satisfactorily completed and
the Town Engineer, Zoning Official, or planner, as appropriate, has verified the completion and a
Certificate of Site Plan Compliance in accordance with Sections 9.1-13 and 9.5-2.F has been issued.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 9-9
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
9.1-13 Certificate of Site Plan Compliance and  		Certi ficate of Occup ancy
9.1-13.A Certificate of Site Plan Compliance
Prior to issuing a Certificate of Site Plan Compliance (CSPC) and a Certificate of Occupancy (CO), the developer
shall have completed all improvements shown on the approved site plan or portion thereof when a project is
to be developed in phases or on individual lots.
9.1-13.B Conditional Certificate of Site Plan Compliance
When requested by the applicant, the OPDS may issue a conditional CSPC for a building, structure, or premises
where site work is not fully completed due to seasonal weather or other unforeseen site conditions, provided
that those improvements that are minimally necessary to support the development and protect the public
health, safety, and welfare as determined by OPDS (e.g., base course of pavement, parking, storm drainage
facilities, fire hydrants, lights, utilities) are completed.
9.1-13.C Performance Bond
No Conditional CSPC will be issued unless a performance bond for the balance of any incomplete improvements
shown on the approved site plan has been submitted to and approved by the Director of OPDS in accordance
with Section 9.1-12.
9.1-13.D Long Term Maintenance of Improvements
No CSPC or CO will be issued without conditions for long term maintenance of all improvements shown on
the approved site plan, including regular irrigation and maintenance of landscaping, regular removal of litter
and debris, etc. Should these conditions not be met any time after the issuance of a CSPC or CO, this will be
considered a zoning violation subject to enforcement action.
9.2 Zoning Auth ority, Enforc ement, and Permit
9.2-1 Authority
9.2-1.A Enforcement
These regulations shall be enforced by the Planning and Zoning Commission (PZC), acting by and through the
Zoning Official.
9.2-1.B Zoning Official
The Zoning Official may cause any building, structure, premise or lot to be inspected and examined, and to
order in writing the remedying of any condition found to exist in violation of any provision of these regulations.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 9-10
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
9.2-1.C Violation
The owner or agent of a building or lot where a violation of any provision of such regulations has been committed
or shall exist, or the lessee or tenant of any entire building or entire lot where such violation has been committed
or exist, or the owner, agent, lessee, or tenant of any part of the building or lot in which such violation has been
committed or exists, will be fined in accordance with the General Statutes of the State of Connecticut.
9.2-1.D Institution of Action/Proceedings
Any official having jurisdiction, in addition to other remedies, may institute an action or proceeding to prevent
the unlawful erection, construction, alteration, conversion, maintenance, or use of a building, or to restrain,
correct, or abate such violation, or to prevent occupation of buildings, structures, or land, or to prevent any
illegal act, conduct, business, or use in or about such lot.
9.2-2 Zoning Permit and Certificate of Zoning  		Compliance
9.2-2.A Zoning Permit
No building or structure is to be erected, added to, or structurally altered and no use is to be established until
a Zoning Permit has been issued by the Zoning Official.
All applications for such Zoning Permit shall be in accordance with the requirements of these regulations.
1. Application:
a. Every application for a Zoning Permit shall be accompanied by such information and exhibits as
are required herein or may be reasonably required by the Zoning Official in order that the proposal
of the applicant may be adequately interpreted and judged as to its conformity with the provisions
set forth in these regulations.
b. The application shall include information that the lot is on record by map or by deed, including the
date of recording, or is in a subdivision which has been approved by the PZC.
c. If conformity is requested based on approval of a Variance or a Special Permit, the application
shall include a copy of the recorded Variance or Special Permit.
2. Plot Plan:
a. The application for a Zoning Permit is to be accompanied by two copies of a plot plan based
on a survey prepared by a land surveyor registered in the State of Connecticut, drawn to scale
showing the actual dimensions of the lot to be built upon, the size of the building(s) to be erected,
the location of the building upon the lot, the proposed floor area, the setback lines observed
by buildings, the location and dimensions of driveways and curb cuts, the area and percentage
of impervious cover, both existing and proposed, if subject to site plan review and approval
provisions under Section 9.5 of these regulations, and such other information as may be necessary
as determined by the Zoning Official.
b. The Zoning Official may reduce the plot plan requirements in cases where the information is not
needed to determine conformity with these regulations.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 9-11
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
9.2-2.B Certificate of Zoning Compliance
1. Need for Certificate of Zoning Compliance: No land shall be occupied or used and no building
hereafter erected or altered shall be occupied or used in whole or in part for any purpose, until
a Certificate of Zoning Compliance is issued by the Zoning Official, stating that the lot or building
complies with all the provisions of these regulations.
2. Change of Use: Such a Certificate of Zoning Compliance is also required for any change, extension,
or alteration in a use.
3. Additional Materials: Applications for a Certificate of Zoning Compliance should be accompanied by
a plot plan of the lot and buildings involved, showing the exact placement of the structures on the lot.
Certification of the plot plan may be required by the Zoning Official to determine conformity with the
Zoning Regulations.
4. Other Requirements and Conditions: No such Certificate of Zoning Compliance shall be issued by
the Zoning Official until all zoning requirements and conditions have been met.
9.2-2.C Special Conditions for Zoning Permit or Certificate of Zoning
Compliance
1. Submission Materials: Any maps, plans, documents, statements and stipulations submitted to and
approved by the PZC, ZBA, and/or IWA in connection with Site Plan, Special Permit, Variance, Wetlands
Permit, or other action of said PZC or ZBA as required by these regulations, and any conditions of such
approval(s) attached by said PZC or ZBA will be conditions for the approval of applications for and the
issuance of a Zoning Permit and a Certificate of Zoning Compliance by the Zoning Official.
2. Other Approvals Required: Prior to issuance of a Zoning Permit or a Certificate of Zoning Compliance,
the applicant should obtain and submit all approvals required by any other Municipal, State, or Federal
department, bureau or agency.
9.3 Zoning Amendments
9.3-1 Authority The Commission, on its motion or on petition, may amend, change, modify, or repeal these regulations or the
zoning map, after public notice and hearing, in accordance with the General Statutes of the State of Connecticut.
Applications for Zone Amendments must follow the General Procedures of Section 9.1 unless superseded by
the specific requirements listed in Section 9.3.
9.1-2 General Application Submittal Requirements
9.1-3 Professional Responsibilities for Plans and Design
9.1-4 Receipt of Applications
9.1-5 Incomplete Applications
9.1-6 Sequence of Public Hearings
9.1-7 Consultations
9.1-8 Public Notice
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 9-12
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
9.1-9 Applications, Notifications, and Referrals to other Agencies
9.1-10 Time Periods for Acting on Applications and Appeals
9.1-11 Action Documentation
9.3-2 Applications Any person, firm, or corporation desiring an amendment or change in the zoning regulations and/ zoning map
of the Town of Groton may submit an application proposing such amendment or change, to the Commission.
Before the Commission shall consider any such application, the following requirements must be met and
information submitted by the person, firm, or corporation submitting the application. The required number of
copies of maps, plans, narratives, or reports will be as designated in the application.
9.3-2.A Zoning Map Amendment
1. Proceedings: All proceedings to change the boundaries or classification of a zoning district must be
instituted by application in writing to the Commission.
2. Signatures: Applications must be signed by the person, firm, or corporation proposing the amendment
change or by the attorney or agent for such person, firm or corporation
3. Application Must Include:
a. A metes and bounds description of the land to be included in the amendment or change.
b. A map including:
• All existing lots, dimensions, property lines, and streets, the existing zoning, the proposed
zoning, the existing contours at a contour interval not to exceed 10 feet, and a scale and north
arrow for the area of the proposed map amendment and within 500 feet of the area affected
by the application.
• The ownership of all lots within 200 feet of the area proposed to be rezoned, as indicated in
the current records of the Town of Groton.
• The map drawn to an accurate scale of 100 feet or up to 400 feet to the inch and a digital copy
provided.
• Any other information considered pertinent by the applicant.
c. A narrative including:
• Reasons for the proposed amendment or change.
• A written analysis of consistency of the proposal with the Town’s Comprehensive Plan and the
Town’s Plan of Conservation and Development.
• An analysis of the availability of public sewer, water, and other utilities to service the site or
the suitability of the site for onsite septic and water.
• An analysis of the ability of the site to accommodate the potential allowed uses under the
proposed zoning district from a zoning and environmental regulatory perspective.
• An analysis of the ability of the current street system to support the proposed request.
9.3-2.B Amendments to the Regulations
1. Proceedings: All proceedings to change the provisions of these regulations must be instituted
by application to the PZC in which the specific provisions to be changed and the provisions to be
substituted, deleted, or added are precisely set forth.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 9-13
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
2. Text Copy: A copy of the existing and proposed text must be submitted.
3. Signatures: Applications must be signed by the person, firm or corporation proposing the amendment
change or by the attorney or agent for such person, firm or corporation.
4. Narrative: A narrative must be provided including:
a. Reasons for the proposed amendment or change
b. Any other information considered pertinent by the applicant
9.3-3 Public Hearing and Notification
The Commission must hold a public hearing on all proposed amendments and changes to the zoning regulations
or map and must provide public notice of said hearing in accordance with Section 9.1-8 of these regulations.
9.3-4 Exemptions
The provisions of Sections 9.3-2 or notification requirements of Section 9.1-8.B do not apply to proposed
amendments initiated by the PZC.
9.3-5 Referrals All required Referrals and Notifications must be made in accordance with Section 9.1-9 of these regulations.
9.3-6 Protest of Proposed Amendment Where a protest is filed with the Commission at or before a public hearing on a proposed zone map amendment
and is signed by the owners of 20% or more of the area of the lots included in such proposed change, or by the
owners of 20% of the area of the lots within 500 feet in all direction of the property included in the proposed
change, such change must not be adopted except by a vote of two-thirds of the entire membership of the PZC.
9.3-7 Effective Date of Amendments /Re-application 9.3-7.A Effective Date
Zoning regulations, boundaries of zoning districts, and any amendments or changes thereto will become
effective at such time as may be fixed by the Commission, provided notice has been published in accordance
with Section 9.1-11 and the amendment has been filed with the Town Clerk.
9.3-7.B Re-Application
The PZC is not be required to hear a Zoning Map Amendment that has been denied within one (1) year from
the date of denial unless it finds, on facts presented in writing, that a material change in the situation justifies
this action. A change of ownership or any interest therein will not be deemed a material change in the
situation for the purpose of this Section.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 9-14
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
9.4 Special Permit
9.4-1 Purpose and Authority Certain classes or kinds of buildings, structures, or uses of land may only be appropriate in particular locations
or districts based on how their attributes relate to specific locations. Such uses are permitted only after the
grant of a special permit by the PZC pursuant to any special conditions of Section 5.1 and the requirements of
Section 9.
9.4-2 Special Permit Procedures Applications for a Special Permit must follow the General Procedures of Section 9.1 unless superseded by the
specific requirements listed in this Section 9.4.
9.1-2 General Application Submittal Requirements
9.1-3 Professional Responsibilities for Plans and Design
9.1-4 Receipt of Applications
9.1-5 Incomplete Applications
9.1-6 Sequence of Public Hearings
9.1-7 Consultations
9.1-8 Public Notice
9.1-9 Applications, Notifications, and Referrals to other Agencies
9.1-10 Time Periods for Acting on Applications and Appeals
9.1-11 Action Documentation
9.1-12 Bonding Requirements
9.1-13 Certificate of Site Plan Compliance and Certificate of Occupancy
In all cases where these regulations require a special permit, no zoning permit must be issued by the Zoning
Official until said special permit has been approved by the PZC and a copy of the approved special permit is
recorded on land records and is effective.
9.4-3 Applications
Before the PZC will consider any such application for a special permit, the following requirements must be
met and information submitted by the person, firm, or corporation submitting the application. The required
number of copies of maps, plans, narratives, or reports will be as designated in the application. Applications
for a special permit must be made on a form established for that purpose and include the following:
9.4-3.A Narrative
Including:
1. Use(s): A detailed statement describing the existing and proposed use or uses and the surrounding
neighborhood.
2. Special Permit Criteria: A detailed statement describing how the special permit criteria in Section
9.4-6 will be satisfied.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 9-15
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
3. Conditions: A detailed statement describing how the applicable conditions of Section 5.1 for the
specific use or uses will be met.
9.4-3.B Plan
Including:
1. Map: A location map in accordance with Section 9.5-3.B.
2. Plan Requirements: A plan in detail and accuracy sufficient to allow the PZC to determine compliance
with the Zoning Regulations, and depicting at a minimum, the boundaries of the property, the location
and height of all existing and proposed buildings and uses on the subject property, all structures located
within 200 feet from the subject property’s boundaries, the location and arrangement of parking
and loading spaces, wetlands, watercourses, flood hazard areas, existing topography and proposed
grading, and the location and description of all proposed open spaces, screening, and buffer areas.
a. The PZC, if it deems necessary to determine compliance with the Regulations, may require the
special permit application to be accompanied by a Site Plan containing the information per Section
9.5-3 of these regulations.
b. The PZC may find there are no physical changes proposed to the site or any building or structure
and the submission of a simplified site plan is adequate to evaluate the proposal.
c. The applicant may submit a site plan application in accordance with Section 9.5 to be reviewed
and approved concurrently with the Special Permit.
9.4-3.C Additional Information
1. Additional Information: The PZC may require the following additional reports, plans, and other
information that the PZC deems reasonably necessary to determine compliance with the special
permit criteria of Section 9.4-6 and all other pertinent provisions of these regulations:
a. Traffic Report or Additional Traffic Information
b. Storm Water Management Plan or Additional Storm Water Information
c. Erosion Control Plan or Additional Erosion Control Information
d. An Evaluation of the Adequacy of Public Utilities
e. Elevations of all Proposed Structures including Buildings, Fences, and Walls
f. Additional Neighborhood Compatibility Information
g. Landscape Plan
h. Generalized Floor Plans
i. Community Design and Service Programs
j. Signage Plan
k. Noise Projection Study
l. Identification of Historic and Archeological Resources
m. Such other information or consultant reports as the Commission may require in order to determine
compliance with these Regulations.
2. Licensed Professionals: All traffic reports, storm water management plans, erosion control plans,
and noise projection studies shall be prepared and signed/sealed by an appropriate professional
licensed in the State of Connecticut, unless this requirement is deemed unnecessary by the PZC.
3. Pre-Application Meeting: For large or complex projects, applicants are encouraged to schedule a
pre-application meeting with the OPDS staff to identify additional information and submittals likely to
be needed for the PZC to act on the application.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 9-16
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
9.4-4 Referrals of Application and Notification
9.4-4.A Referrals and Notifications
All referrals and notifications must be made in accordance with Sections 9.1-8 and 9.1-9.
9.4-4.B Referral to Other Agencies
The Commission may also refer the application to other agencies, boards, and commissions it deems necessary
for review and recommendations for determining compliance with the special permit criteria of Section 9.4-6,
and the requirements of all applicable zoning regulations, including Section 5.1.
9.4-5 Planning and Zoning Commission Action 9.4-5.A Public Hearing
Except for certain applications filed under Section 9.4-8, the Commission must hold a public hearing on all
applications for a special permit in accordance with all requirements of Section 9.1.
9.4-5.B Options for Approval
The PZC may approve, disapprove, or approve with modifications or conditions the proposed special permit,
provided such modifications or conditions do not increase the scope of use requested by the Special Permit.
9.4-5.C Concurrent Site Plan Applications
Before granting a Special Permit, the PZC determines that any accompanying Site Plan Application, if submitted
concurrently, is in conformance with the applicable provisions of these regulations.
9.4-5.D Conditions
In granting a Special Permit, the PZC may impose conditions or safeguards that are reasonable and necessary to
protect or promote the public health, safety or welfare; property values; the environment; sound planning and zoning
principals; improved land use, site planning, and land development; or better overall neighborhood compatibility.
9.4-5.E Stipulations for Conditions
Any condition or safeguard attached to the granting of a Special Permit:
1. Is binding on the property as long as the Special Permit use is still in operation, and
2. Continues to be in effect regardless of any change in ownership of the property.
9.4-5.F Zoning Violations
The PZC should not approve any Special Permit for any property on which there exists a zoning violation,
unless such Special Permit application will remedy such violation.
9.4-5.G Taking of Effect
A special permit approved by the PZC will take effect upon filing a copy thereof in the Office of the Town Clerk
and in the Land Records.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 9-17
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
9.4-6 Special Permit Criteria In evaluating an application for a special permit, the PZC must consider the effect the proposed use is likely to
have on the public health, safety, and welfare of the public in general, and on the immediate neighborhood in
particular, and when deemed necessary by the PZC, may make modifications and impose reasonable conditions
and safeguards to render the application consistent with the Zoning Regulations. In all cases, the PZC should
also consider the following criteria:
9.4-6.A Location
The location and size of the site is appropriate for the orderly development of the site and the surrounding
area(s), given the nature, scale, and intensity of the proposed use.
9.4-6.B Buildings
The type, size, location, height and other characteristics of all buildings associated with the use or activity are
appropriate for the use or activity and the proposed site, and that new buildings and structures or modifications
to existing buildings and structures are in scale with other buildings in the area.
9.4-6.C Neighborhood Compatibility
The design elements of the proposed development are compatible with the development in the district and
the surrounding area(s) and do not hinder or discourage the orderly development and use of other properties
within the area or alter the essential characteristics of the area.
9.4-6.D Parking and Access
The design provides adequate and suitable parking, loading, and vehicular circulation for the use, and includes
sufficient measures to assure safe and convenient use of the site. Access points, to and from the site, are in
locations and sufficient in number so as not to cause any traffic congestion or safety conflicts.
9.4-6.E Streets
Streets serving the proposed use are adequate in width, grade, and alignment, with sufficient visibility at
intersections, and have the capacity for the additional traffic generated by the proposed use. Traffic control
systems are sufficient to assure a reasonable level of service at affected intersections.
Where applicable, the design shall take into account existing and future street, trail, and pedestrian connections,
based on the Town’s Plan of Conservation and Development and respective policy documents.
When the PZC deems street or other improvements, including, but not limited to, new traffic control devices or
modifications to existing devices, necessary in order to render a proposed use and plan consistent with these criteria
and the Zoning Regulations, it may require such necessary improvements on- or off-site related to the application.
The PZC will give due consideration to options that recognize, protect, or enhance community character.
9.4-6.F Public Safety
The design and operation of the use utilizes the best available methods to minimize potential risks and provide
for access by emergency services, based on the type of use or uses proposed, the available utilities, and other
relevant factors.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 9-18
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
9.4-6.G Utilities
The water supply, sewage disposal, storm water management, and other utility systems, whether public or
private, are of sufficient capacity to handle immediate and reasonably projected future needs and demands
for the site, conform with the most current generally accepted engineering criteria, and comply with the
standards of the governing regulatory or public service authority.
9.4-6.H Environmental Protection, Conservation, and Long Island Sound
1. Minimizing Environmental Impacts: The design and operation of the use incorporates appropriate
features and practices which minimize potential impacts on the area’s natural systems and historic
resources, based upon the unique characteristics of the site and the proposed use, with due
consideration to be given to relevant portions of the Town’s Plan of Conservation and Development.
Applicants should demonstrate how any such relevant provisions have been addressed in the
application.
2. Long Island Sound: The Commission should consider the environmental impact on Long Island Sound
for any proposal for development in accordance with CGS Chapter 124 Section 8-2(b). The site and
building plans should be designed so as to reasonably minimize the potential environmental impact
of the proposed project on Town resources and on water bodies adjacent to the Town including Long
Island Sound. The requirements of this subsection in reference to Long Island Sound will be met by
complying with the specific, relevant, express requirements of these Regulations, such as, for example,
Sections 7.1, 7.3, and 7.4.
9.4-6.I Consistent with Purpose
1. Detrimental Effects: The proposed use does not have any detrimental effects upon the public health,
safety, and welfare.
2. Purpose of the Regulations: The proposed use does not conflict with the purposes of these
regulations.
3. Plan of Conservation and Development: The proposed use furthers the goals, objectives, and
policies of the Town’s Plan of Conservation and Development
9.4-7 Revocation Any authorized special permit shall be subject to revocation by the PZC, after notification and a public hearing,
if any conditions or safeguards imposed by the PZC upon buildings, structures, land or uses for said permit are
not strictly adhered to by the applicant and/or owner.
9.4-8 Amendments or Modifications Applications for special permit amendments or modifications which are necessitated by site conditions or
which are deemed to be in the public interest must be made in the same manner as the original application;
except that amendments or modifications which are found to be of a minor nature or which do not materially
alter the special permit as determined by the PZC, may be authorized after PZC approval only, in lieu of another
public hearing.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 9-19
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
9.4-9 Time Period and Expiration In approving a special permit, the PZC may set or impose time periods or limits on the permit or require periodic
renewal of the permit without a public hearing. In the event an appeal is taken, directly or indirectly, from the
PZC ‘s approval of a special permit, then the time period shall commence on the date of final resolution or
disposition of such litigation. Expired special permits shall be considered null and void and of no effect.
9.5 Site Plan and Coastal Site Plan
9.5-1 Purpose and Authority 9.5-1.A Site Plan
A Site plan application and review and approval by the PZC is required before a Zoning Permit can be issued
for the following:
• Any new building.
• Any enlargement in size or other alteration of any building or accessory structure that results in a more
intensive use of the premises than prior to such action.
• Any new use on the premises or any change in use on the premises, which enlargement or alteration
or change of use results in a more intensive use of a property than prior to such action.
A more intensive use includes any of the following:
• additional residential units,
• additional employees,
• additional clientele or customers,
• additional floor space for sales or service, or
• additional required parking.
9.5-1.B Administrative Site Plan (ASP)
In lieu of a Site Plan, an Administrative Site Plan review and approval may be granted by the Director of Planning
and Development Services or designee for:
• Minor or temporary land uses, or modifications to previously approved site plans where the proposed
use or modification does not significantly affect the intensity of the use, the building footprint, traffic
circulation, public safety, and impact on surrounding areas,
• Incidental filling with or removal of earth products in quantities not exceeding 1,000 cubic yards or
• When the PZC determines that a Site Plan application is not required because the construction or
alteration or change of use does not significantly affect existing circulation, drainage, relationship of
buildings to each other, landscaping, buffering, lighting, and other considerations of site plan review.
1. ASP Application
• Application for an Administrative Site Plan (ASP) must be made on a form prescribed by the Office
of Planning and Development Services (OPDS).
• The application should provide all information and details as required by the application form
and should include a simplified site plan. The simplified site plan should include all information to
clearly identify the requested proposal and to determine compliance with these regulations.
• The Director of OPDS, or his designee, may require additional information or reports, consistent
with Section 9.5-3 (Contents of Site Plan), in order to determine compliance with these regulations
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 9-20
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
and the site plan objectives of Section 9.5-4.
• All other applicable requirements of the Zoning Regulations must be met during the administrative
site plan review process.
2. ASP Decision: The Director of Planning and Development or designee shall approve, modify and
approve, or disapprove all applications for administrative site plan approval within 65 days after
statutory receipt of such application. The applicant may consent to one or more extensions of such
period, provided the total period of all extensions shall not exceed 65 days.
3. Aggrieved Persons: Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Director of Planning and Development
or designee may apply to the Commission for site plan approval pursuant to Section 9.5 of these
regulations.
4. Review by the PZC: After review of any Administrative Site Plan (ASP) Application, the Director of
OPDS may determine that the proposal is significant in scope to warrant a full site plan application
with review and approval by the Commission. The applicant must withdraw the ASP application and
submit a Site Plan Application with the appropriate information and fees.
9.5-1.C Exemption
Site plan or administrative site plan approval shall not be required for any detached one- or two-unit dwellings
or any uses accessory thereto, such as a private garages or storage sheds incidental to one- or two-unit
residential uses unless specifically required by these regulations.
9.5-2 Site Plan Procedure 9.5-2.A Application
Applications for a Site Plan must follow the General Procedures of Section 9.1 unless superseded by the specific
requirements listed in this Section 9.5
9.1-2 General Application Submittal Requirements
9.1-3 Professional Responsibilities for Plans and Design
9.1-4 Receipt of Applications
9.1-5 Incomplete Applications
9.1-7 Consultations
9.1-9 Applications, Notifications, and Referrals to other Agencies
9.1-10 Time Periods for Acting on Applications and Appeals
9.1-11 Action Documentation
9.1-12 Bonding Requirements
9.1-13 Certificate of Site Plan Compliance and Certificate of Occupancy
9.5-2.B Planning and Zoning Commission Action
1. The PZC may approve, modify and approve, or deny the site plan.
2. A site plan application may be modified and approved or denied if it fails to comply with the
requirements set forth in these regulations.
3. The Commission’s denial or modification of the site plan application should include reasons of any site
plan element found contrary to either the provisions or intent of these regulations.
4. Failure to act within the time period as stated in Section 9.1-10 will be deemed approval.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 9-21
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
9.5-2.C Post Planning and Zoning Commission Action
1. Documentation and Effective Date:
a. Documentation of the Commission action and effective date will follow the requirements of
Section 9.1-11 for notification of decision and publication of decision.
2. Recording of Plans:
a. Following approval of a site plan application, the final plans must incorporate all approved
conditions and modifications required by the PZC. Draft final plans (checkprints) may be required
to be submitted to the OPDS for review prior to submittal of the final site plans.
b. Prior to commencement of disturbance of the site or construction, final site plans, signed and
sealed by a Connecticut-registered Professional Engineer, Land Surveyor, or other appropriate
design professional, must be submitted to OPDS, signed by the Chairman of the Commission, or
designee, and recorded in the Land Records of Town Hall and a Notice of Action obtained.
3. Modifications:
a. A modifications to an approved site plan must be made to OPDS in the same manner as the original
site plan application unless the modification meets the criteria of Section 9.5-1.B. for the submittal
of an Administrative Site Plan application.
b. Modifications to an approved site plan:
• Are not to be interpreted as a re-approval of the original site plan,
• Do not have an independent expiration date, and
• Do not alter the expiration date for any previous approval.
9.5-2.D Expiration and Completion
Unless otherwise specified in the CGS Section 8-3, all work in connection with a site plan must be completed
within five years after the approval of the plan.
9.5-2.E Extension
The Commission may grant one or more extensions of the time to complete all or part of the work in connection
with the site plan, provided the total extension(s) does not exceed 10 years from the original date of approval.
The Commission may condition an extension on a determination of the adequacy of a bond or other surety.
9.5-2.F Certificate of Site Plan Compliance and Certificate of Occupancy
1. Certificate of Site Plan Compliance: All requirements of Section 9.1-13 must be met for the issuance
of a Certificate of Site Plan Compliance (CSPC).
2. Certificate of Occupancy: If a site plan is associated with a project, no Certificate of Occupancy
(CO) or other final approval may be issued until the applicant has received a Certificate of Site Plan
Compliance (CSPC) from OPDS
3. Green Sheet: A request for CSPC (aka Green Sheet) must be submitted to OPDS and all other
departments and agencies where review and approval of a CSPC for a CO is required. This request must
be made at least 10 days before a CO or other, final approval is requested from the Building Official.
4. Inspection: A planner will inspect the site for compliance with the final site plan of record for the
project, any site plan modifications, and any conditions placed on the project, and provide the applicant
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 9-22
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
with a punch list of outstanding items to complete. The planner may also request a written statement
be submitted by the project’s design professional certifying the site work has been completed in
accordance with the approved plans.
5. Conditional CSPC: When minor site work cannot be completed because of weather or other pertinent
reasons, a conditional CSPC may be issued for a period not to exceed 180 days, providing a satisfactory
financial guarantee (bond) in accordance with Section 9.1-12 is posted with the Town of Groton in an
amount sufficient to complete the site work.
6. Notification: The OPDS will notify the Building Official when a CSPC or a conditional CSPC is approved
by the OPDS and of its conditions.
7. Release of Surety: Upon written request of the applicant and satisfactory completion of the site
work, OPDS may release any surety posted under this provision in accordance with Section 9.1-12.D.
9.5-2.G As-Built Plans
1. As-Built Plan Required: The PZC or designee may require in certain cases that “as-built” plans,
prepared by a professional engineer registered in the State of Connecticut, be submitted at the time
of request for CSPC. “As-builts” may be required as follows:
a. As a condition of site plan approval where it is determined that the development proposed is of
such a scale, includes significant grading, drainage or utilities as to merit it, or where the size of the
site in relation to the proposed development would justify the need for verification that structures
have been placed accurately.
b. Where there may be several modifications to an already approved site plan requiring Commission
approval, in lieu of requiring the recording of each modified plan in Land Records.
c. Where there is a disagreement between an applicant and OPDS concerning conformance with an
approved plan at the time a request is made for a CSPC.
2. Written Statement: All “as-built” plans must be accompanied by a written statement certifying that
the site work has been completed in accordance with the most recently approved site plan.
9.5-3 Contents of Site Plan APPLICATION
Before the PZC considers any application for a Site Plan, the following requirements must be met and
information submitted by the person, firm, or corporation submitting the application. The required number of
copies of maps, plans, narratives, or reports will be as designated in the application.
For all uses requiring site plan approval, a site plan application shall include the following information:
9.5-3.A General Information
1. Name and address of the applicant and current owner as listed on the Town’s tax rolls.
2. Date, north arrow, and numerical and graphical scale on each map
3. A written description of the proposed use or uses and type of work proposed.
4. A table or chart indicating the proposed number or amount and types of uses, lot area, lot width, yards,
building height, coverage, floor area and floor area ratio, parking spaces, existing and proposed impervious
cover, landscaping, and open spaces as they relate to the requirements of the Zoning Regulations.
5. The property address and/or parcel identification number.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 9-23
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
9.5-3.B Location Map
Applications shall include an accurate scale location map as depicted on the Zoning Map and must show the
subject property and all property and streets within 1,000 feet of any part of the subject property, and the
following information:
1. All lots and lot lines.
2. All zoning district boundaries.
3. All existing streets and roads.
9.5-3.C Site Plan
1. The site plan must include an accurate class A-2 survey of the property and all improvements prepared
by a land surveyor registered in the State of Connecticut, unless the Commission determines that an
A-2 survey is not required in accordance with Section 9.1-3.B.
2. All plans must be prepared, signed, and sealed by a Connecticut registered engineer, architect, or
landscape architect, whichever is appropriate.
3. All plans should be prepared at a scale of one-inch equals 20 feet or, at the discretion of the Director
of OPDS, any other appropriate scale.
4. The plans must illustrate the proposed development of the property and should include the following
information:
a. The Property
• The boundaries of the property.
• Location, width, and purpose of all existing and proposed easements and rights-of-way on the
property.
• Existing and proposed contours with intervals of two feet, referred to USGS MSL datum.
• Location of all existing wooded areas, watercourses, wetlands, rock outcrops, stonewalls, and
other significant physical features, and where appropriate, the mean high-water line or Coastal
Jurisdiction Line (CJL), the wetlands boundary, the flood hazard area, and the floodway line.
• Areas of steep slopes as defined by these regulations.
b. Buildings and Uses
• Location, design, and height of all existing and proposed buildings, signs, fences, walls, and
other structures.
• Location of all existing and proposed uses, structures, and facilities not requiring a building
permit such as decks, patios, tennis courts, light standards, tanks, transformers, and dumpsters.
c. Parking, Loading and Circulation
• Location, arrangement, and dimensions of automobile parking spaces, aisles, vehicular drives,
fire lanes, entrances, exits, and ramps.
• Location, arrangement, and dimensions of loading and unloading areas.
• Location and dimensions of pedestrian walkways, entrances, exits, and frontage walks.
d. Buffers and Landscaping
• Size, arrangement, uses, and dimensions of buffers on the site.
• Location, general layout, type, and size of buffers or landscape areas, plant material, fencing,
walls, screening devices, decorative paving, or other materials proposed.
• Location of existing trees with a trunk caliper of more than 6 inches except in densely wooded
areas where the foliage line shall be indicated.
e. Signs and Lighting
• Location, size, height, orientation, and plans of all signs.
• Location, size, height, orientation, and design of any outdoor lighting.
f. Utilities
• Location and design of all existing and proposed sanitary sewer, storm drainage, water supply
facilities, and refuse collection areas, as well as other underground and above ground utilities.
• Design and Screening of solid waste enclosures, service areas, mechanical equipment, and
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 9-24
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
utilities in accordance with Section 8.1-9.
g. Hazardous Materials
• The plan and a narrative must address how the plan complies with 8.6 for Hazardous Materials.
h. Erosion and Sediment, Flood Protection, Stormwater Management, and Environmental
• The plan must address compliance with the Special Regulations in Section 7.
i. General Notes
• Notes and other information as required by the application checklist to provide information
and to show compliance with these regulations.
9.5-3.D Phasing Plan
In cases where the applicant wishes to develop in phases, an overall site and phasing plan indicating ultimate
development must be submitted. The plan(s) should address all development and amenities to be completed
with each phase.
9.5-3.E Architectural Plans
The applicant shall submit preliminary architectural drawings showing all proposed buildings and structures,
at a minimum scale of one (1) inch equals eight (8) feet, illustrating all exterior wall elevations, indicating floor
heights, fenestration, roof top mechanical equipment, screening of equipment, and building materials, and
building floor plan(s) indicating usage, circulation, and square footage.
9.5-3.F Reports
All reports or narratives necessary to show compliance with these regulations, including but not limited to the
following Sections:
• Section 6.4 WRPD
• Section 7.1 E&S Control Plan
• Section 7.2 Flood Protection Regulations
• Section 7.3 Stormwater Management Plan
9.5-3.G Additional Information
The Commission may require the following additional reports, plans, and other information that the
Commission or the OPDS staff deem reasonably necessary to determine compliance with these regulations
and the site plan objectives of Section 9.5-4:
a. Traffic Report or Additional Traffic Information
b. An Evaluation of the Adequacy of Public Utilities
c. Noise Projection Study
d. Identification of Historic or Archeological Resources
e. Information to show compliance with the State of CT Natural Diversity Data Base (NDDB)
f. Such other information or consultant reports as the Commission may require in order to determine
compliance with these Regulations.
9.5-3.H Certification
All traffic reports, storm water management plans, erosion control plans, and noise projection studies must
be prepared and signed/sealed by an appropriate professional licensed in the State of Connecticut, unless this
requirement is deemed unnecessary by the Commission.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 9-25
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
9.5-3.I Pre-Application Meeting
For large or complex projects, applicants are encouraged to schedule a pre-application meeting with the OPDS staff
to identify additional information and submittals likely to be needed for the Commission to act on the application.
9.5-4 Site Plan Objectives  In reviewing a site plan application, the PZC may take into consideration the public health, safety and welfare of
the public in general and the immediate neighborhood in particular and may prescribe reasonable conditions,
modifications, and safeguards to insure the accomplishment of the following general objectives.
9.5-4.A Town Plan(s)
The proposed site plan must be in general conformance with the intent of the Plan of Conservation and
Development of the Town of Groton. However, the Plan of Conservation and Development shall not take
precedence over specific provisions of the Zoning Regulations of the Town of Groton.
9.5-4.B Public Safety
All buildings, structures, uses, equipment, or material are readily accessible for fire and police protection.
9.5-4.C Traffic Access
All proposed traffic accessways do not create traffic hazards and are: adequate, but not excessive in number;
adequate in width, grade, alignment, and visibility; adequate in distance from street corners, places of public
assembly, and other accessways; and adequate in design for other similar safety considerations.
9.5-4.D Circulation and Parking
That adequate off-street parking and loading spaces are provided to prevent on-street traffic congestion; that
all parking spaces, maneuvering areas, entrances, and exits are suitably identified; that the interior circulation
system is adequately designed to provide safe and convenient access to all structures, uses, and/or parking
spaces; that parking areas are provided with suitable bumper guards, guard rails, islands, crosswalks, speed
bumps and similar safety devices when deemed necessary by the Commission to adequately protect life and
property; and that provision is made for safe pedestrian movement within and adjacent to the property by the
installation of sidewalks.
9.5-4.E Landscaping and Screening
That the general landscaping of the site complies with the purpose and intent of Section 8.1 of these
regulations; that existing trees are preserved to the maximum extent possible; and that parking and service
areas are suitably screened during all seasons of the year from the view of adjacent residential districts, and
public rights-of-way.
9.5-4.F Lighting
That glare from the installation of outdoor lights and illuminated signs is properly shielded from the view of
adjacent property and public rights-of-way and is not directed up into the sky.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 9-26
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
9.5-4.G Public Health
That all utility systems are suitably located, adequately designed, and properly installed to serve the proposed
uses, to protect the property from adverse air, water, or land pollution, and to preserve and enhance the
environmental quality of the surrounding neighborhood and that of the Town.
9.5-4.H Environmental Features
That the development of the site will preserve sensitive environmental land features such as steep slopes, wetlands,
and large rock outcroppings and preserve scenic views or historically significant features such as stonewalls.
9.5-4.I Neighborhood Character
That the location and size of any proposed use, building or structure, as well as the nature and intensity of
operations involved in or conducted in connection therewith, will be in general harmony with the character
of the surrounding neighborhood, and will not be hazardous or otherwise detrimental to the appropriate and
orderly development or use of any adjacent land, building, or structure.
9.5-4.J Long Island Sound
That the proposed site development be designed and arranged to show that reasonable consideration has
been given to restoring and protecting the ecosystem and habitat of Long Island Sound. The requirements of
this subsection will be met by complying with the specific, relevant, express requirements of these Regulations,
including without limitation, Sections 7.1, 7.3, and 7.4.
9.5-5 Coastal Site Plan Review 9.5-5.A Applicability
The following site plans, plans, and applications for activities or projects to be located fully or partially within
the adopted coastal area boundary are subject to coastal site plan review and to the requirements of Chapter
444, Sections 22a-90 through 22a-113 of the Connecticut General Statutes as amended:
1. Site plans submitted to the PZC.
2. Subdivision plans submitted to the Commission.
3. Plans submitted to the Commission for a planned unit development.
4. Applications for a special permit submitted to the Commission.
5. Applications for a zoning variance submitted to the Zoning Board of Appeals.
6. Referrals of a proposed municipal project to the Commission pursuant to CGS Section 8-24.
7. Shoreline flood and erosion control structures. These structures also require a referral to the Land and
Water Division of CT DEEP.
9.5-5.B Exemptions
Under the authority of Chapter 444, Section 22a-109(b) of the Connecticut General Statutes, the following
uses, structures, and activities are exempt from coastal site plan review:
1. Minor Additions: Minor additions to or modifications of existing buildings or detached accessory
buildings such as garages and utility sheds except in instances where Section 6.1.3 is applicable or the
structure is located within 25-feet of the Coastal Jurisdiction Line (CJL) in the MDD.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 9-27
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
2. Incidental Structures: Construction of new or modification of existing structures incidental to the
enjoyment and maintenance of residential property including but not limited to walks, terraces,
driveways, swimming pools, tennis courts, docks, and detached accessory buildings except in instances
where Section 6.1-3 is applicable or the structure is located within 25-feet of the CJL in the MDD.
3. Fences, Walls, Etc.: Construction of new or modification of existing on premise fences, walls (provided
they do not meet the definition of shoreline flood and erosion control structure found in Section
22a-109(c) of the CGS), pedestrian walks and terraces, underground utility connections, essential
electric, gas, telephone, water and sewer service lines, signs and such other minor structures as will
not substantially alter the natural character of coastal resources or restrict access along a public beach.
4. Single-Unit Dwellings: Construction of an individual conforming single unit residential structure
except when such structure is in or within 100 feet of the following coastal resource areas as defined by
Section 22a-93(7) of the Connecticut General Statutes: tidal wetlands, coastal bluffs and escarpments,
and beaches and dunes or coastal waters.
5. Conservation Activities: Activities conducted for the specific purpose of conserving or preserving
soil, vegetation, water, fish, shellfish, wildlife, and other coastal land and water resources, except those
activities that meet the definition of shoreline flood and erosion control structure found in Section
22a-109(c) of the CGS.
6. Interior Modifications: Interior modifications to buildings.
7. Minor Changes in Use: Minor changes
in use of a building, structure, or property
except those changes occurring on property
adjacent to or abutting coastal waters.
9.5-5.C Coastal Site Plan
Application
A complete coastal site plan application must include,
at a minimum, the following information:
1. Location: A plan showing the location and
spatial relationship of coastal resources on
and contiguous to the site.
2. Project Description: A description of
the entire project with appropriate plans
indicating project location, design, timing,
and methods of construction.
3. Capability of Resources: An assessment
of the capability of the resources to
accommodate the proposed use.
4. Project Suitability: An assessment of the
suitability of the project for the proposed
site.
ANNOTATION
Criteria listed in Section 22a-106 of the
Connecticut General Statutes
CGS 22a-106(b) In determining the
acceptability of potential adverse impacts of
the proposed activity described in the coastal
site plan on both coastal resources and future
water-dependent development opportunities
a municipal board or commission shall:
1. Consider the characteristics of the site,
including the location and condition of
any of the coastal resources defined in
section 22a-93
2. Consider the potential effects, both
beneficial and adverse, of the proposed
activity on coastal resources and
future water-dependent development
opportunities
3. Follow all applicable goals and policies
stated in section 22a-92 and identify
conflicts between the proposed activity
and any goal or policy
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 9-28
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
5. Impacts: An evaluation of the potential beneficial and adverse impacts of the project on coastal
resources and future water-dependent development activities.
6. Mitigation Methods: A description of proposed methods to mitigate adverse effects on coastal
resources and future water-dependent development activities.
Any persons submitting a coastal site plan as defined above must demonstrate that the adverse impacts of
the proposed activity are acceptable and shall demonstrate that such activity is consistent with the goals and
policies of Section 22a-92 of the Connecticut General Statutes.
9.5-5.D Coastal Site Plan Action
1. Required Action: The board or commission reviewing the coastal site plan will, in addition to the
discretion granted in any other sections of the Connecticut General Statutes or in any special act,
approve, modify, condition, or deny the activity proposed in a coastal site plan on the basis of criteria
listed in Section 22a-106 of the Connecticut General Statutes.
2. Findings: Further, pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes, Section 22a-106(e), the reviewing board
or commission must find that the proposed activity:
a. Is consistent with all applicable goals and policies of Section 22a-92, and
b. Incorporates as conditions or modifications all reasonable measures which would mitigate or
lessen the adverse impacts of the proposed activity on both coastal resources and future waterdependent
development activities.
The board and commission approving, modifying, conditioning or denying a coastal site plan on the
basis of criteria listed above should state in writing the findings and reasons for its action.
3. Timing of Decision: The review of any coastal site plan pursuant to this section shall not be deemed
complete and valid unless the board or commission having jurisdiction over such plan has rendered a
final decision. If such board or commission fails to render a decision within the time period provided
by the CGS and Section 9.1-10 for such a decision, the coastal site plan shall be deemed rejected.
4. Bonding / Financial Guarantee: The commission or board may require a bond, or other surety or
financial security arrangement to secure compliance with any modifications, conditions, and other
terms stated in its approval of a coastal site plan. (CGS Section 22a-107)
9.6 Zoning Board of Appeals
9.6-1 Purpose and Authority
The Zoning Board of Appeals has the following powers and duties as provided in the CGS Section 8-6:
9.6-1.A Appeals
1. Powers of the Board: The Board has the power to hear and decide appeals made by any person or
persons severally or jointly aggrieved by any order, requirement, or decision of the Zoning Official in
charge of the enforcement of these regulations.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 9-29
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
2. Affirmation of Connecticut General Statutes: A zoning regulation affirming a specific requirement
under the Connecticut General Statutes is not subject to an appeal.
3. Timing: An appeal must be taken within 15 days of receipt of any order, requirement or decision by
the Zoning Official of which the appellant is aggrieved. The Board does not have jurisdiction to hear
an appeal filed beyond the 15 days.
4. Decisions of the Board: The Board may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order,
requirement or decision appealed from, and will make such order, requirement or decision as in its
opinion ought to be made in the enforcement of the regulations.
5. Zoning Official: The Board will have the powers of the Zoning Official from whose order, requirement,
or decision the appeal was taken.
6. Vote: The concurring vote of four members is necessary to reverse or modify the order, requirement,
or decision appealed of the Zoning Official.
9.6-1.B Variances
1. Powers of the Board: In accordance with CGS Section 8-6, the Board has the power to grant
variances from the strict application of these regulations when, by reason of exceptional narrowness,
shallowness, shape, substandard size, or other conditions specifically affecting such parcel, not
generally affecting the district in which it is located, the strict application of these regulations would
result in exceptional difficulty or unusual hardship upon the owner of said property; provided that such
relief or variance can be granted without substantial impairment of the intent, purpose, and integrity
of these regulations and of the Plan of Conservation and Development for the Town of Groton.
2. Findings: Before granting a variance on the basis of exceptional difficulty or unusual hardship, there
must be a finding by the Board that all of the following conditions exist:
a. That the difficulties or hardship are peculiar to the property in question, in contrast with those of
other properties in the same district.
a. That the hardship was not the result of the applicant’s own action.
b. That the hardship is not merely financial or pecuniary.
The concurring vote of four members shall be necessary to vary the application of the Zoning
Regulations.
9.6-1.C Certificates of Approval of Location
1. Purpose: To issue certificates of approval of location for dealers’ and repairers’ licenses as provided
for by sections 14-51, 14-54, and 14-55 of the Connecticut General Statutes (CGS), and for gasoline and
motor oil sales as provided for by CGS sections 14-318 and 14-321.
2. Review: In reviewing the Certificate of Approval of Location, the Board acts as an agent of the State of
Connecticut, not in a zoning capacity, and no such certificate should be issued until the application has
been approved and such location has been found suitable (e.g. located in the appropriate zone for the
business intended, with due consideration to its location in reference to schools, churches, theaters,
traffic conditions, width of highway, and effect on public travel).
3. Vote: The concurring vote of three members shall be necessary to issue a certificate.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 9-30
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
9.6-2 Applications AND PROCEDURES
Applications for a variance, an appeal of an interpretation of a ruling of the Zoning Official, or a certificate
of approval of location must follow the General Procedures of Section 9.1 unless superseded by the specific
requirements listed in this Section 9.6.
9.1-2 General Application Submittal Requirements
9.1-3 Professional Responsibilities for Plans and Design
9.1-4 Receipt of Applications
9.1-5 Incomplete Applications
9.1-6 Sequence of Public Hearings
9.1-7 Consultations
9.1-8 Public Notice
9.1-9 Applications, Notifications, and Referrals to other Agencies
9.1-10 Time Periods for Acting on Applications and Appeals
9.1-11 Action Documentation
Applications must be submitted on a form established for that purpose and include such supporting information
as is indicated within the application form and the required fee.
9.6-3 Hearings 9.6-3.A Occasions for Public Hearings
The Board shall hold a public hearing on all applications for an appeal and/or variance, and may hold a hearing
on a Certificate of Approval of Location, in accordance with the General Statutes of the State of Connecticut
and Section 9.1-10.B.
9.6-3.B Setting the Date
Upon the filing of an application to reverse a decision of the Zoning Official (Appeal) or the filing of an
application for a variance, a date shall be set for a public hearing, and due notice thereof shall be given to the
parties in accordance with Section 9.1-4.A.
9.6-3.C Notice and Proof of Notice
Notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be published in a newspaper having substantial circulation
in the Town of Groton in accordance with the General Statutes of the State of Connecticut and Section 9.1-8 of
these regulations. Proof of Notice by the applicant must be in accordance with Section 9.1-8.B.
9.6-3.D Considerations
When considering an application for a certificate of approval of location, the Board may provide notice of and
may conduct a hearing on the application in accordance with the General Statutes of the State of Connecticut.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 9-31
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
9.6-4 Referrals and Notifications 9.6-4.A Referral to Planning and Zoning Commissions
All proposed variances will be referred to the Commission at least ten days prior to the date assigned for a
public hearing on that request. The Commission or its staff may submit an advisory opinion on such referrals
prior to the public hearing, and the findings of the Commission or its staff will be read into the record of the
public hearing. The failure of the Commission or its staff to submit a report to the Board will not prevent the
Board from reaching a decision on any matter before it.
9.6-4.B Other Referrals and Notifications
Other referrals and notifications must be made in accordance with Section 9.1-9 of these regulations
9.6-5 Decision of the Board and Post Decision Action
9.6-5.A Appeals
1. Time Frame for Decisions: The Board shall render its decision on such an appeal within the time
frame established in CGS and Sections 9.1-10.B and 9.1-10.C of these regulations.
2. Decisions of the Board: The Board may reverse or affirm, wholly or in part, or may modify the order,
requirement, decision, or determination as in its opinion ought to be made in the enforcement of the
regulations, and to that end will have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken.
3. Taking of Effect: Decisions of the Board will take effect upon filing a copy thereof in the Office of the
Town Clerk and in the Land Records.
4. Notifications: Notice of the decision of the Board shall be provided in accordance with Section 9.1-11
including being published in a newspaper having a substantial circulation in the Town of Groton within
15 days after such decision has been rendered.
9.6-5.B Variances
1. Time Frame for Decisions: The Board shall render its decision on a variance in accordance with the
time frame established in the CGS and Sections 9.1-10.B and 9.1-10.C of these regulations.
2. Taking of Effect: A variance will take effect upon filing a final copy of the variance in the Land Records
of the Town after the established appeal period and in accordance with Section 9.1-11.D.
3. General Notice: Notice of the decision of the Board will be provided in accordance with Section 9.1-11.
4. Limitations: A variance shall only authorize the particular activity specified in the Board’s approval.
5. Runs with the Land: Any variance granted by the Board permanently runs with the land and not the
person(s) who applied for and received the variance.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 9-32
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
6. Repetition: The Board is not required to hear any application for the same variance or substantially
the same variance more than once in a period of six months after a decision by the Board unless it
finds, based on facts presented in writing, that a material change in the situation justifies a new public
hearing. A change in ownership or interest in a property is not considered a material change in the
situation for the purpose of this Section.
9.6-5.C Certificate of Approval of Location
1. Time Frame: If a hearing is held for a Certificate of Approval of Location, the Board shall render its
decision in accordance with the time frame established in the CGS and Sections 9.1-10.B and 9.1-10.C
of these regulations.
2. State of Connecticut License: An approval of the Certificate of Approval of Location by the Board
allows the Zoning Official to sign the appropriate application for a State of Connecticut License for the
business at the approved site.
9.7 Non -Conforming Lots , Non -Conforming Uses  		of Land , Non -Conforming Structures , and  		Non -Conforming Uses of Structures and  		Premises
9.7-1 Intent
Where lots, structures, and uses of land and structures lawfully existed before the effective date of adoption
or amendment of these Regulations, but are prohibited, regulated, or restricted under the terms of these
Regulations, it is the intent of these Regulations to permit these non-conformities to continue until they are
removed, but not to encourage their survival.
9.7-2 Non -Conforming Lots
Except as per Section 8-26a(b) of the Connecticut General Statutes, for a vacant and unimproved residential
lot, any lot approved by the Commission and shown on a subdivision plan on file in the Groton Town Clerk’s
Office or separately described in the latest deed of record prior to the effective date of these Regulations that
does not meet the minimum lot area and/or lot width requirements of these Regulations may be used for any
use permitted in the underlying zone, if there is compliance with all other provisions of these Regulations and
the Town of Groton Subdivision Regulations.
The above non-conforming lot allowance does not apply to any substandard lot where sufficient adjoining land
that was under the same ownership at any time after such lot became non-conforming and can be combined
to reduce or eliminate the lot area and/or lot width noncompliance.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 9-33
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
9.7-3 Non -Conforming Uses of Land
Where the lawful use of land existed at the effective date of adoption or amendment of these Regulations that
is no longer permissible under the current provisions of these Regulations, such use may be continued as long
as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions.
9.7-3.A Enlargement
No non-conforming use shall be enlarged to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the effective
date of adoption or amendment of these Regulations.
9.7-3.B Change of Non-Conforming Use
Any non-conforming use of land may be changed to another non-conforming use with the approval of a special
permit and a determination by the Commission that the proposed use is equally or more appropriate in the
district than the existing non-conforming use and will not have a greater impact on the surrounding area. In
permitting such change, the Commission may require appropriate conditions to protect the public and the
environment in accordance with these Regulations.
9.7-3.C Moving of a Non-Conforming Use
No non-conforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to any other portion of the lot occupied by the use
at the effective date of adoption or amendment of these Regulations.
9.7-3.D Resumption of Non-Conforming Use
Any non-conforming use of land that is superseded by a permitted use shall not be resumed.
9.7-3.E Abandonment
If a non-conforming use of land is abandoned by virtue of an overt act by the property owner to discontinue
such use and an overt intent not to reestablish such use, any subsequent use of that land shall conform to the
requirements specified by these Regulations for the underlying zoning district (provided that the demolition
or deconstruction of a non-conforming use shall not by itself be evidence of such property owner’s intent to
not reestablish such use).
9.7-4 Non -Conforming Use of Structures
If a lawful use of a structure existed at the effective date of adoption or amendment of these Regulations that
would not be allowed in the district under the current provisions of these Regulations, the lawful use may be
continued as long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions.
9.7-4.A Increase in Non-Conformity
No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by these Regulations in the underlying zone shall be
enlarged, moved, or structurally altered in a manner that increases the nonconformity, except in changing the
use of the structure to a use permitted in the underlying zone.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 9-34
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
9.7-4.B Change to Another Non-Conforming Use
Any non-conforming use of a structure may be changed to another nonconforming use with the approval of a
special permit and a determination by the Commission that the proposed use is equally or more appropriate in
the district than the existing non-conforming use and will not have a greater impact on the surrounding area.
In permitting such change, the Commission may require appropriate conditions to protect the public and the
environment in accordance with these Regulations.
9.7-4.C Resumption of Non-Conforming Use
Any non-conforming use of a structure that is superseded by a permitted use shall not be resumed.
9.7-4.D Abandonment
When a non-conforming use of a structure is abandoned by virtue of an overt act by the property owner to
discontinue such use and an overt intent not to reestablish such use, the structure or structure and premises
shall not be used, except in compliance with the requirements of the underlying zone (provided that the
demolition or deconstruction of a non-conforming use of the structure shall not by itself be evidence of such
property owner’s intent to not reestablish such use).
9.7-5 Non -Conforming Structures
Where a lawful structure existed at the effective date of adoption or amendment of these Regulations that
could not be built under the current provisions of these Regulations by reason of restrictions on area, coverage,
height, yards or other characteristics of the structure or its location on the lot, such non-conforming structure
may remain as long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions.
9.7-5.A Increase in Non-Conformity
No non-conforming structure may be enlarged or altered in a way that increases its non-conformity.
9.7-5.B Removal, Damage or Destruction
Should a non-conforming structure be removed, damaged or destroyed, it may be repaired or replaced to the
extent that does not increase the nonconformity.
9.7-5.C Moving of a Structure
Any structure moved for any reason or for any distance shall conform to the requirements of the underlying
zone of its new location.
9.7-5.D Abandonment
When a non-conforming structure is abandoned by virtue of an overt act by the property owner to demolish
such structure, the structure shall not be used, except in compliance with the requirements of the underlying
zone (provided that the demolition or deconstruction of a non-conforming structure shall not by itself be
evidence of such property owner’s intent to not reestablish such structure).
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 9-35
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
9.7-6 Repairs and Maintenance
Ordinary repairs or remodeling may be done to any structure, or structure and premises devoted in whole or
in part to a non-conforming use, provided that such work does not increase the nonconformity.
Nothing in these Regulations shall prevent the ordered repair of any building or part thereof declared unsafe
by any official charged with protecting public health and safety.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 10-1
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
SECTION 10: SEPARABILITY, REPEALER
AN D VALIDITY
10.1 Separability
It is hereby declared to be the Legislative intent that:
10.1-1
If a court of competent jurisdiction finds any provisions of these regulations to be invalid or ineffective in
whole or in part, the effect of such decision shall be limited to those provisions which are expressly stated
in the decision to be invalid or ineffective, and all other provisions of these regulations shall continue to be
separately and fully effective.
10.1-2
If a court of competent jurisdiction finds the application of any provision or provisions of these regulations to
any zoning lot, building, or structure to be invalid or ineffective in whole or in part, the effect of such decision
shall be limited to the person, property, or situation immediately involved in the controversy, and the application
of any such provision to other person, property, or situations shall not be affected.
10.1-3
While any provision or provisions of these regulations or application of any provision or provisions of these
regulations to any zoning lot, building, or structure is before a court of competent jurisdiction, all other provisions
of these regulations and all other applications of the provisions of these regulations to other zoning
lots, buildings, or structures shall continue to be separately and fully effective.
10.2 Repealer
The provisions of the zoning regulations of the Town of Groton, as adopted June 21, 1957 and subsequently
amended, are repealed as of the effective date of these zoning regulations, except that all terms and conditions
attached to special exceptions, site plans, and variances shall remain in effect.
10.3 Effective Date
The effective date of these regulations shall be October 1, 2019.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 1
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 2
PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
1
index
Subject
A Section #
Access Drive, Common...................................................................................................................... 4.2-2.K
Access, Required............................................................................................................................... 4.2-2.J
Accessory Dwelling Units .................................................................................................................. 5.1-1.A
Accessory Buildings .......................................................................................................................... 4.2-2.A
Accessory Uses.................................................................................................................................. 5.1-1
Active Senior Housing........................................................................................................................ 5.1-8.B
Administrative Site Plan.................................................................................................................... 9.5-1.B
Agriculture, Commercial...................................................................................................... 5.1-2.B, 6.4-9.A.1
Agriculture, Home............................................................................................................................. 5.1-2.C
Amendments, Zoning........................................................................................................................ 9.3
Animals.................................................................................................................................. 5.1-2.B, 5.1-2.C
Animal Day Care.................................................................................................................. 5.1-2.F, 6.4-9.A.2
Animal Hospital................................................................................................................................. 5.1-2.G
Appeals, Zoning Board of ................................................................................................................. 9.6
Applications (General Procedures).................................................................................................... 9.1
Aquaculture....................................................................................................................................... 5.1-2.A
Assisted Living Facility....................................................................................................................... 5.1-8.I
Association........................................................................................................................................ 5.1-3.A
Averaging, Front Yard........................................................................................................................ 4.2-2.D
Automobile Dealer (New).................................................................................................................. 6.4-9.D.5
Automobile Repair and Service ......................................................................................... 5.1-13.C, 6.4-9.D.6
Automobile Washing Facility.............................................................................................. 5.1-13.D, 6.4-9.D.7
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019
PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
2
B Section #
Bar..................................................................................................................................................... 5.1-9.A
Bed and Breakfast............................................................................................................................. 5.1-7.B
Boat and Equipment Display/Sales..................................................................................... 5.1-13.B, 6.4-9.D.4
Bonds................................................................................................................................................. 9.1-12
Bonds, Erosion and Sediment Control............................................................................................... 7.1-6
Boundaries, Zoning Districts ............................................................................................................. 3.8
Buffer Area........................................................................................................................................ 8.1-6
Building, Accessory............................................................................................................................ 4.2-2.A
Building Coverage.............................................................................................................................. 4.2
Building Height.................................................................................................................................. 4.2
Building, Principal.............................................................................................................................. 4.2-2.G
C Section #
Campgrounds.................................................................................................................................... 5.1-3.A
Canopies (Fuel Dispending Station)................................................................................................... 5.1-13.A
Car Dealers (New).............................................................................................................................. 6.4-9.D.5
Car Repair and Service ....................................................................................................... 5.1-13.C, 6.4-9.D.6
Car Washing Facility........................................................................................................... 5.1-13.D, 6.4-9.D.7
Caretaker Dwelling ........................................................................................................................... 5.1-8.C
Carnivals............................................................................................................................................ 5.1-3.H
Cemeteries ....................................................................................................................................... 5.1-11.A
Certificate of Compliance (Site Plan/Occupancy and Zoning).................................................9.1-13, 9.2-2
Chickens (Hens)................................................................................................................................. 5.1-2.C.2
Change in Use (Non-Conforming) ..................................................................................................... 9.7-4.B
Cinema.............................................................................................................................................. 5.1-3.I
Club .................................................................................................................................................. 5.1-3.B
Coastal High Hazard Areas................................................................................................................. 7.2-7
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 1
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 2
PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
3
Coastal Resource Setback ................................................................................................................. 6.1-3
Coastal Site Plan Review ................................................................................................................... 9.5-5
College............................................................................................................................................... 5.1-11.B
Commercial Districts ........................................................................................................................ 3.3-1
Commercial, Neighborhood (CN)...................................................................................................... 3.3-1.B
Commercial, Regional (CR)................................................................................................................ 3.3-1.A
Common Access Drive....................................................................................................................... 4.2-2.K
Common Lot Line Agreement (Common Wall)................................................................................. 4.2-2.H
Community Garden........................................................................................................................... 5.1-2.D
Conditional Uses ............................................................................................................................... 5.1
Congregate Living Facility.................................................................................................................. 5.1-8.I
Construction Equipment Storage...................................................................................................... 5.1-1.B
Construction Equipment Sales.......................................................................................................... 6.4-9.D.1
Contractor Vehicle Parking ............................................................................................................... 5.1-1.B
Cottage Community........................................................................................................................... 5.1-8.E
Counseling Facility, Residential.......................................................................................................... 5.1-8.D
D Section #
Day Care ........................................................................................................................................... 5.1-4
- Animal......................................................................................................................................... 5.1-2.F
- Adult........................................................................................................................................... 5.1-4.A
- Child............................................................................................................................................ 5.1-4.B
- Group.......................................................................................................................................... 5.1-4.C
Density Calculations, Residential....................................................................................................... 4.2-3
Display, Outdoor Retail...................................................................................................................... 5.1-10.A
District Boundaries............................................................................................................................ 3.8
Drinking Establishment..................................................................................................................... 5.1-9.A
Drive Through Facilities..................................................................................................................... 5.1-1.C
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019
PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
4
Driveways................................................................................................................................ 8.2-9, 8.2-12
Dwelling, Multi-Unit ............................................................................................................ 5.1-8.G, 5.1-8.H
Dwelling, Single-Unit......................................................................................................................... 5.1-8.A
Dwelling, Two-Unit............................................................................................................................ 5.1-8.A
Dwelling Unit, Accessory................................................................................................................... 5.1-1.A
Duplex .............................................................................................................................................. 5.1-8.A
E Section #
Earth Products, Filling and Removing................................................................................................ 5.1-2.E
Effective Date of Regulations............................................................................................................. 10.3
Emergency Treatment Center............................................................................................................ 5.1-5.A
Enclosures, Solid Waste..................................................................................................................... 8.1-7
Enforcement, Zoning......................................................................................................................... 9.2
Entertainment Facilities..................................................................................................................... 5.1-3.E
Environmental Performance Standards............................................................................................. 7.4
Erosion and Sediment Control Plan................................................................................................... 7.1
Event, Temporary.............................................................................................................................. 5.1-3.H
Excavation ......................................................................................................................................... 5.1-2.E
Existing Lots....................................................................................................................................... 4.2-2.B
F Section #
Fairs................................................................................................................................................... 5.1-3.H
Farm ................................................................................................................................................. 5.1-2.B
Filling................................................................................................................................................. 5.1-2.E
Flex Space.......................................................................................................................................... 5.1-6.A
Flood Protection Regulations ........................................................................................................... 7.2
Flood Hazard Areas ............................................................................................................. 7.2-3, 7.2-4, 7.2-5
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 1
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 2
PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
5
Floodways.......................................................................................................................................... 7.2-6
Floor Area of Dwelling....................................................................................................................... 4.2-2.C
Food Production................................................................................................................................ 5.1-6.B
Food Trucks....................................................................................................................................... 5.1-9.B
Front Landscape Area........................................................................................................................ 8.1-4
Front Yards ........................................................................................................................................ 4.2
Front Yard Averaging......................................................................................................................... 4.2-2.D
Frontage/Access, Required................................................................................................................ 4.2-2.J
Fuel Dealer........................................................................................................................................ 6.4-9.D.2
Fuel Dispensing Station...................................................................................................... 5.1-13.A, 6.4-9.D.3
G Section #
Garden, Community ......................................................................................................................... 5.1-2.D
Gasoline Station ............................................................................................................................... 5.1-13.A
Golf Courses...................................................................................................................................... 5.1-3.D
Greenhouses, Commercial ................................................................................................. 5.1-2.B, 6.4-9.A.3
Green Districts................................................................................................................................... 3.5
Green, Conservation (GC).................................................................................................................. 3.5-2
Green, Recreation (GR)...................................................................................................................... 3.5-1
H Section #
Hazardous Materials.......................................................................................................................... 8.6
Health Care Office/Clinic................................................................................................................... 5.1-5.B
Height Limitation .............................................................................................................................. 4.1, 4.2-2.F
Hens (Chickens)................................................................................................................................. 5.1-2.C.2
Historic/Institutional Reuse............................................................................................................... 6.2
Home-Based Business....................................................................................................................... 5.1-1.D
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019
PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
6
Horses............................................................................................................................ 5.1-2.B, 5.1-2.C.3, 6.4-9.A.5
Hospital ............................................................................................................................................ 5.1-5.A
Hospital, Animal ................................................................................................................. 5.1-2.G, 6.4-9.A.6
Hotel.................................................................................................................................................. 5.1-7.A
I Section #
Industrial Districts ............................................................................................................................. 3.4
Industrial, General (IG)...................................................................................................................... 3.4-1
Industrial, Heavy................................................................................................................................ 5.1-6.C
Industrial, Light.................................................................................................................... 5.1-6.D, 6.4-9.B.1
Industrial, Mixed-Use (IM)................................................................................................................. 3.4-2
J Section #
Junk Yard........................................................................................................................................... 5.1-6.C
K Section #
Kennel, Commercial ............................................................................................................ 5.1-2.F, 6.4-9.A.2
L Section #
Landscaping....................................................................................................................................... 8.1
Lighting (Parking Areas and Outdoor) .............................................................................................. 8.2-15, 8.5
Livestock.............................................................................................................................. 5.1-2.B, 5.1-2.C.3
Loading Requirements ...................................................................................................................... 8.2, 8.2-16
Lodge................................................................................................................................................. 5.1-3.A
Lot, Adjacent to Railroad................................................................................................................... 4.2-2.F
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 1
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 2
PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
7
Lot, Existing....................................................................................................................................... 4.2-2.B
Lot, Frontage .................................................................................................................................... 4.2
Lot, More than One Principal Building on a...................................................................................... 4.2-2.G
Lot Line, Common Agreement.......................................................................................................... 4.2-2.H
Lot Line, Zero..................................................................................................................................... 4.2-2.L
Lot Lying in More Than One District.................................................................................................. 3.9
Lot Requirements ............................................................................................................................. 4.2
M Section #
Map Changes..................................................................................................................................... 9.3-2.A
Marina............................................................................................................................................... 5.1-3.F
Marine Craft and Equipment Display/Sales........................................................................ 5.1-13.B, 6.4-9.D.4
Mechanical Equipment, Screening.................................................................................................... 8.1-7
Medical Office/Clinic......................................................................................................................... 5.1-5.B
Mixed-Use Districts........................................................................................................................... 3.3-2
Mixed-Use Town Center (MTC).............................................................................................3.3-2.C, 3.3-2.D
Mixed-Use Village Center (MVC)........................................................................................... 3.3-2.E, 3.3-2.F
Mobile Manufactured Home Park/Subdivision................................................................................. 5.1-8.F
Motel................................................................................................................................................. 5.1-7.A
Multi-Unit Dwelling.............................................................................................................. 5.1-8.G, 5.1-8.H
Mystic Downtown District (MDD) .........................................................................................3.3-2.A, 3.3-2.B
N Section #
Nautilus Memorial Design District (NMDD)..........................................................................3.3-1.D, 3.3-1.E
Noise................................................................................................................................................. 7.4
Non-Conforming Structure................................................................................................................ 9.7-5
Non-Conforming Lot ......................................................................................................................... 9.7-2
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019
PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
8
Non-Conforming Use (of Land or Structures)........................................................................... 9.7-3, 9.7-4
Non-Conforming Use, Change In....................................................................................................... 9.7-4.B
Notice, Public.................................................................................................................................... 9.1-8
Notifications (General Procedures)................................................................................................... 9.1
Nursery School ................................................................................................................................. 5.1-4.B
Nurseries, Commercial........................................................................................................ 5.1-2.B, 6.4-9.A.3
Nursing Home ................................................................................................................................... 5.1-8.I
O Section #
Office, Professional ........................................................................................................................... 5.1-11.D
Off-Street Parking ............................................................................................................................. 8.2
Open Space Subdivisions................................................................................................................... 6.3
Outdoor Patio, Commercial............................................................................................................... 5.1-1.E
Outdoor Storage Yard.................................................................................................... 5.1-1.F, 5.1-6.E, 6.4-9.B.2
P Section #
Parking, Bicycle.................................................................................................................................. 8.2-17
Parking, Contractor Vehicle............................................................................................................... 5.1-1.B
Parking, Landscaping Requirements.................................................................................................. 8.1-5
Parking, Loading Spaces.................................................................................................................... 8.2-16
Parking, in the MDD.......................................................................................................................... 8.2-6
Parking, Phased Development.......................................................................................................... 8.2-8
Parking, Shared................................................................................................................................. 8.2-7
Parking Spaces .................................................................................................................................. 8.2-4
Patio, Outdoor Commercial............................................................................................................... 5.1-1.E
Performance Standards, Environmental............................................................................................ 7.4
Permitted Uses, Table........................................................................................................................ 4.1
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 1
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 2
PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
9
Pet Grooming...................................................................................................................... 5.1-2.G, 6.4-9.A.4
Petitions, Zoning Amendments ........................................................................................................ 9.3
Poultry................................................................................................................................. 5.1-2.B, 5.1-2.C.3
Principal Building .............................................................................................................................. 4.2-2.G
Professional Office............................................................................................................................. 5.1-11.D
Projection Into Required Yard Areas ................................................................................................. 4.2-2.I
Public Hearings........................................................................................................... 9.1-6, 9.3-3, 9.4-5.A, 9.6-3
Public Notice..................................................................................................................................... 9.1-8
R Section #
Rear Yard........................................................................................................................................... 4.2, 4.2-2.F
Recreation, Indoor Commercial......................................................................................................... 5.1-3.C
Recreation, Outdoor Commercial ..................................................................................................... 5.1-3.D
Recreation, Public.............................................................................................................................. 5.1-3.G
Referrals.........................................................................................................................9.1-9, 9.3-5, 9.4-4, 9.6-4
Regulation Amendments................................................................................................................... 9.3
Repair, Vehicles.................................................................................................................................. 5.1-13.C
Required Frontage/Access ................................................................................................................ 4.2-2.J
Residential Counseling Facility.......................................................................................................... 5.1-8.D
Residential Districts........................................................................................................................... 3.2
Residential (R) Districts, R-7 and R-12............................................................................................... 3.2-1
Residential Multi-Unit ...................................................................................................................... 3.2-4
Residential, Rural (RU) Districts, RU-20, RU-40, and RU-80.............................................................. 3.2-3
Residential Single Unit (RS) Districts, RS-12 and RS-20...................................................................... 3.2-2
Residential Life Care Communities.................................................................................................... 5.1-8.I
Restaurant, Mobile............................................................................................................................ 5.1-9.B
Retail, Outdoor Sales and Storage/Display......................................................................... 5.1-10.A, 6.4-9.B.2
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019
PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
10
S Section #
Salvage Operation............................................................................................................................. 5.1-6.C
Schools................................................................................................................................ 5.1-11.B, 5.1-11.C
Scrap Yard.......................................................................................................................................... 5.1-6.C
Screening........................................................................................................................................... 8.1
Security Service Dwelling.................................................................................................................. 5.1-8.C
Sediment and Erosion Control Plan................................................................................................... 7.1
Self-Service Storage Facility............................................................................................................... 5.1-11.E
Senior Housing, Active...................................................................................................................... 5.1-8.B
Service Areas, Screening................................................................................................................... 8.1-7
Setbacks............................................................................................................................................ 4.2, 4.2-2.I
Shared Parking................................................................................................................................... 8.2-7
Sidewalks........................................................................................................................................... 8.3
Side Yard............................................................................................................................................ 4.2, 4.2-2.H
Sight Lines......................................................................................................................................... 4.2-2.N
Sign Requirements............................................................................................................................ 8.4
Single-Unit Dwelling.......................................................................................................................... 5.1-8.A
Site Plan............................................................................................................................................. 9.5
Site Standards.................................................................................................................................... 8
Special Permit ................................................................................................................................... 9.4
Sports Facilities.................................................................................................................................. 5.1-3.E
Stable, Riding or Boarding .................................................................................................. 5.1-2.F, 6.4-9.A.5
Storage, Construction Equipment..................................................................................................... 5.1-1.B
Storage, Outdoor Retail..................................................................................................................... 5.1-10.A
Storage, Unregistered Vehicles/Waste Material............................................................................... 4.2-2.M
Storage Yard, Outdoor................................................................................................... 5.1-1.F, 5.1-6.E, 6.4-9.B.2
Stormwater....................................................................................................................................... 7.3
Studios............................................................................................................................................... 5.1-11.C
Subdivisions, Open Space ................................................................................................................. 6.3
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 1
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 2
PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
11
T Section #
Telecommunication Towers and Facilities......................................................................................... 5.1-12.A
Temporary Event............................................................................................................................... 5.1-3.H
Theater.............................................................................................................................................. 5.1-3.I
Towers, Telecommunication.............................................................................................................. 5.1-12.A
Transit Stations.................................................................................................................................. 6.4-9.C.1
Trash Enclosure................................................................................................................................. 8.1-7
Truck Loading.................................................................................................................................... 8.2-16
Two-Unit Dwelling............................................................................................................................. 5.1-8.A
U Section #
University ......................................................................................................................................... 5.1-11.B
Unregistered Vehicle, Storage of....................................................................................................... 4.2-2.M
Uses, Permitted................................................................................................................................. 4.1
Utilities, Screening............................................................................................................................. 8.1-7
Utility Infrastructure.......................................................................................................................... 5.1-12.B
V Section #
Variances...............................................................................................................................9.6-1.B, 9.6-5.B
Variances, Flood Hazard Areas.......................................................................................................... 7.2-8
Vehicle, Contractor, Parking.............................................................................................................. 5.1-1.B
Vehicle Dealers (New)....................................................................................................................... 6.4-9.D.5
Vehicle Repair and Service ................................................................................................ 5.1-13.C, 6.4-9.D.5
Vehicle, Storage, Unregistered.......................................................................................................... 4.2-2.M
Vehicle Washing Facility..................................................................................................... 5.1-13.D, 6.4-9.D.7
Veterinary Services.............................................................................................................. 5.1-2.G, 6.4-9.A.6
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019
PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
12
W Section #
Warehouse and Distribution............................................................................................................. 6.4-9.B.3
Waste Material, Storage of................................................................................................................ 4.2-2.M
Water Resource Protection District (WRPD)...................................................................................... 6.4
Working Waterfront (WW)................................................................................................................ 3.3-1.C
Y Section #
Yacht Club.......................................................................................................................................... 5.1-3.F
Yard Requirements............................................................................................................................ 4.2
Z Section #
Zero Lot Line ..................................................................................................................................... 4.2-2.L
Zoning Amendments......................................................................................................................... 9.3
Zoning Board of Appeals................................................................................................................... 9.6
Zoning, Certificate of Compliance..................................................................................................... 9.2-2
Zoning Districts ................................................................................................................................. 3.1
Zoning District Boundaries ............................................................................................................... 3.8
Zoning District, Lot in More than One............................................................................................... 3.9
Zoning Enforcement ......................................................................................................................... 9.2
Zoning Map ....................................................................................................................................... 3.6
Zoning Map Changes ........................................................................................................................ 9.3-2.A
Zoning Permit.................................................................................................................................... 9.2-2
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 1
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 2
PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
13
List of amendments and dates
[To be inserted]
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019
PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
14
Appendices
Appendix A: WRPD Appendices
Appendix A.1: Connectitcut Guidelines For Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Measures
Appendix A.2: New Hampshire Stormwater Manual, BMP Pollutant Removal Efficiencies
(Appendix E)
Appendix A.3: 2004 Connecticut Stormwater Quality Manual, Ch. 8: Selection Criteria For
Stormwater Treatment Practices
Appendix A.4: Spill Information
Appendix A.5: Materials Management Plan
Appendix B: Mixed Use Town Center (MTC) Design Guidelines
Appendix C: Mixed Use Village Center (MVC) Design Guidelines
Appendix D: Lighting Design Guidelines
Appendix E: Two-Unit Dwelling Design Guidelines
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 1
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 2
PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
15
Appendix A: WRPD Appendices
Appendix A.1: Connecticut guidelines for soil
erosion and sediment control measures
Connecticut Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Measures
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019
PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
16
Appendix A.2: New Hampshire Stormwa ter Manual,
bmp Pollutant removal efficiencies (APPEN DIX E)
Appendix E.
BMP Pollutant Removal
Efficiency
Appendix E.
Pollutant Removal Efficiencies for Best Management Practices for Use in Pollutant
Loading Analysis (March 2011 update)
Best Management Practice (BMP) removal efficiencies for total suspended solids (TSS), total nitrogen
(TN), and total phosphorus (TP) for pollutant loading analysis, as well as percent runoff reduction
(volume reduction) efficiencies are presented in the following table. These removal efficiencies are based
on literature sources, data collected by the University of New Hampshire Stormwater Center, and best
professional judgement based on literature values and general expectation of how values for different
BMPs should relate to one another. The intent is to update this information to add BMPs and removal
efficiencies for other parameters as more information and data become available.
NHDES will consider other BMP removal efficiencies if sufficient documentation is provided.
Please note that all BMPs must be designed in accordance with the specifications in the Alteration of
Terrain (AoT) Program Administrative Rules (Env-Wq 1500), as described in this manual. If BMPs are
not designed in accordance with the AoT Rules, NHDES may require lower removal efficiencies to be
used in the analysis.
BMP in Series: When BMPs are placed in series, the BMP with the highest removal efficiency shall be
the efficiency used in the model for computing annual loadings. Adding efficiency together is generally
not allowed because removals typically decrease with decreasing influent concentration and, in the case
of primary BMPs (i.e., stormwater ponds, infiltration and filtering practices), pre-treatment is usually
part of the design and is therefore, most likely already accounted for the efficiencies cited for these
BMPs.
Pollutant Removal Efficiencies for Best Management Practices
for Use in Pollutant Loading Analysis
Values Accepted for
Loading Analyses
BMP Type BMP Notes Lit. Ref.
Runoff
Reduction
Efficiency
TSS TN TP
Stormwater
Ponds
Wet Pond B, F, P 0% 70% 35% 45%
Wet Extended Detention
Pond A, B, P 0% 80% 55% 68%
Micropool Extended
Detention Pond TBA
Multiple Pond System TBA
Pocket Pond TBA
Stormwater
Wetlands
Shallow Wetland A, B, F, I, P 0% 80% 55% 45%
Extended Detention Wetland A, B, F, I, P 0% 80% 55% 45%
Pond/Wetland System TBA
Gravel Wetland H, P, Q 90% 99% 85% 64%
Infiltration
Practices
Infiltration Trench (=75 ft from
surface water) B, D, I, P 90% 90% 55% 60%
Infiltration Trench (<75 ft from
surface water) B, D, I, P 90% 90% 10% 60%
Infiltration Basin (=75 ft from
surface water) A, F, B, D, I, P 90% 90% 60% 65%
Infiltration Basin (<75 ft from
surface water) A, F, B, D, I, P 90% 90% 10% 65%
Dry Wells P 90% 90% 55% 60%
Drip Edges P 90% 90% 55% 60%
Filtering
Practices
Aboveground or Underground
Sand Filter that infiltrates
WQV (=75 ft from surface
water)
A, F, B, D, I, P 0% 90% 60% 65%
Aboveground or Underground
Sand Filter that infiltrates
WQV (<75 ft from surface
water)
A, F, B, D, I, P 0% 90% 10% 65%
Aboveground or Underground
Sand Filter with underdrain
A, I, F, G, H,
P, Q 0% 51% 10% 33%
Tree Box Filter TBA P, Q 15% 99%
Bioretention System I, G, H, P, Q 80% 99% 65% 65%
Permeable Pavement that
infiltrates WQV (=75 ft from
surface water)
A, F, B, D, I, P 75% 90% 60% 65%
Permeable Pavement that
infiltrates WQV (<75 ft from
surface water)
A, F, B, D, I, P 75% 90% 10% 65%
Permeable Pavement with
underdrain
Use TN and
TP values for
sand filter w/
underdrain and
outlet pipe, P
45% 90% 10% 45%
Pollutant Removal Efficiencies for Best Management Practices
for Use in Pollutant Loading Analysis
Values Accepted for
Loading Analyses
BMP Type BMP Notes Lit. Ref.
Runoff
Reduction
Efficiency
TSS TN TP
Treatment
Swales
Flow Through Treatment
Swale TBA P 60%
Vegetated
Buffers Vegetated Buffers A, B, I 73% 40% 45%
Pre-
Treatment
Practices
Sediment Forebay TBA P 0%
Vegetated Filter Strip A, B, I, P 50% 73% 40% 45%
Vegetated Swale A, B, C, F, H,
I, P 60% 65% 20% 25%
Flow-Through Device -
Hydrodynamic Separator A, B, G, H, Q 27% 10% 42%
Flow-Through Device - ADS
Underground Multichamber
Water Quality Unit (WQU)
G, H, Q 99% 10% 81%
Other Flow-Through Devices TBA
Off-line Deep Sump Catch
Basin J, K, L, M 15% 5% 5%
Sources
Sources A - F are as reported in the EPA Region 5 Model
A Appendix D Model Best Management Practice Selection Methodology & Lake County Decisions Making Dramework, NIPC. July
1994.
B www.epa.gov/owowwtrl/NPS/MMGI/chapter4/table401.gif
C http://ohioline.ag.ohio-state.edu/aex-fact/0467.html
D Athayde. 1983.
E Schueler. 1987.
F Model Stormwater Regulations. Duxbury, Marshfield, and Plymouth, MA. Horsley Witten Group. December 31, 2004. (suggested
Average ssumes no practice is greater than 90% efficient. Median values are shown in parentheses).
G 2005 Data Report. University of New Hampshire Stormwater Center. and personal communication with Dr. Robert Roseen.
H Roseen, R., T. Ballestero, J. Houle, P. Avelleneda, J. Briggs, G. Fowler, R. Wildey. Unpublished 2007 Draft Report. Seasonal
Variations for Stormwater Management Systems in Cold Climate Conditions. University of New Hampshire.
I http://cfpub.epa.gov/npdes/stormwater/menuofbmps/index.cfm
Sources J - M and P are as reported in Stormwater Center Website
J Pitt, R., M. Libum, S. Nix, S. Durrans, and S. Burian. 1997. Guidance Manual for Integrated Wet Weather Flow Cllection and
Treatment Systems for New Urbanized Areas. USEPA. Office of Research and Development. Cincinnato, OH.
K Aronson, F., D. Watson, and W. Pisaro. 1983. Evaluation of Catch Basin Performance for Urban Stormwater Control. EPA-600/2-83-
043.
L Pitt and Shawley, 1982.
M Mineart, P. and S. Singh. 1994. Storm Inlet Pilot Study. Woodward Clyde Consultants. Alameda County Urban Runoff Clean Water
Program. Oakland, CA.
P Winer, Rebecca. 2000. National Pollutant REmoval Performance Database for Stormwater Treatment Practices. 2nd Edition. Center
for Watershed Protection. Elliot City, MD.
Source N is as reported in Low Impact Development Center Website
N Yu, S.L., X. Zhang, A. Earles and M. Sievers. 1999: Field Testing of Ultraurban BMPs. Proceedings of the 26th Annual Water
Resources Planning Conference ASCE, 609 June, Tempe, AZ.
Source O is as reported in EPA’s National Management Measures to Control Nonpoint Source Pollution
O Herson-Jones, L.M., M. Heary, and B. Jordan. 1995. Riparian Buffer Strategies for Urban Watersheds. Metropolitan Washington
Council of Governments, Washington, DC.
Q 2009 Biannual Report. University of New Hampshire Stormwater Center.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 1
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 2
PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
21
Appendix A.3: 2004 CONNECTICUT STO RMWATER QUALITY
MANUAL, CH. 8: SELECTION CRITERIA FO R STO RMWATER
TREATMENT PRACTICES
Chapter 8
Selection Criteria for
Stormwater Treatment Practices
Chapter 8 Selection Criteria for
Stormwater Treatment Practices
8.1 Stormwater Management Effectiveness ................................................8-2
8.2 Land Use Factors.........................................................................................8-3
8.3 Physical/Site Feasibility Factors .................................................................8-5
8.4 Downstream Resources ............................................................................8-6
8.5 Maintenance Factors.................................................................................8-10
8.6 Winter Operation ......................................................................................8-10
8.7 Nuisance Insects and Vectors...................................................................8-11
8.8 Natural Wetlands and Vernal Pools ........................................................8-13
Volume 1I: Design
2004 Connecticut Stormwater Quality Manual 8-1
8-2 2004 Connecticut Stormwater Quality Manual
No single stormwater treatment
practice is appropriate
for every site and condition.
The applicability of individual
practices varies depending
upon relatively simple
physical constraints, as well
as more complicated siting
and treatment issues.This
chapter addresses criteria
to consider when selecting
stormwater treatment
practices for a particular site.
8.1 Stormwater Management Effectiveness
As discussed in Chapter Two, land development increases the potential for
several stormwater related impacts. These impacts are largely a function of
altering the natural hydrology at a site and increasing exposure to potential
pollutants. Common stormwater impacts related to land development
include degraded water quality, increased peak flow rates, increased runoff
volume, stream channel erosion, and reduced groundwater recharge.
As discussed in Chapter Seven, stormwater treatment practices can
achieve one or more of the following management objectives:
? Pollutant reduction
? Groundwater recharge and runoff volume reduction
? Stream channel protection and peak flow control
Table 8-1 summarizes the relative effectiveness of each stormwater treatment
practice in providing these management capabilities. The
effectiveness ratings provided in the table should only be used to compare
the relative management capabilities of different treatment practices. The
ratings should not be used in an absolute sense to quantitatively predict
actual field performance.
As described in Chapter Six, there is currently a lack of reliable performance
data for stormwater treatment practices in the State of
Connecticut. Additionally, the available performance data from past monitoring
studies conducted throughout the United States are limited by
differences in design, performance goals, site parameters, storm events,
flow and pollutant loadings, seasonal variations, monitoring methods, and
efficiency calculation methods or simply by the lack of, or inadequate,
information. The reliability of pollutant removal efficiencies, which are
often cited in guidance documents, is typically poor due to the large
degree of uncertainty in the data. Additional performance monitoring using
standardized methods and quality control procedures is recommended for
new and existing stormwater treatment practices (see Chapter Six) in
Connecticut to provide a more useful set of data on the effectiveness of
individual stormwater treatment practices, and to better understand the
relationship between treatment practice design and performance.
As shown in Table 8-1, most of these primary treatment practices are
similarly effective at removing sediment, nutrients, and metals. Removal
efficiencies are generally highest for sediment, while nutrient and metals
removal efficiencies are typically lower. Infiltration systems are generally
the most effective practices for removal of bacteria. Designs that incorporate
floatable controls or pretreatment are most effective for removal of
hydrocarbons. Treatment practices that incorporate biological removal
mechanisms, such as constructed wetlands, are also more effective in
removing pollutants than systems that strictly rely on gravity or physical
separation of particles.
Many of these practices also have limited effectiveness in terms of
peak flow control and groundwater recharge. Open bottom basins and dry
swales provide some groundwater recharge, but only practices specifically
designed as infiltration structures will provide significant levels of groundwater
recharge. Many of these practices either have an impermeable
bottom or are designed to intercept groundwater and thereby provide little
infiltration. Similarly, attenuation of peak flows requires significant
available storage capacity to temporarily store runoff as the peak flow is
being throttled. Many stormwater treatment practices provide limited storage
capacity or detention time and are inadequate as stand-alone flood
2004 Connecticut Stormwater Quality Manual 8-3
control facilities. Separate facilities for peak flow
control are often necessary to augment stormwater
treatment practices.
A treatment train approach should be considered
when selecting treatment practices for a particular site
when faced with several sometimes competing
demands. As discussed in Chapter Six, a treatment
train consists of a series of management practices
each designed to provide targeted pollution control
benefits. For example, one practice may be selected
for its ability to remove sediments while another may
be better suited to remove dissolved pollutants.
8.2 Land Use Factors
Land use, both current and potential future use,
should be considered when selecting stormwater
treatment practices. Some practices are more “neighbor
friendly” than others. Other practices are more
land intensive and may be less desirable where space
is at a premium. The following land use factors
should be considered when selecting stormwater
treatment practices.
Rural
Rural areas are typically characterized by low-density
development (i.e., few neighbors) and relatively large
amounts of available space. Stormwater treatment
practices with larger area demands may be easier to
locate with appropriate buffers in rural areas.
Additionally, typical stormwater pollutants from rural
areas include sediments and nutrients, which can be
effectively managed by most stormwater treatment
practices. As a result, most treatment practices are
suitable for rural areas.
Residential
Medium- to high-density residential areas typically
have limited space and higher property values compared
to rural undeveloped areas. Also, treatment
practices in these areas are likely to be located in
close proximity to residences. Public safety and nuisance
insects are common concerns for treatment
practices in residential areas. Stormwater treatment
practices with large land requirements or open pools
of water may be less desirable in these areas. In some
situations, stormwater ponds or other open water
Category
Stormwater
Ponds
Stormwater
Wetlands
Infiltration
Practices
Filtering
Practices
Water
Quality
Swales
Practice
Wet pond
Micropool ED pond
Wet ED pond
Multiple pond system
Shallow wetland
ED wetland
Pond/wetland system
Infiltration trench
Infiltration basin
Surface sand filter
Underground sand filter
Perimeter sand filter
Bioretention
Dry swale
Wet swale
Sediment





Total P





Total N





Metals





Hydro
Carbons





Bacteria




?
Ground Water
Recharge/
Runoff Volumn
Reduction
?


?
?
?
?


1
?
?
1
1
?
Stream
Channel
Protection










?
?

?
?
Peak
Flow
Control







?

?
?
?
?
?
?
Table 8-1 Stormwater Management Effectiveness Criteria
Pollutant Reduction
Notes:  Effective
 Somewhat effective
? Least effective
Source: Adapted from Winer, 2000; EPA 1993; and ASCE and Wright Water Engineers, Inc., 2001.
1If designed as exfilter
ED – Extended Detention
8-4 2004 Connecticut Stormwater Quality Manual
practices may be incorporated into the landscape as
natural amenities to provide habitat, recreation, and
aesthetic value.
Roads and Highways
Roads and highways typically generate high stormwater
pollutant loads due to vehicle traffic and winter
deicing activities. Sediments, metals, chlorides, and
hydrocarbons are the primary pollutants associated
with roads and highways. Nitrogen from vehicle
exhausts and bacteria are also commonly present in
road and highway runoff. As a result, most treatment
practices provide some treatment benefit but do not
adequately address all of the water quality impacts
associated with this land use. In addition, open water
and deep pools can also be a safety issue near roads
and highways.
Commercial and Industrial Development
Commercial and industrial areas often have more
intensive traffic, increased risk of spills, and exposure
of materials to precipitation. Pollutants associated
with these land uses can vary significantly depending
on the nature of activities at each site, although traffic-
related pollutants such as sediments, metals, and
hydrocarbons are commonly present in runoff from
most commercial and industrial sites. These developments
may also have more available space for
locating stormwater treatment practices.
Ultra-Urban Sites
Ultra-urban sites are the most restrictive in terms of
treatment practice selection. These sites are characterized
as having little available space or land area, high
population density, and a wide range of potential
pollutants.
Table 8-2 summarizes the compatibility of
stormwater treatment practices with each of the above
land uses, considering potential pollutants, public
safety, nuisance insects, and land availability.
Category
Stormwater
Pond
Stormwater
Wetlands
Infiltration
Practices
Filtering
Practices
Water Quality
Swales
Roads and Commercial/ Ultra
Practice Rural Residential Highways Industrial Urban3
Wet pond  ?  2 ?
Micropool extended
   2 ? detention pond
Wet extended
   2 ? detention pond
Multiple pond system  ?  2 ?
Shallow wetland  ?  2 ?
Extended
 ?  2 ? detention wetland
Pond/wetland system    2 ?
Infiltration trench     ?
Infiltration basin     ?
Surface sand filter    1 ?
Underground
?     sand filter
Perimeter sand filter ? ? ?  
Bioretention    1 
Dry swale    1 ?
Wet swale     ?
Table 8-2 Land Use Selection Criteria
Notes:  Appropriate
 Somewhat appropriate
? Least appropriate
1If not designed to infiltrate
2May require pond liner
3Secondary treatment practices and stormwater treatment trains
are typically more appropriate for Ultra Urban land uses
Source: Adapted from NYDEC, 2001.
2004 Connecticut Stormwater Quality Manual 8-5
8.3 Physical/Site Feasibility Factors
Physical site constraints can also dictate the feasibility
of specific stormwater treatment practices. These
physical constraints can either make the installation of
a particular treatment practice too costly or result
in reduced or ineffective operation. While every site
has its own individual characteristics that need to be
evaluated, the five most common physical constraints
that need to be considered are:
? Infiltration capacity
? Seasonally high groundwater (water table)
? Drainage area
? Slope
? Required hydraulic head
These factors are discussed in general terms
below. Chapter Eleven contains additional information
on physical feasibility and siting considerations
for individual treatment practices.
Infiltration Capacity
Infiltration practices are highly dependent on the infiltration
capacity of the underlying soils. Low soil
infiltration capacity requires structures with larger
infiltration surface area and storage capacity to
account for slower infiltration rates. Higher soil infiltration
rates allow for smaller infiltration structures.
Accurate field measurements of infiltration rates are
critical for the successful design and implementation
of stormwater treatment practices that rely on infiltration
of stormwater to underlying soils.
In Connecticut, the United States Department of
Agriculture (USDA) Natural Resources Conservation
Service (NRCS) has developed soil suitability rankings
for various types of stormwater management practices,
including infiltration trenches, underground
infiltration galleries, stormwater wetlands, and
stormwater ponds. The soil suitability designations
are intended to facilitate proper selection and siting of
stormwater controls and are based upon NRCS soil
survey soil properties and landscape criteria. The
information can be used to generate soil suitability
maps for a town, watershed, or other designation.
Soils are rated for each practice (suitable, fair, or
good), and the specific limitations (slow infiltration,
for example) are provided. This tool is intended to be
used for initial screening of stormwater treatment
practices and does not eliminate the need for on-site
evaluation of soil characteristics for design purposes.
Additional information on this program can be
obtained from the Connecticut USDA NRCS
(see Additional Information Sources at the end of
this chapter).
Water Table
An elevated water table poses several design issues.
The primary issue is the loss of storage and retention
capacity in unlined treatment structures. If seasonally
high groundwater exists above the bottom of
an unlined pond or basin, groundwater will drain into
the structure and fill or displace volume that may
have been intended for retention. If a treatment practice
is constructed below the seasonally high water
table, the loss of storage capacity should be
accounted for in the design, or engineering controls
such as liners and/or underdrains should be considered.
An elevated water table may be advantageous for
some treatment practices where a permanent pool of
water is desired, such as stormwater wetlands.
However, small separation between the bottom of a
treatment structure and the water table may result in
inadequate pollutant attenuation and treatment in the
unsaturated zone. The potential for groundwater pollution
due to stormwater infiltration is an important
consideration in the design of stormwater treatment
practices. Engineering controls such as impermeable
liners may be required in these circumstances.
Buoyancy of structures installed below the water
table is another issue related to a high water table.
Below the water table, buoyancy is calculated as the
weight of water displaced (i.e., the volume of the
structure below the water table multiplied by the unit
weight of fresh water or 62.4 pounds per cubic foot).
The upward buoyant force may be large enough to
displace a structure, sometimes out of the ground.
Engineering controls typically consist of anchors, such
as connecting the structure to an appropriately sized
concrete pad to provide adequate weight to offset
buoyant forces.
Field determination of seasonally high groundwater
is required for the successful design and
implementation of most stormwater treatment
practices.
Drainage Area
The efficiency of most treatment practices decreases
with increasing drainage area and volume of
stormwater runoff. An increased hydraulic load can
increase velocities and reduce detention time in a
treatment structure. The size of some practices can be
increased to address the issues associated with an
increased hydraulic load. Other treatment practices
are better suited to smaller drainage areas and smaller
hydraulic loads. One approach to improving the efficiency
of practices serving larger drainage areas is to
construct diversion structures for treatment of the
Water Quality Volume, while larger flows or volumes
are bypassed around the treatment system.
8-6 2004 Connecticut Stormwater Quality Manual
Slope
The ground slope at and immediately adjacent to the
location of a treatment practice, as well as the slope
of the contributing watershed and drainage flow
paths, are important factors in determining the feasibility
of treatment controls. Most stormwater
treatment practices are sensitive to the local terrain
slope. For example, swales and infiltration basins cannot
be used in steep terrain, while others such as
stormwater ponds and filtering practices can be
adapted to most terrain. The slope of the contributing
drainage area or watershed can influence erosion and
sediment loads to the treatment system. Many
stormwater treatment practices are not recommended
for sites with significant sediment loads without
suitable pretreatment.
Required Head
Several practices, such as stormwater filtering systems,
require larger hydraulic head for gravity flow to and
through the system. For example, if only four feet of
grade exists on a site between the most hydraulically
remote point on the site and the invert elevation of
the discharge, a treatment practice that requires five
feet of head would not be feasible.
Table 8-3 summarizes the physical feasibility
criteria discussed above.
8.4 Downstream Resources
While all sites should provide at least a minimum
level of protection, stormwater treatment practices
should be tailored not only to the conditions that exist
at a particular site, but also to the downstream
resources that could be impacted by stormwater discharges
from the site. As a result, the following
downstream resources should be considered in the
treatment practice selection process.
Sensitive Watercourses
Streams, brooks, and rivers that are classified by DEP
as Class A (fishable, swimmable, and potential drinking
water), as well as their tributary watercourses and wetlands,
are high quality resources that warrant a high
degree of protection. Toxic pollutants such as metals
and soluble organics, as well as other contaminants
such as bacteria, are the primary concern for these
waterbodies. Sensitive cold water fisheries, including
Class B waters or managed stocked streams, could also
be adversely impacted by stormwater runoff with elevated
temperatures. In addition, the rate and volume of
stormwater discharges from new developments are
especially critical to these systems, as they could
impact the flood carrying capacity of the watercourse
and increase the potential for channel erosion.
Water Supply Aquifers
Groundwater is a major source of drinking water in
Connecticut for residences that rely on small private
wells and larger water distributors. This applies to
both water supply aquifers and Class GA and GAA
groundwaters as defined by DEP. In addition, groundwater
is the source of dry weather flows (baseflow) in
watercourses, which is critical for maintaining suitable
habitat. As a result, it is important to maintain groundwater
recharge, and to maintain a high quality
recharge to groundwater in water supply aquifers and
Class GA and GAA waters.
Lakes and Ponds
Lakes and ponds are especially sensitive to sediment
and nutrient loadings. Excess sediments and nutrients
are the cause of algal blooms in these surface waters,
leading to eutrophication and degradation. These
conditions often result in costly dredging and rehabilitation
projects. In fresh water systems, phosphorus is
typically the limiting nutrient, that is, much less phosphorus
is needed compared to other nutrients such as
nitrogen to create eutrophic conditions. As a result,
treatment practices should focus on nutrient removal,
particularly phosphorus, for stormwater discharges to
lakes and ponds, and watercourses that feed lakes
and ponds. Control of phosphorus is also directly
related to the control of iron. Certain iron compounds
such as ferric iron often have a high scavenging coefficient
for metals. Thus, control of phosphorus may
have ancillary benefits in the control of metals.
Surface Water Drinking Supplies
Surface waters that supply drinking water are especially
susceptible to contamination by bacteria and
other pathogens. Other contaminants-of-concern may
be defined for specific water supply systems by the
owner/operator or the State Department of Health.
Treatment practices for sites within drinking water
supply watersheds should target these potential contaminants.
The Public Health Code also requires a
100-foot separation distance between drainage or
treatment practice outlets and public water supply
tributaries. Site designs within public water supply
watersheds are encouraged to maximize absorption of
pollutants by the soil and vegetation.
Estuary/Coastal
Coastal or estuary areas are more sensitive to nitrogen
loadings than fresh water systems. In salt water
systems, nitrogen tends to be the limiting nutrient as
opposed to phosphorus. Bacteria are also a concern
given the sensitivity of public swimming areas and
shellfish beds to bacterial loadings.
Table 8-4 summarizes limitations and engineering
considerations for stormwater treatment practices
based on downstream resources and the receiving
environment.
2004 Connecticut Stormwater Quality Manual 8-7
Category
Stormwater
Ponds
Stormwater
Wetlands
Infiltration
Practices
Filtering
Practices
Water Quality
Swales
Practice
Micropool ED pond
Wet Pond
Wet ED pond
Multiple pond
system
Shallow
wetland
ED wetland
Pond/wetland system
Infiltration
trench
Infiltration
basin
Surface sand filter
Underground
sand filter
Perimeter
sand filter
Bioretention
Dry Swale
Wet Swale
Soil Infiltration
Capacity
USDA Hydrologic
Soil Group A and B
soils may require
pond liner unless
groundwater
intercepted
USDA Hydrologic
Soil Group A and B
soils may require
pond liner unless
groundwater
intercepted
Min field
measured
infiltration rate
0.3 in/hr
Max infiltration
rate 5.0 in/hr
Pretreatment
required over
3.0 in/hr
Unrestricted
Unrestricted
Unrestricted
Seasonally High
Water Table
Construct below
water table.
Construct liner for
sites with higher
potential pollutant
loads or water
supply aquifers.
Construct below
water table.
Use liner for sites
with higher
potential pollutant
loads or water
supply aquifers
Bottom of facility
3 feet above
seasonally high
water table
Underdrain for
unlined system
2 feet above
seasonally high
water table
Swale bottom 2 to 4
feet above seasonally
high water table
At or below
seasonally high
water table
Drainage
Area (acres)
10 min1
25 min1
1-5 max2
(pocket pond)
10 min
5 max2 (pocket
wetland)
2 max2
10 max2
25 max2
10 max2
2 max2
5 max2
5 max2
5 max2
Table 8-3 Physical Feasibility Criteria
Source: Adapted from NYDEC, 2001.
Slope
15% max
8% max
15% max
6% max
5% max
Required
Head
4 to 8 ft
2 to 5 ft
1 ft
3 ft
5 ft
5 to 7 ft
2 to 3 ft
2 to 5 ft
3 to 5 ft
<1 ft
Notes: 1Unless adequate water balance
2Drainage area can be larger if appropriately designed
ED – Extended Detention
8-8 2004 Connecticut Stormwater Quality Manual
Category
Stormwater Ponds
Stormwater Wetlands
Infiltration Practices
Filtering Practices
Water Quality Swales
Practice
Micropool extended
detention pond
Wet pond
Wet extended
detention pond
Multiple pond system
Shallow wetland
Extended
detention wetland
Pond/wetland system
Infiltration trench
Infiltration basin
Surface sand filter
Underground sand filter
Perimeter sand filter
Bioretention
Dry swale
Wet swale
Sensitive
Watercourses
Restrict in-stream
practices
Minimize permanent
pool area, and
encourage shading
to reduce
thermal impacts
Restrict use or
utilize shading
Encourage use to
maximize groundwater
recharge
Combine with a
detention facility to
provide flood control
and channel protection
Combine with a
detention facility to
provide flood control
and channel protection
Combine with a
detention facility to
provide flood control
and channel protection
Water Supply
Aquifers
Require liner if
USDA Hydrologic Soil
Group A soils are present
or <2 ft separation to
seasonally high
groundwater
Pretreat runoff from
land uses or sites with
the potential for high
pollutant loadings
Provide 100 ft
horizontal separation
distance from wells
and 3 ft vertical distance
from the seasonally
high water table, 4 ft
from bedrock
Pretreat runoff from
all land uses prior
to infiltration
Excellent pretreatment
for infiltration or open
channel practices
OK, but pretreat runoff
from land uses or sites
with the potential for
high pollutant loadings
Lakes and Ponds
Encourage the use of a
large permanent pool to
increase residence time to
improve phosphorus
removal
OK, provides high
phosphorus removal
OK, but designs with
a submerged filter
bed may result in
phosphorus release
OK, moderate
phosphorus removal
Table 8-4 Downstream Resource Selection Criteria (A)
2004 Connecticut Stormwater Quality Manual 8-9
Category
Stormwater Ponds
Stormwater Wetlands
Infiltration Practices
Filtering Practices
Water Quality Swales
Practice
Micropool
extended
detention pond
Wet pond
Wet extended
detention pond
Multiple pond system
Shallow wetland
Extended
detention wetland
Pond/wetland system
Infiltration trench
Infiltration basin
Surface sand filter
Underground sand filter
Perimeter sand filter
Bioretention
Dry swale
Wet swale
Estuary/
Coastal
Encourage long detention times to
promote pollutant removal
Consider tidal elevations
More effective for removal of inorganic
nitrogen and ammonia; less effective
for organic nitrogen removal
Encourage long detention times
to promote pollutant removal
Consider tidal elevations
OK, but provide 3 ft separation
distance to seasonally high
groundwater
Moderate to high bacteria removal
Designs with a submerged filter bed
appear to provide high nitrogen removal
Pretreat runoff
Minimal bacteria removal
Surface Water
Drinking Supplies
Encourage the use of a large
permanent pool to improve
phosphorus removal
Promote long detention times
to encourage pollutant removal
Provide 100 ft separation distance from
outlet to public water supply tributary
Encourage the use of a large permanent
pool to improve phosphorus removal
Promote long detention times to
encourage bacteria removal
Provide 100 ft separation distance from
outlet to public water supply tributary
Provide 4 ft separation distance to bedrock
and 3 ft to seasonally high water table
Pretreat runoff prior to
infiltration practices
Excellent pretreatment for infiltration
or open channel practices
Moderate to high bacteria removal
Provide 100 ft separation distance from
outlet to public water supply tributary
Pretreat runoff
Minimal bacteria removal
Provide 100 ft. separation distance from
outlet to public water supply tributary
Table 8-4 Downstream Resource Selection Criteria (B)
Source (Tables 8-4 A and B): Adapted from NYDEC, 2001.
8-10 2004 Connecticut Stormwater Quality Manual
8.5 Maintenance Factors
Regular maintenance is required for the successful
long-term operation of any stormwater treatment
practice. Accumulated sediment and floatables reduce
pollutant removal efficiencies and increase the potential
for resuspension as well as sediment reflux.
Accumulated debris can also impact hydraulic
performance. Some treatment practices require more
intensive or more frequent maintenance in order to
function as designed. For example, the filter bed
of a sand filter needs to be replaced when clogged,
and stormwater wetlands need to be “harvested”
periodically.
Table 8-5 summarizes the maintenance requirements
for stormwater treatment practices. Maintenance
sensitivity is a measure of a practice’s susceptibility to
reduced performance if not adequately maintained.
8.6 Winter Operation
In Connecticut, the effects of winter conditions (cold
temperatures, snow, ice, etc.) on stormwater treatment
practice performance are important considerations.
While there may be fewer runoff events during winter
months, snow and ice may significantly impact the
operation of some treatment practices during winter
Category
Stormwater
Ponds
Stormwater
Wetlands
Infiltration
Practices
Filtering
Practices
Water Quality
Swales
Maintenance Sediment
Practice Sensitivity Inspections Removal
Micropool extended
? ?  detention pond
Wet pond ? ? 
Wet extended
? ?  detention pond
Multiple pond
? ?  system
Shallow wetland   
Extended
? ?  detention wetland
Pond/wetland
? ?  system
Infiltration trench   
Infiltration basin   
Surface sand filter   
Underground
   sand filter
Perimeter sand filter   
Bioretention   
Dry Swale ? ? ?
Wet Swale ? ? ?
Table 8-5 Maintenance Criteria
Other
Aging ponds become
ineffective and may
become pollutant
sources in some cases;
decadal evaluations are
considered minimal;
more frequent dredging
may be required in
developing watersheds
with significant sediment
loads
Requires periodic
harvesting to maximize
nutrient and metals
removal
Frequent
sediment/debris removal
required for proper
performance
Periodic removal and
replacement of media
is required
Sediment removal may
damage swale
Notes:  Significant  Moderately Significant ? Least Significant
Source: Adapted from Watershed Management Institute (WMI), 1997.
2004 Connecticut Stormwater Quality Manual 8-11
rain events and periods of snowmelt. Some of these
potential impacts are:
Pipe Freezing: Most treatment practices, with the
exception of vegetative filter strips, rely on some form
of inlet piping, and may also have an outlet or underdrain
pipe. Frozen pipes can crack due to ice
expansion, creating a maintenance or replacement
burden. In addition, pipe freezing reduces the
hydraulic capacity of the system, thereby limiting
pollutant removal and creating the potential for flooding
(Center for Watershed Protection, 1997).
Ice Formation on the Permanent Pool: Ice cover
on the permanent pool causes two problems. First,
the treatment pool’s volume is reduced. Second, since
the permanent pool is frozen, it acts as an impermeable
surface. Runoff entering an ice-covered pond can
follow two possible routes, neither of which provides
sufficient pollutant removal. In the first, runoff is
forced under the ice, causing scouring of bottom sediments.
In the second, runoff flows over the top of the
ice, receiving little or no treatment. Sediment that settles
on top of the ice can easily be resuspended by
subsequent runoff events (Center for Watershed
Protection, 1997).
Reduced Biological Activity: Many stormwater treatment
practices rely on biological mechanisms to help
reduce pollutants, especially nutrients and organic
matter. For example, wetland systems rely on plant
uptake of nutrients and the activity of microbes at the
soil/root zone interface to break down pollutants.
During cold temperatures (below 40°F), photosynthetic
and microbial activity is sharply reduced when
plants are dormant during the non-growing season,
limiting these pollutant removal pathways (Center for
Watershed Protection, 1997).
Reduced Soil Infiltration: The rate of infiltration in
frozen soils is limited, especially when ice lenses form
(Center for Watershed Protection, 1997). This reduced
infiltration significantly impacts the operation of infiltration
practices and other treatment systems that rely
on infiltration of stormwater into the soil.
Table 8-6 summarizes winter operation and cold
weather considerations for stormwater treatment
practices. Chapter Eleven includes design guidance
for mitigating the potential effects of cold weather on
treatment practice operation and performance.
8.7 Nuisance Insects and Vectors
Some stormwater treatment practices can provide
breeding habitat for mosquitoes, ticks, fleas, and other
vectors (organisms that can transmit pathogens that
can cause an infectious disease such as West Nile
fever, Lyme disease, and St. Louis encephalitis).
Mosquitoes are one of the most prevalent nuisance
insects, as well as vectors of West Nile fever and
Eastern Equine Encephalitis virus, in Connecticut, and
therefore are the focus of many municipal control
programs.
The approximately 48 species of mosquitoes in
Connecticut can be broadly grouped into two categories:
those that lay eggs directly on a stagnant water
surface (“surface water mosquitoes”), and those that
lay eggs on a moist substrate (mud, leaf litter) and
hatch at a later date when flooded by rain or tides
(“floodwater mosquitoes”). The eggs of floodwater
species can lie dormant for several years until conditions
are right for hatching. Usually, however, the
eggs will survive over winter and hatch with the
spring thaw. Eggs of “surface water” mosquitoes do
not survive over the winter. The adults survive during
the winter in caves, basements, and other similar
environments and emerge with warmer weather. The
rate of development (from hatching to emergence) is
controlled by photoperiod (length of day) and water
temperature. In the spring, this may take up to a
month and a half. In the summer, it may take as little
as 1 to 2 weeks. Generally speaking, relative to
stormwater basins and other treatment practices, there
is the potential for mosquito breeding if water is
allowed to stand or stagnate, in the absence of predators,
for more than 7 to 10 days in the summer
(Roger Wolfe, Mosquito Management Coordinator,
DEP 2003).
When located in residential and urban areas,
stormwater treatment practices that hold water for an
extended period (longer than 7 to 10 days) have the
potential to become new sources of mosquito habitat
or aggravate existing mosquito problems. According
to national studies conducted by the California
Department of Health Services and the California
Department of Transportation (1998), stormwater
treatment practices that maintain permanent sources
of standing water in sumps, basins (wetlands, perimeter
sand filters), or wet swales provide habitat for
immature mosquitoes and frequently support relatively
larger mosquito populations. Catch basins with
sumps provide ideal mosquito breeding conditions
(particularly species of the genus Culex): stagnant,
organically rich water in a shaded and humid environment
devoid of predators. In contrast, stormwater
treatment practices designed to drain more rapidly
(dry swales, filter strips, extended detention structures,
and infiltration structures) provide less suitable
habitats and rarely harbor mosquitoes. Treatment
practices that employ a larger permanent body of
open water (i.e., ponds) generally pose lower risk of
mosquito breeding since larger open bodies of water
are not conducive to mosquito egg laying and, unless
extremely polluted, a pond community structure will
8-12 2004 Connecticut Stormwater Quality Manual
Category
Stormwater
Ponds
Stormwater
Wetlands
Infiltration
Practices
Filtering
Practices
Water Quality
Swales
Pipe Ice Reduced Reduced Soil
Practice Freezing Formations Biological Activity Infiltration
Micropool extended
   ? detention pond
Wet pond    ?
Wet extended
   ? detention pond
Multiple pond
   ? system
Shallow wetland    ?
Extended
   ? detention wetland
Pond/wetland
   ? system
Infiltration trench ? ? ? 
Infiltration basin ? ? ? 
Surface sand filter   ? 
Underground
? ? ? ? sand filter
Perimeter sand filter   ? ?
Bioretention   ? 
Dry Swale ? ?  
Wet Swale ?   ?
Table 8-6 Winter and Cold Weather Operation Criteria
Notes:  Significant
 Moderately Significant
? Least Significant
Source: Adapted from Center for Watershed Protection, 1997.
2004 Connecticut Stormwater Quality Manual 8-13
support a natural predator population. Improperly
maintained structures can also result in sediment and
debris accumulation that can contribute to conditions
of prolonged standing water.
Proper siting, design, and maintenance of
stormwater treatment practices are important factors
in minimizing the potential for these structures to
become mosquito-breeding areas. Stormwater ponds,
wetlands, and other treatment practices that maintain
standing water for a prolonged period should be carefully
considered and designed in residential,
commercial, and other urban areas where mosquito
control is a concern. Key design considerations for
mosquito control include:
? Limiting water retention or draining time to
5 days or less (based on a 7 to 10 day summer
breeding period and a factor of safety).
Structures designed with sumps or basins that
retain water permanently or longer than 5 days
should be sealed completely to prevent entry of
adult mosquitoes.
? Maintaining pond and wetland water quality
sufficient to support mosquito-feeding fish and
other aquatic predators. Stormwater ponds and
wetlands often develop mini-ecosystems where
birds, frogs, and other insects feed, many of
which are natural predators of mosquitoes and
other nuisance insects. Ponds can also be
stocked with fish native to Connecticut that feed
on mosquito larvae such as banded killfish,
golden shiners, and pumpkinseed sunfish. The
DEP Inland Fisheries Division should be consulted
regarding species selection and permitting
requirements. A liberation permit is required to
introduce these and other fish into ponds and
other water bodies in Connecticut. Other natural
predators of mosquitoes such as dragonfly
nymphs can also be used.
? Maintaining permanent pond water depths in
excess of 4 feet to preclude invasive emergent
vegetation such as cattails. Dense emergent
vegetation provides mosquito larvae with refuge
from predators.
? Designing ponds to allow for easy dewatering
of the basin when necessary.
? Providing sufficient slope on basin floors and
swales for adequate drainage.
? Ensuring sufficient separation distance to the
seasonal high groundwater table for infiltration
structures.
? Sealing potential mosquito entry points in
underground stormwater treatment devices
(adult female mosquitoes can use openings as
small as 1/16 inch to access water for egg laying).
Chapter Eleven includes additional design guidance
to avoid or reduce mosquito-breeding problems
for individual treatment practice categories.
8.8 Natural Wetlands
and Vernal Pools
Careful consideration should be given to the selection,
design, and location of stormwater treatment
practices on or near sites with natural wetlands and
vernal pools. Conventional stormwater management
techniques often have adverse impacts on biodiversity.
Wildlife species that migrate seasonally between
forested upland habitats and vernal pools (and other
small wetlands) are particularly susceptible (Calhoun
and Klemens 2002). Populations of turtles, snakes,
small mammals, frogs, and salamanders often decline
in areas with intensive stormwater management
measures. Curb and catch-basin systems, particularly
in combination with hydrodynamic separators, can
intercept, trap, and kill amphibians and other small
animals crossing roads. Stormwater wetlands and
ponds that are placed near vernal pools can also
threaten pool-breeding amphibian populations.
Stormwater ponds and wetlands can serve as “decoy”
pools, intercepting amphibians as they migrate in
spring to their vernal pool breeding habitats.
Amphibians often deposit their eggs in these artificial
wetlands. The eggs rarely survive due to sediment
and pollutant loads, which are concentrated in these
stormwater treatment systems. Fluctuations in water
quality, water quantity, and temperature within these
decoy wetlands can also cause reproductive failure.
Many vernal pool species are extremely sensitive to
hydroperiod (duration of flooding). Stormwater management
can de-water (or shorten the hydroperiod)
vernal pools. This impacts species that require longer
hydroperiods such as marbled salamanders.
Stormwater management can also increase the
hydroperiod of vernal pools, impacting species that
require shorter hydroperiods (e.g., fairy shrimp).
In addition, constructed wetlands tend to support
highly adaptable, widespread, “weedy” species
(e.g., bullfrogs or green frogs), which prey upon, or
successfully out-compete, vernal pool-breeding
amphibians.
Stormwater ponds and wetlands should be
located at least 750 feet from a vernal pool and should
not be sited between vernal pools or in areas that are
8-14 2004 Connecticut Stormwater Quality Manual
primary amphibian overland migration routes, if
known (Calhoun and Klemens 2002). Using natural
wetlands as stormwater treatment practices is also
highly undesirable. Increases in pollutants, sediments,
and “flashiness” of the system degrade the wetland
and result in a reduction habitat complexity, leading
to reductions in biodiversity. In general, stormwater
runoff to vernal pools should be maintained at
pre-construction levels to avoid increases ordecreases
in water levels and hydroperiod. Chapter Eleven contains
additional design guidance to avoid impacts to
natural wetlands and vernal pools.
Additional Information Sources
U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA). Natural
Resources Conservation Service (NRCS). 2002 (draft).
Soil Suitability for Stormwater Management Practices.
URL: http://www.ct.nrcs.usda.gov. Contact: Kipen
Kolesinskas, State Soil Scientist, 344 Merrow Road,
Tolland, CT 06084-3917, (860) 871-4047.
References
Calhoun, A.J.K. and M.W. Klemens. 2002. Best
development practices: Conserving pool-breeding
amphibians in residential and commercial developments
in the northeastern United States. MCA
Technical Paper No. 5, Metropolitan Conservation
Alliance, Wildlife Conservation Society, Bronx,
New York.
Center for Watershed Protection (CWP). 1997.
Stormwater BMP Design Supplement for Cold
Climates. Ellicot City, Maryland.
New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation (NYDEC). 2001. New York State
Stormwater Management Design Manual. Prepared
by Center for Watershed Protection. Albany,
New York.
Urban Water Resources Research Council of the
American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE) and
Wright Water Engineers, Inc. 2001. National
Stormwater Best Management Practices (BMP)
Database.
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). 1993.
Handbook of Urban Runoff Pollution Prevention and
Control Planning. EPA 625-R-93-004. Washington, D.C.
Winer, R. 2000. National Pollutant Removal Database
for Stormwater Treatment Practices, 2nd Edition.
Center for Watershed Protection. Ellicott City,
Maryland.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 1
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 2
PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
37
Appendix A.4: Spill information
These instructions are designed for businesses that have only incidental hazardous materials stored or used
on site and do not need to do a full Materials Management Plan and Spill Prevention & Response Plan. To help
protect the Town’s drinking water supply, businesses must complete the following:
SIGN or INFORMATION SHEET
For every building on site that includes hazardous materials, post a clearly visible sign or information sheet
that addresses the following:
1. Identify where spill response equipment or materials are located and appropriate personnel who are
instructed in its use. This information can be shown on a site map, building plan, or diagram.
2. Identify the spill coordinator for the business who will be advised immediately of all spills, regardless of
quantity, as well as any emergency spill response contractor, if relevant.
3. Indicate how the spill will be evaluated to determine the necessary response (e.g., If there is a health
hazard, fire, or explosion potential, 911 will be called. If the spill is large or threatens ground water, the
DEEP Oil and Chemical Spills Unit will be called at 860-424-3338. Any questions on pollution potential
of spilled materials and proper disposal of spilled materials or wastes should be directed to DEEP Waste
Management Bureau at 860-424-3372).
4. Indicate how the spill will be first contained as close to the source as possible with a dike or absorbent
materials from the emergency spill kit (such as socks, pads, pillows or “pigs”), and how notification will be
done to provide additional clean-up measures.
• Actions by immediate response personnel should be defensive in nature for the purpose of
protecting t e source of supply without risk to an individual’s health or safety.
• O?? ensive control activitie (e.g. plug-and-patch, clean up) should be performed only by emergency
response units which are appropriately trained to handle the material in questio .
5. Indicate how all waste material will be disposed of properly, including used absorbent materials.
(The DEEP should be called at 860-424-3372 for any questions about proper disposal of hazardous or
regulated wastes).
Emergency Spill Response Equipment List and Location
Emergency spill response equipment should be stored at key locations within or near the hazardous materials
on site.
• Identification signs and notification information should be placed at all equipment locations.
• Typical Emergency Response Kits and Equipment should be based on the quantitie and types of
hazardous materials onsite. There are websites that can provide information for types of equipment
to use.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019
PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
38
EMERGENCY SPILL RESPONSE EQUIPMENT LIST – TYPICAL ITEMS
Absorbant Pads
Absorbant Boom
Absorbant Socks
Absorbant Pillows
Absorbant Wipes
Safety Goggles
Safety Gloves
Disposal Bags and Ties
Spill Kit Storage Container
Boots
Flashlight
Instruction Sheet / Hazardous Material Emergency Response Book
Shovel/Rake
HAZARDOUS SPILL RESPONSE NOTIFICATION
Signs should be placed to clearly indicate the location of all Spill Containment Kits. Notification contact
information should also be developed with the information below. This information can be included on the
sign or within the Kits.
PRIORITY NOTIFICATION
1. Call 911 for notification of the local Fire Department responsible for your business area.
2. The DEEP Oil and Chemical Spill Response Unit must be notified of the spill.
• The person coordinating the spill response operation should be responsible to make the contact
with DEEP.
• Provide information as per the Hazardous Materials Spill Response Information Form
• Make it clear that the incident has occurred on a drinking water supply area and find out how
soon they will respond.
Connecticut Department of Energy and Environmental Protection (DEEP)
Oil and Chemical Spill Response Unit
Bureau of Materials Management and Compliance Assurance
79 Elm Street
Hartford, CT 06106-5127
Phone #: 860-424-3338 (weekdays and after hours, including weekends and holidays)
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 1
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 2
PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
39
ADDITIONAL NOTIFICATION
The person handling the spill may have to contact the following agencies listed below when a spill occurs.
State and National A encies
1) CHEMTREC: 1-800-424-9300
CHEMTREC, a public service offered by the Chemical Manufacturers Association, will help to
identify the spill, give advice on how to approach a known spill, advise medical care for victims
exposed to the spill, and contact the shipper of the hazardous materials involved for more
detailed assistance and appropriate action to be taken.
2) National Response Center: 1-800-424-8802
The National Response Center (NRC), which is operated by the Coast Guard, receives reports
required from spillers of hazardous substances. Federal law requires that anyone who releases
a reportable quantity of a hazardous substance into the environment must immediately notify
the NRC.
3) Connecticut Department of Public Health (DPH) Drinking Water Section
During Business Hours (8:30 a.m. - 4:00 p.m.): 860-509-7333
After Business Hours/Emergencies: 860-509-8000
4) Connecticut Department of Energy and Environmental Protection (DEEP)
Public Utilities Regulatory Authority (PURA)
Water Unit
10 Franklin Square New Britain, CT 06051
During Business Hours (8:30 a.m. - 4:00 p.m.): 860-827-2600
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019
PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
40
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS SPILL RESPONSE INFORMATION FORM
The information bel w must be recorded for each spill
1. LOCATION:
Town: _______
Nearest address or street intersection: _______
Source(s) that may be impacted: _____________
Distance to nearest reservoirs, tributaries, streams or wells: _______
2. DATE: ____________
3. TIME OF INCIDENT: _______
4. TIME REPORTED TO UTILITY: _____________
5. NATURE OF INCIDENT: (vehicle accident; container of chemicals, fuel tank rupture; spill during delivery;
fire; explosion; etc.)
6. DESCRIPTION OF MATERIAL RELEASED:
Type: HAZARDOUS? Yes No
Quantity & Concentration: _______
7. TYPE AND CONDITION OF CONTAINERS:
8. SPILL REPORTING: Get names and phone numbers of the individuals who reported the incident or
other officials as well as the names of the persons who received the report at their office (Fire, DPH,
etc.). Get this information at the scene if possible.
CONTACT NAME & NUMBER OF PERSON REPORTING
INCIDENT
NAME & NUMBER OF PERSON WHO
RECEIVED REPORT
Fire/Police
DEEP
Health Dept.
Spill Contractor
Mark NA if no contact made.
9. INITIAL SPILL RESPONSE: Describe initial response measures taken by the municipality or others at the
scene (i.e. deploy booms, call spill contractor)
10. OTHER INFORMATION: Provide pertinent information such as:
- Extent of contamination/potential impact on water supplies
- Any restrictions for access to the scene
- Water supply source shut downs (name of source, time, duration)
- Name of shipper/carrier, receiver and/or driver involved in transport
Prepared by: Date:
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 1
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 2
PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
41
Appendix A.5: materials management plan
GENERAL INFORMATON:
A materials management plan should be developed and implemented in accordance with the following
guidelines:
1. A materials management plan should contain, at a minimum, the following information with respect to
the subject regulated activity:
A. A description of any operations or practices which may pose a threat of pollution to the aquifer,
which shall include the following:
i. A process flow diagram identifying where hazardous materials are stored, disposed and used,
and where hazardous wastes are generated and subsequently stored and disposed,
ii. An inventory of all hazardous materials which are likely to be or will be manufactured,
produced, stored, utilized or otherwise handled, and
iii. A description of waste, including waste waters generated, and a description of how such wastes
are handled, stored and disposed,
B. The name, street address, mailing address, title and telephone number of the individual(s)
responsible for implementing the materials management plan and the individual(s) who should be
contacted in an emergency,
C. A record-keeping system to account for the types, quantities, and disposition of hazardous
materials which are manufactured, produced, utilized, stored, or otherwise handled or which
are discharged or emitted; such record-keeping system shall be maintained at the subject facility
and shall be made available for inspection during normal business hours by the Town and the
municipal aquifer protection agency, and
D. A spill prevention and response plan for responding to a release of hazardous materials. Such plan
shall set forth the methods to be used to prevent and abate any such a release;
2. The materials management plan must be maintained at the subject facility and must be made available
for inspection during normal business hours by the Town.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019
PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
42
MODEL DOCUMENT INSTRUCTIONS
This model document was prepared by the Town of Groton to assist you in complying with the requirements
of the WRPD. The document provides a general form for developing and implementing a site-specific Materials
Management Plan (MMP) for activities conducted at facilities in the WRPD.
This document is an example of what a Plan might look like. Depending on the business or industry you are in,
your own plan may be different. The Plan has seven sections including:
Section 1 – Facility and Site Information
Section 2 – Tables
Section 3 – Spill Prevention and Emergency Response Plan
Section 4 – Employee Training
Section 5 – Record Keeping System
Section 6 – Individual Responsible for Implementing MMP
Section 7 – Additional Protection Actions
Please keep in the following in mind when completing the Plan:
1. If any section does not apply to your facility, state that it is not applicable. Do not skip it or leave it blank.
2. If other similar information has already been prepared for the site for other purposes (i.e. site plans,
emergency response procedures, spill plans, etc) and meets the MMP requirement, it may be submitted
as an attachment instead of the MMP form.
Once the Plan is complete, you are required to keep your Materials Management Plan on file at your facility
and use it to assist you in controlling inventory of hazardous materials, monitoring and inspecting your site
operations, responding to an emergency, and training employees.
Keep the Plan up to date! By using common sense, good housekeeping and by following your Plan, pollutants
that could potentially contaminate the drinking water supply can be managed or eliminated without significant
cost. Remember, it costs less to keep pollutants out of the drinking water supply than to remediate later!
Below are some phone numbers you may find useful in assembling your Plan.
CT - Pollution Prevention: 860-424-3297 (for any question about pollution prevention or best management
practices)
CT - Bureau of Materials Management and Compliance Assistance: 860-424-3023 (for any questions about
spills, hazardous materials, waste engineering and enforcement)
CT - Wastewater Permitting and Enforcement: 860-424-3018 (for any questions about floor drains or waste
water discharges). Discharge of hazardous materials or other waste water to a sanitary sewer may require
an individual permit (860-424-3003).
Emergency Response and Spill Prevention
CT - Emergency Line: 860-424-3333 OR 860-424-3338 (to report spills)
CT - General Information: 860-424-3024 (for questions on underground storage tanks or spill
preparedness)
Local Fire Departments: Call 911 for spill response. They will direct you to the correct Fire District.
Center of Groton Fire District
Mystic Fire District
Old Mystic Fire District
Poquonnock Bridge Fire District
West Pleasant Valley Fire District
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 1
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 2
PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
43
Section 1: FACILITY AND SITE INFORMATION
FACILITY INFORMATION
Facility Name: Date of Plan:
Facility Address:
Contact Name:
Title: Phone:
Type of Business:
Standard Industrial Code (SIC) (if known):
Products and Services Produced:
SITE INFORMATION
Property size:
Number and size of buildings/ storage areas:
Number and size of paved surfaces:
Number of employees:
SITE MAP
Attach a site map of the facility and label it “Figure 1”.
The following is a list of items that if applicable to your facility should be included on your site map:
1. Site boundary
2. Outline of buildings, sheds or other storage structures, pavement
3. Stormwater structures, controls, and drainage flow direction
4. Location of fueling stations
5. Location of loading/unloading areas
6. Location of wastewater disposal systems- sewer line or septic system
7. Location of waste storage and disposal areas including- dumpsters, used oil storage tanks,
and other waste storage
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019
PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
44
8. Location of liquid storage areas including- underground and above ground storage tanks, and their
filling and discharging or distribution lines
9. Location of any other outdoor structures or processing service areas that may impact groundwater
or have materials exposed to precipitation
BUILDING PLAN OR DIAGRAM
Attach a building plan or diagram showing the site operations and label it “Figure 2”.
Identify the following on your building floor plan or diagram:
1. Hazardous materials and hazardous waste storage areas
2. Hazardous materials and hazardous waste transfer, handling, and processing areas
3. Waste water generation areas, collection lines, and disposal areas including floor drains, sinks,
sewer line or septic system connections
4. Hazardous materials delivery routes, and hazardous waste transport through the site
5. Designated loading and unloading areas, tank filling operations, and holding areas
6. Location of vehicle and equipment maintenance and cleaning areas
7. Location of roof areas that may be subject to chemical exhaust or drippage (do not include
heating/ventilation/air conditioning (HVAC) condensate)
Note: For small or simple sites, information for site map and building plan or diagram may be combined
into one figure.
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 1
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 2
PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
45
SECTION 2
TABLES
Use the tables in this section to help with establishing a record keeping system for your MMP. Small
businesses or businesses with limited amount of hazardous materials onsite may not need all of the tables.
SECTION 3
EMERGENCY RESPONSE PLAN
Provide an emergency spill prevention and response plan. You may reference any Spill Prevention
Countermeasure Control Plan or other Spill Plan that you have as long as the plan includes the items below
and attach to this document.
Your Plan should include, at a minimum, the following:
Response Procedures
6. Identify where spill response equipment or materials are located and appropriate personnel who are
instructed in its use. This information can be shown on the site map or building plan or diagram.
7. Identify the spill coordinator for the business who will be advised immediately of all spills, regardless of
quantity.
8. Indicate how the spill will be evaluated to determine the necessary response. (If there is a health hazard,
fire, or explosion potential, 911 will be called. If the spill is large or threatens ground water, the DEEP
Oil and Chemical Spills Unit will be called at 860-424-3338. Any questions on pollution potential of
spilled materials and proper disposal of spilled materials or wastes should be directed to DEEP Waste
Management Bureau at 860-424-3372).
9. Indicate how the spill will be contained as close to the source as possible with a dike of absorbent
materials from the emergency spill kit (such as socks, pads, pillows or “pigs”), how additional dikes will be
constructed to protect swales, catch basins or other conveyances.
10. Indicate how all waste material will be disposed of properly, including used absorbent materials.
(The DEEP should be called at 860-424-3372 for any questions about proper disposal of hazardous or
regulated wastes).
11. Indicate how spill response kit(s) will be kept up to date and fully stocked at all times. Typical contents
of spill containment kits can be found in Appendix A.4.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019
PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
46
SECTION 4
EMPLOYEE TRAINING
It is the responsibility of the facility operator to ensure that employees are trained in materials
management. All employees should be trained annually and new hires should be trained within 30 days of
starting. Training logs should be kept.
Training Date:
Trainer Name/Title:
Topics Covered: ( all applicable)
? Purpose and requirements of the Materials Management Plan
? Employees’ responsibilities
? Facility site plan and location of all hazardous materials
? Proper waste collection and disposal procedures of materials
? Spill prevention and response procedures and equipment
? Good housekeeping practices and preventive maintenance
? Reporting procedures
? Other measures and controls
Employees in attendance:
PRINT NAME SIGN NAME
Comments:_
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 1
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 2
PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
47
SECTION 5
RECORD KEEPING SYSTEM - ACCOUNTING AND TRACKING OF MATERIALS
Identify how you will track materials and account for any abnormal losses.
Maintain product Material Safety Data Sheets (MSDS):
Maintain hazardous waste manifests:
Ensure materials and waste containers are properly labeled:
Mark purchase date on materials:
Control access to materials that are hazardous:
Maintenance of Spill Logs:
Other:
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019
PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
48
SECTION 6
INDIVIDUALS RESPONSIBLE FOR IMPLEMENTING THE MMP
Identify the person who will be responsible for implementing the plan.
Contact Information
Name: Title:
Phone:
Street Address:
City: State: Zip Code:
Mailing Address:
City: State: Zip Code:
Mailing Address:
City: State: Zip Code:
Emergency Contact Information
Identify the emergency contact person to be advised immediately of all spills, regardless of quantity.
Name:
Phone:
List additional emergency contact numbers.
DEEP Oil and Chemical Spills Unit: 860-424-3338
Water Utility:
Other:
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 1
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 2
PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
49
SECTION 7
ADDITIONAL PROTECTION ACTIONS
Use this section to list any other current measures, improvements, or modifications in practices, procedures,
or structures that are being used to address compliance of the WRPD zoning regulations.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019
PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
50
Appendix B: Mixed Use Town Center (MTC ) Design
Guidelines
D E S I G N G U I D E L I N E S
F O R T H E
MIXED USE TOWN
C E N T E R ( M T C )
D I S T R I C T
TOWN OF GROTO N , C T
OCTO B E R 1 , 2 0 1 9
Page 2 Mixed-Use Town Center INTRODUCTION SITE DESIGN BUILDING DESIGN SITE COMPONENTS APPENDIX
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Table of Contents Page 2
Overview of Design Guidelines Page 3
Design Guidelines Format Page 4
Building Location Page 6
Building Entry Location Page 7
Parking Location Page 8
Bike Parking Page 10
Sidewalks Page 11
Circulation Page 13
Re-development of Shopping Centers Page 15
Public Space Page 16
Building Form Page 18
Storefronts Page 19
Lighting Page 21
Landscaping Page 22
Street Trees Page 23
Fences/Walls Page 24
Parking Screening Page 25
Additional Resources Page 26
INTRODUCTION
SITE DESIGN
BUILDING DESIGN
SITE ELEMENTS
APPENDIX
Mixed-Use Town Center Page 3
INTRODUCTION
OVERVIEW OF DESIGN GUIDELINES
This document contains design guidelines for development in the Town of Groton, Connecticut. The purpose
of these guidelines is to describe design principles that, when applied, help contribute to the quality of the
public realm, creating the “sense of place” that is the difference between communities that thrive and those
that do not.
These guidelines are supplementary to design standards provided in the Town’s Zoning Regulations, which
apply to the Mixed Use Town Center (MTC). Where the design standards included in the body of the Zoning
Regulations are firm and require compliance, the guidelines herein are meant to be more instructive. The
guidelines communicate the intent of what the Town calls for in its Plan of Conservation and Development
(POCD) and other more targeted plans that examined individual village areas. Images are used to help clarify
the design language and overall vision for each village and, in some cases, clarify how different choices
are appropriate for different village areas. These guidelines will help developers and the Town discuss the
character of each village and how existing conditions do or do not inform applications for development.
Overarching principles related to village development in Groton include:
1. A Vibrant Public Realm – “Public realm” is a term of art in urban/village planning that is used to
discuss any area where people have the opportunity to mingle, gather, and visually experience their
surroundings. The term often refers to the street right-of-way, park areas, sidewalks, bike paths, plazas,
and similar features. Any of these areas may be publicly or privately owned. In Groton’s mixed use
areas, great care will be taken to provide a public realm that works as a connected system of accessible
and attractive spaces that will foster positive interaction between residents, visitors, and businesses.
All projects will contain a vibrant public realm or create ways to connect and be a part of a larger public
realm.
2. Environmental Best Practices – The days when urban development was incompatible with achieving
environmental objectives are in the past. The Town of Groton envisions town center mixed use at various
scales that incorporates state-of-the-art “best practices” in the areas of construction management,
stormwater management, waste management, and landscaping.
3. A Mix of Uses and Densities – The Town recognizes that market demand will play an important role
in determining the types of uses and densities that are built in mixed use districts. The Town also
acknowledges that the most economically resilient mixed use centers are those that foster a diverse mix
of commercial uses that can respond to market trends and innovations over time. Similarly, housing shall
be provided within mixed use districts and should provide options for individuals and households at all
levels of abilities, incomes, and preferences.
4. Pedestrians First – The Town understands that accommodations for automobiles within mixed use
areas are essential to their success. However, the Town also recognizes that the most successful and
memorable mixed use centers are those where pedestrians feel safe and welcome. Circulation along
Route 1 as well as within newly developed or redeveloped mixed use areas in Groton shall be designed
with the highest priority placed on developing a safe, attractive, accessible, and intuitive pedestrian
network. The use of bicycles as an alternative form of transportation shall be incorporated into all
development proposals.
5. Quality Architecture – Buildings and signs will be designed in a manner that conveys high quality design
and a thoughtful approach to developing a sense of place within mixed use areas. Traditional building
forms, high quality building materials, and attention to detail will be apparent and integral to the design
process.
Page 22
SITE COMPONENTS
Mixed-Use Town Center
LIGHTING
Key Features
• A variety of lighting types
should be used to address
the different needs of civic
spaces, pedestrian oriented
streets, and parking areas.
• Lighting should be designed
to provide a uniform
distribution of light while
also addressing safety needs.
• Lighting should be in keeping
with the character of the
spaces and buildings around
them. Industrial poles and
fixtures concerned purely
with functional requirements
should be avoided.
AVOID
A mix of lighting types, including appropriate street lights, helps to establish
the character of a place.
DO
Street lighting has a strong effect
on the character of a place. This
includes both the distribution of
the light, and the character of
the light fixture/pole itself.
STREET LIGHTING IS A KEY
COMPONENT TO THE MAKING
OF A PLACE
Designing site lighting purely to meet functional requirements denies its ability to support character of place.
Street lights should reflect the character of the district, with articulated treatments
for the base, post, and fixture.
Page 4 Mixed-Use Town Center INTRODUCTION
DESIGN GUIDELINES FORMAT
The majority of the design guidelines follow the general format illustrated below:
Design Element
Being Addressed
Design Guidelines
Section Being
Addressed
Importance of
Considering
Particular Design
Element
Key Features and
Examples Showing
Proper Application
Approaches
and Examples
Showing Improper
Application
Mixed-Use Town Center Page 5
BUILDING DESIGN
This section of the Design Guidelines looks at different
elements of site design within the Mixed-Use Town
Center, ranging from pedestrian connectivity within the
public right of way (ROW) to more specific issues related
to individual sites, like building placement and parking
location.
SITE DESIGN SITE DESIGN
Page 6 SITE DESIGN Mixed-Use Town Center
BUILDING LOCATION
The front of the shops form a street wall that define the
street as a “public room”.
Retail buildings set back from the street discourage
shoppers since even adjacent shops or those across the
street are separated by expanses of cars and asphalt.
DO AVOID
Mixed-use buildings should
engage the sidewalk and form
a street wall that contributes to
the character of the street.
ON A TRADITIONAL MIXEDUSE
STREET, BUILDINGS
ENGAGE THE SIDEWALK
A traditional retail building meets the sidewalk to engage pedestrians in
window-shopping.
Front setback area
typically used for
parking is hostile
to pedestrians.
Buildings help
define the edge of
the sidewalk. In
conditions where
sidewalks are
tight, buildings
should consider
setting back a
few feet to create
ample pedestrian
space.
Mixed-Use Town Center Page 7
SITE DESIGN
BUILDING ENTRY LOCATION
BUILDINGS SHOULD BE
ENTERED DIRECTLY FROM
THE SIDEWALK
Key Points
• Entries to retail and
commercial uses should be
prominent and large in scale
to be clearly identifiable to
the public.
• Retail entries should be
located directly off the
sidewalk. Gallerias and
indoor malls are prohibited.
• Residential entries should
be separate from public
entries. The location may be
less prominent and the scale
smaller than for retail.
• Residential entries should
have their own address
separate from the retail.
Building entries should engage
and activate the street edge.
In mixed-use conditions, there
should also be a clear separation
and hierarchy between retail
storefronts and secondary
entries for upper floor uses.
Commercial entries connect directly to a public sidewalk
DO
AVOID
Diagram of entry location(s).
Secondary entrance / exits
may be located facing the
rear parking area, but retail
entrances should never solely
be located at the rear.
A corner entrance can
provide both main
thoroughfare entry as well as
access from rear parking.
Retail entrances should
always be located fronting
the main thoroughfare.
Provide a clear walking path
from the rear parking area to
the front entrance.
Avoid locating the primary entry at
the rear of a building, regardless of
its proximity to a rear parking area.
A corner entry serves customers
arriving from two different directions.
An inset entry allows more display
area and a protected place to view
merchandise.
Page 8 SITE DESIGN Mixed-Use Town Center
PARKING LOCATION
Off-street parking is least disruptive behind or beside the building.
Parking should
occur behind
the building
Alternate parking
location beside
the building
Avoid parking lots in front of the building.
Narrow curb cut
and small curb
radius reduce
traffic speed
Wide entry and exit lanes, yield conditions
and large curb radii allow traffic to enter or
exit parking lots at dangerous speeds.
Gaps between storefronts for
parking or driveways disrupt
the experience of mixed-use
streets. Off-Street parking
should be hidden to the greatest
extent possible by buildings,
fences, walls or landscaping.
See Site Components section for
more details on screening and
landscape. Successful mixed-use streets offer a continuous line of buildings and entries.
Wall screens
parking
DO
VISIBLE OFF-STREET PARKING
HARMS TRADITIONAL MIXEDUSE
STREETS.
AVOID
Page 9
SITE DESIGN
Mixed-Use Town Center
PARKING LOCATION
Screen parking areas from outdoor seating
and sidewalks by the use of masonry
walls and plantings at a minimum of
three feet in height.
The layout and design of all
means of circulation, including
interior drives, parking areas, and
walkways, should provide for safe,
delineated circulation for pedestrians
and vehicles.
Where parking abuts a sidewalk, a curb
at least six inches high should be included
to delineate the two uses.
Sidewalks or walkways should be included
in commercial areas to provide a safe
route from parking areas and retail
establishments.
Lighting in parking areas
should be oriented to reflect
light away from adjacent
uses. Dark Sky cutoff fixtures
recommended.
Site entrances should be minimized,
including sharing access drives with
adjacent properties and creating contiguous
parking areas wherever possible.
Sidewalks should be a hard surface
with provisions for managing
stormwater runoff included as
necessary. Where sidewalks intersect
with automobile lanes, raised surfaces
and/or durable, decorative alternatives
to conventional pavement shall be
used to connect sidewalks or bike lanes
across the automobile lanes.
Opaque fencing and/or dense landscaping should
be included to screen parking areas from adjacent
residential areas.
Secondary
Bioswale
Continuous
Sidewalk
MAIN STREET
Page 10 SITE DESIGN Mixed-Use Town Center
BIKE PARKING
SAFE AND CONVENIENT
PARKING CAN ENCOURAGE
BICYCLE USE.
Entry
Inverted ‘U’ Comb Toast Wave
Bicycle parking areas should well lit
for safety and security.
Separate bicycle parking from auto
parking and roadways.
The bike parking area should be
convenient to building entrances and
street access, but away from normal
pedestrian and auto traffic.
Bicycle parking facilities should be provided wherever
possible. A highly visible location discourages theft and
vandalism. Also, locate bike racks as to not block the
pedestrian path.
DO AVOID
Bike parking should be convenient
to building entrances and street
access but away from normal
pedestrian and auto traffic.
Bike parking should be
well lit and separated from
parking and roadways for
safety and security.
Bike parking should be provided wherever
A highly visible location promotes
use and discourages theft and vandalism.
Page 11
SITE DESIGN
Mixed-Use Town Center
SIDEWALKS
Key Features
• Sidewalks are composed of
three zones: a furnishing
zone (for trees, lighting,
etc.), a pedestrian zone (for
movement), and a frontage
zone (for activities adjacent
to building)
• Ideally each of these has a
dedicated area: a minimum
of four feet for furnishing,
five feet for pedestrian, and
two feet for frontage.
• In highly constrained
locations, these activities
may overlap but doing so
will constrain use and may
eliminate the ability to
include certain elements,
such as street trees.
AVOID
Well designed sidewalks promote pedestrian use by a range of people, supporting
local business, reducing vehicular use, and improving wellness.
DO
Sidewalks support pedestrian
flow and mixed-use activity while
also accommodating elements
such as street trees, lighting and
other street furniture.
WELL DESIGNED
SIDEWALKS ARE CRUCIAL
TO A PEDESTRIAN FRIENDLY
ENVIRONMENT.
Narrow sidewalks end up compromised by other needs and create conditions that don’t promote pedestrian use.
In addition to pedestrian movement, sidewalks can host a number of other
amenities if given enough space and distributed appropriately.
Page 12 SITE DESIGN Mixed-Use Town Center
SIDEWALKS
Furnishing Zone
The 4’ to 5’ of sidewalk
closest to the roadway, used
for street trees, light fixtures,
and garbage cans. This
zone helps define the edge
of the sidewalk area and
protects pedestrians from
vehicular traffic.
Pedestrian Zone
The middle of the sidewalk
dedicated solely to
pedestrian circulation. The
pedestrian zone should be
at least 5’ for comfort and
accessibility and should be
free of obstructions.
Frontage Zone
The area of the sidewalk
closest to the building
face, used for objects and
activities associated with
the building. The frontage
zone may include potted
plants, outdoor seating, and
temporary signage.
Furnishing zone used to define the edge of the sidewalk Frontage zone used for plants and outdoor seating.
Design Guidelines
Travel lanes and driveways developed in the interior of the site
are encouraged to show a dedicated bicycle lane(s) distinct from
8. BICYCLE TRAVEL LANES
Page 13
SITE DESIGN
Mixed-Use Town Center
CIRCULATION
Key Features
• Where sidewalks or other
pedestrian or bicycle ways
intersect with automobile
driveways or lanes, raised
surfaces and/or durable,
decorative alternatives to
conventional pavement
should be used to connect
sidewalks or bike lanes
across the automobile lane.
• Striping across the asphalt
used for an automobile lane
to connect the pedestrian or
bicycle way is not adequate.
Continuous sidewalks promote pedestrian use by a range of people,
supporting local business, reducing vehicular speed, and improving wellness.
DO
The networks of circulation
in mixed use areas should be
designed to balance the needs
of motorists, cyclists, and
pedestrians.
SAFE, BROAD, AND CLEARLY
IDENTIFIABLE PEDESTRIAN
AND NON-MOTORIZED
VEHICLE CONNECTIONS
ENCOURAGE ALTERNATIVE
MODES OF TRAVEL
Raised and painted crosswalks serve as traffic calming measures by extending
the sidewalk across the road and bringing vehicles to the pedestrian level.
- 2 Circulation -
Design Guidelines
Covered pedestrian only walkways shall be integrated into the site between buildings to connect both
on and off site buildings and parking areas and provide pedestrian
access during inclement weather.
Storage facilities for bicycles shall be provided in
accordance with the following requirements:
a. Multi-family development, including top of
the shop housing shall provide storage areas
for residents to securely store a minimum of
two bicycles per residential unit.
b. Bicycle parking facilities along the front or
side edge of each non-residential structure.
3. COVERED PEDESTRIAN CONNECTIONS
4. BICYCLE FACILITIES
- 2 Circulation -
Design Guidelines
Covered pedestrian only walkways shall be integrated into the site between buildings to connect both
on and off site buildings and parking areas and provide pedestrian
access during inclement weather.
Storage facilities for bicycles shall be provided in
accordance with the following requirements:
a. Multi-family development, including top of
the shop housing shall provide storage areas
for residents to securely store a minimum of
two bicycles per residential unit.
b. Bicycle parking facilities along the front or
side edge of each non-residential structure.
3. COVERED PEDESTRIAN CONNECTIONS
4. BICYCLE FACILITIES
Page 14 SITE DESIGN Mixed-Use Town Center
CIRCULATION
AVOID
Crosswalks that are designed or located to prioritize automobile traffic create hazardous conditions for pedestrians.
Provide linked shared streets (woonerfs) or alleyways as pedestrian connections between buildings where
applicable. The design should provide safe, broad and easily identifiable ways for pedestrians to travel through
areas that may also be shared by vehicles. These shared streets shall be designed to clearly show the space is
primarily dedicated to pedestrian traffic through the use of signage, raised or alternative surfaces, and other traffic
calming devices.
Covered pedestrian only walkways shall be integrated into the site between buildings to connect both on and offsite
buildings and parking areas and provide pedestrian access during inclement weather.
Route 1 / Poquonnock Road
CVS
GROTON
SHOPPERS
MART
DUNKIN’
Route 1 /Long Hill Road
Poquonnock Road
Page 15
SITE DESIGN
Mixed-Use Town Center
RE-DEVELOPMENT OF SHOPPING CENTERS
Key Features
• Place new mixed-use
buildings on corners and
along the street edge to hide
parking lots and create a
well-defined public realm
• Convert primary parking
aisles into internal streets
that balance the needs of
pedestrians, cyclists, and
motorists.
• Maintain a manageable/
walkable block size
• Connect adjacent parking
lots to avoid unnecessary
curb cuts along Route 1
DO
Through redevelopment, the
MTC district will become a
destination and ultimately
serve as a true Town Center and
gathering spot.
RESTRUCTURE THE SINGLEUSE,
AUTO-ORIENTED STRIP
MALLS INTO BALANCED,
MIXED-USE, WALKABLE
PLACES
This diagram from Sprawl Repair Manual by Galina Tachieva shows how
a strip mall site can be re-developed through additions that help define the
street edge and create a new public space and opportunity for public art.
Place new buildings along the street edge to hide parking lots and create a welldefined
public realm. Utilize curb cuts that already exist and convert primary
parking aisles into internal streets for pedestrians, cyclists, and motorists
AVOID
Deep setbacks, endless parking lots,
and frequent curb cuts make walking
along Route 1 unpleasant and
dangerous
New buildings should not be placed in a way that reinforces the current autooriented
development pattern
Page 16 SITE DESIGN Mixed-Use Town Center
WELL-SHAPED PUBLIC SPACES
CAN CREATE MEANINGFUL
PLACES FOR PEOPLE TO
GATHER
DO
AVOID
Small and scattered green spaces that are not well-defined or well-located will not add to the quality of the public realm
Concentrate public and green
space into meaningful squares,
parks, and greens and avoid
scattered bioswales and green
“features” that do not relate to
each other or the public realm.
PUBLIC SPACE
Creating well-defined public and green space between buildings creates opportunities for creative place-making
and public art while also helping with water retention and passive stormwater strategies
Page 17
APPENDIX
Mixed-Use Town Center
BUILDING DESIGN
This section of the Design Guidelines addresses a number
of issues related to new construction within the Mixed-
Use Town Center. The design principles described will
help create a vibrant mixed-use, pedestrian-friendly
neighborhood.
BUILDING DESIGN
Page 18 BUILDING DESIGN Mixed-Use Town Center
BUILDING FORM
DO
AVOID
MIXED USE BUILDINGS
SHOULD CREATE A
PEDESTRIAN-FRIENDLY
GROUND FLOOR AND DEFINE
THE EDGES OF THE PUBLIC
REALM
Key Points
• New buildings should clearly
articulate base, middle, and
top
• Ground floors should be at
least 11’ in height and should
enhance the pedestrian
streetscape
• Middle floors should be
articulated differently than
the ground floor with smaller
window openings and ceiling
heights of at least 9’
• The top of the building
should gracefully meet the
sky and complete the overall
composition
Multi-story buildings should
clearly articulate base, middle,
and top of the building using
cornices, distinct materials, or
other articulating features.
Traditional, modern, and transitional mixed use buildings utilize the
same principles to create a pedestrian-friendly environment
Facades that are largely monolithic, homogeneous, or blank provide little interest and detract from a sense of place.
Page 19
BUILDING DESIGN
Mixed-Use Town Center
STOREFRONTS
AVOID
Large displays on a storefront
can entice passers-by and invite
them into a store. Visibility is
important to make potential
customers aware of a store’s
offering and create a sense of
welcome.
Optional signage on
glass - to be legible
from across the street
Sign Band
Clear-glazed door
fronting on the
sidewalk
Sign lights with full
cut-off to minimize
light pollution
Durable material,
such as stone, to
meet the ground
Optional transoms
Clear glazing area
is approx. 70% of
ground floor elevation
GROUND-LEVEL RETAIL
DRAWS SHOPPERS AND
ENLIVENS THE SIDEWALK.
DO
Opaque façades do not invite commercial
activity.
Transparency of a storefront invites customers by letting them know what is
offered and if the shop is welcoming business.
The blank walls and windows are uninteresting
and shoppers may pass on by.
Key Points
• Storefronts should contain
approximately 70% clear
glazed area for the display of
goods and services.
• Displays should allow a view
through to the sales floor
for customers to easily see
whether the shop is open.
Page 20 Mixed-Use Town Center
The objects and elements that occupy the space between
buildings have a big impact on the “sense of place” in the
neighborhood. This section addresses how items like site
lighting, landscaping, and walls all contribute to the quality
of the public realm.
SITE COMPONENTS
SITE COMPONENTS
Page 21
SITE COMPONENTS
Mixed-Use Town Center
LIGHTING
Key Features
• A variety of lighting types
should be used to address
the different needs of civic
spaces, pedestrian oriented
streets, and parking areas.
• Lighting should be designed
to provide a uniform
distribution of light while
also addressing safety needs.
• Lighting should be in keeping
with the character of the
spaces and buildings around
them. Industrial poles and
fixtures concerned purely
with functional requirements
should be avoided.
AVOID
A mix of lighting types, including appropriate street lights, helps to establish
the character of a place.
DO
Street lighting has a strong effect
on the character of a place. This
includes both the distribution of
the light, and the character of
the light fixture/pole itself.
STREET LIGHTING IS A KEY
COMPONENT TO THE MAKING
OF A PLACE
Designing site lighting purely to meet functional requirements denies its ability to support character of place.
Street lights should reflect the character of the district, with articulated treatments
for the base, post, and fixture.
www.
Figure 1. Buffer between sidewalk and parked cars (Source: www.
pedbikeimages.org / Ban Burden)
- Landscape 3 -
transition between non compatible land uses and provide a
plantings and/or site elements. Breaks in the buffer may also
designated pedestrian or bicycle crossings or other features
corridors or connections to surrounding neighborhoods are part of
landscaped buffer area subject to the following conditions:
concrete, or other impervious materials are screened from view
may be planted along the stormwater facility.
following locations:
including:
Figure 1. Street Trees (Source: http://citytank.org/)
Figure 1. Street Trees (Source: http://citytank.org/)
Development Standards
materials and
entire
communities to
flora and
designed
reduce
elements
comfort;
vegetation
distances,
interfere
buffers to
wayfinding,
Landscape
landscape
Figure 1. Street Trees (Source: http://citytank.org/)
Figure 1. Street Trees (Source: http://citytank.org/)
Figure 1. Street Trees (Source: http://citytank.org/)
entire
communities to
flora and
designed
reduce
elements
comfort;
vegetation
distances,
interfere
buffers to
wayfinding,
Landscape
landscape
streetscape;
scale of the
into
create
provide
mulched
plantings,
infrequent or no mowing, native ground cover sod, or decorative
Development Standards
LANDSCAPE
cultural experience of the physical environment
provision of open space, street trees and vegetation;
transition between land uses through the use of well
landscaping and/or buffers;
dust pollution and glare;
impacts from impervious surfaces including heat island
disruption to the hydrologic cycle;
and water quality;
temperature, precipitation, and humidity through
evapotranspiration and windbreaks;
Design and construct landscapes that have aesthetic value, utilize sustainable practices to
promote a healthy ecosystem, and encompass both the regional context and the vision for the
Landscaping design and installation shall:
Page 22 SITE COMPONENTS Mixed-Use Town Center
LANDSCAPING
Landscaping is critical
to softening the urban
environment. Arrangements
should be both beautiful and
resilient.
LANDSCAPING CONTRIBUTES
TO A BEAUTIFUL PEDESTRIAN
ENVIRONMENT AND HELPS
ABSORB WATER.
Key Features
• Select plants that are
tolerant of drought, salt, and
heat
• Species should be native
where possible. No invasive
species allowed.
• Use landscaping as part of
stormwater management
wherever possible.
• Use a variety of plants that
will provide some color yearround.
DO
Landscape used as buffer between sidewalk and parked cars
Integrate stormwater management into overall design.
Use plants that complement the scale of the architecture and street.
Landscaping can help define the
pedestrian realm.
Page 23
SITE COMPONENTS
Mixed-Use Town Center
STREET TREES
Key Features
• Continuous, regularly
spaced street trees are best
for creating a consistent
canopy, but even periodic
trees (where feasible) are
worthwhile.
• Proper installation and
maintenance are required
to promote health and avoid
hazardous situations.
AVOID
DO
For pedestrians, street trees can
serve as a buffer to vehicular
flow and as protection from the
elements, while also adding an
element of natural beauty and
softening an otherwise hard
landscape.
STREET TREES PROVIDE
SEVERAL PEDESTRIANFRIENDLY
BENEFITS.
Improper maintenance or tree selection creates hazards.
Street trees can help delineate zones of a street and add character.
Regularly spaced street trees create a continuous canopy that covers sidewalks
while physically and visually separating pedestrians and cars.
Where space is limited, trees can be incorporated in curb extensions.
Pedestrian-friendliness is hard to achieve without trees.
Page 24 SITE COMPONENTS Mixed-Use Town Center
FENCES AND WALLS
Key Points
• Fences and walls can be
used in combination with
landscaping to help create
separation between the
public realm and private
property.
• Construct fences of durable,
paint-able materials such as
wood, fiberglass, or wrought
iron. Walls may be brick or
stone masonry.
• The design of fences should
be appropriate in scale and
style to the building, site,
and surrounding properties.
PVC, plastic and other synthetic fences
have been shown to lower property
values in historic neighborhoods.
AVOID
Tall stockade type fences are typically
not found in a mixed-use setting.
Dressed masonry walls, wrought iron, and decorative wood fences are appropriate
in more urban and/or formal settings and can help define boundaries
like parking edges or deep setbacks.
Chain-link fencing should be confined
to the least visible locations.
Fences and walls can have a big impact on the character of a place.
DO
Low stone walls and fences
can mark the boundaries of a
property to identify the edge of
public and private space. They
can also serve to help screen
parking lots or define open
spaces.
FENCES AND WALLS HELP
HOLD AN EDGE WHERE
BUILDINGS CAN NOT
Page 25
SITE COMPONENTS
Mixed-Use Town Center
PARKING SCREENING
At exposed edges of surface
parking lots, a combination of
landscaping and fencing can help
screen and define the public
realm.
PROPER SCREENING OF
PARKING AREAS CAN
MINIMIZE THEIR VISUAL
IMPACT.
A similar approach
can be used to define
the space in front of
existing buildings
set back from the
road to create usable
space for seating or
programming.
A wall, fence or landscaping
can shield
views to the parking
area from the public
way.
Key Points
• When parking is exposed to
the public realm, a wall or
fence can shield the parking
area from view from the
public way.
• Including a layer of landscape
can also serve to soften the
edge of an otherwise broad
expanse of hardscape.
• Without such screening,
pedestrians will feel uneasy
being surrounded by motor
vehicles.
• This approach also works
well to screen utilities and/or
to help define underutilized
spaces in building setbacks.
Large expanses of parking exposed to the public realm
also detract from the character of the community.
DO
Undefined parking zones in retail building front setbacks
are unwelcoming to pedestrians.
AVOID
Page 26 Mixed-Use Town Center
For further reading and guidance, see the following resources:
APPENDIX
The Architectural Pattern Book: A Tool for Building Great Neighborhoods
Urban Design Associates, 2004
Designing Walkable Urban Thoroughfares: A Context Sensitive Approach
Institute of Transportation Engineers, 2010
Model Design Manual for Living Streets
Los Angeles County, 2011
Retrofitting Suburbia: Urban Design Solutions for Redesigning Suburbs
Dunham-Jones, Ellen, and June Williamson, Hoboken, John Wiley & Sons, 2009
SmartCode (version 9.2) & SmartCode: Bicycling Module
The Town Paper, 2009
Street Design Manual
New York City Department of Transportation, 2009
Sprawl Repair Manual
Tachieva, Galena, Washington, DC, Island Press, 2010
Urban Street Design Guide
National Association of City Transportation Officials, 2013
APPENDIX
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 1
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 2
PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
77
Appendix C: Mixed Use village Center (MVC ) Design
Guidelines
D E S I G N G U I D E L I N E S
F O R T H E M I X E D - U S E
V I L L A G E C E N T E R
( M V C )
TOWN OF GROTO N , C T
OCTO B E R 1 , 2 0 1 9
Page 2 Design Guidelines for the Mixed-Use Village Center INTRODUCTION SITE DESIGN BUILDING DESIGN SITE ELEMENTS ILLUSTRATIVE EXAMPLES APPENDIX
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Table of Contents Page 2
Introduction Page 3
Village Area Page 4
Design Guidelines Format Page 6
Building Location Page 8
Building Entry Location Page 9
Parking Location Page 10
Bike Parking Page 12
Sidewalks Page 13
Circulation Page 14
Public Space Page 15
Building Form Page 17
Historic Infill Page 19
Storefronts Page 20
Lighting Page 22
Landscaping Page 23
Street Trees Page 24
Fences/Walls Page 25
Illustrative Examples Page 27
Historic Conversion Page 29
Infill Development Page 30
Commercial Redevelopment Page 31
Streetscape Page 32
Additional Resources Page 35
INTRODUCTION
SITE DESIGN
BUILDING DESIGN
SITE ELEMENTS
ILLUSTRATIVE EXAMPLES
APPENDIX
Design Guidelines for the Mixed-Use Village Center Page 3
INTRODUCTION
INTRODUCTION
This document contains design guidelines for development in the Town of Groton, Connecticut. The purpose
of these guidelines is to describe design principles that, when applied, help contribute to the quality of the
public realm, creating the “sense of place” that is the difference between communities that thrive and those
that do not.
These guidelines are supplementary to design standards provided in the Town’s Zoning Regulations, which
apply to the Mixed Use Village Center (MVC). Where the design standards included in the body of the Zoning
Regulations are firm and require compliance, the guidelines herein are meant to be more instructive. The
guidelines communicate the intent of what the Town calls for in its Plan of Conservation and Development
(POCD) and other more targeted plans that examined individual village areas. Images are used to help clarify
the design language and overall vision for each village and, in some cases, clarify how different choices
are appropriate for different village areas. These guidelines will help developers and the Town discuss the
character of each village and how existing conditions do or do not inform applications for development.
Overarching principles related to village development in Groton include:
1. A Vibrant Public Realm – “Public realm” is a term of art in urban/village planning that is used to
discuss any area where people have the opportunity to mingle, gather, and visually experience their
surroundings. The term often refers to the street right-of-way, park areas, sidewalks, bike paths, plazas,
and similar features. Any of these areas may be publicly or privately owned. In Groton’s mixed use
areas, great care will be taken to provide a public realm that works as a connected system of accessible
and attractive spaces that will foster positive interaction between residents, visitors, and businesses.
All projects will contain a vibrant public realm or create ways to connect and be a part of a larger public
realm.
2. Environmental Best Practices – The days when urban development was incompatible with achieving
environmental objectives are in the past. The Town of Groton envisions village mixed use at various
scales that incorporates state-of-the-art “best practices” in the areas of construction management,
stormwater management, waste management, and landscaping.
3. A Mix of Uses and Densities – The Town recognizes that market demand will play an important role
in determining the types of uses and densities that are built in mixed use districts. The Town also
acknowledges that the most economically resilient mixed use centers are those that foster a diverse mix
of commercial uses that can respond to market trends and innovations over time. Similarly, housing shall
be provided within mixed use districts and should provide options for individuals and households at all
levels of abilities, incomes, and preferences.
4. Pedestrians First – The Town understands that accommodations for automobiles within mixed use
areas are essential to their success. However, the Town also recognizes that the most successful and
memorable mixed use centers are those where pedestrians feel safe and welcome. Circulation within
newly developed or redeveloped mixed use areas in Groton shall be designed with the highest priority
placed on developing a safe, attractive, accessible, and intuitive pedestrian network. The use of bicycles
as an alternative form of transportation shall be incorporated into all development proposals.
5. Quality Architecture – Buildings and signs will be designed in a manner that conveys high quality design
and a thoughtful approach to developing a sense of place within mixed use areas. Traditional building
forms, high quality building materials, and attention to detail will be apparent and integral to the design
process.
Page 4 Design Guidelines for the Mixed-Use Village Center INTRODUCTION
VILLAGE AREA
Fort Hill Road
Poquonnock Road
Raleigh Court
South Road
Design Guidelines for the Mixed-Use Village Center Page 5
INTRODUCTION
VILLAGE AREA
Fort Hill Road
Newtown Road
North Road
Depot Road
Indian Field Rd
This diagram is intended to highlight those areas for which these design guidelines will apply. Generally
speaking this area includes what might be considered the “village center” of Poquonnock Bridge: this includes
the current mixed-use corridor along Route 1 from Buddington Road to the Claude Chester School, the
potential mixed-use corridor along South Street, and the institutional and recreational uses on Newtown
Road up to the Senior Center. Currently this area is comprised of eight different zoning categories which
will now be consolidated into the single Mixed-Use Village Center (MVC) zone, allowing for a simpler, more
cohesive development pattern for the future based upon the historic, walkable, village character that defines
Poquonnock Bridge today.
Raleigh Court
Page 24
SITE COMPONENTS
Poquonnock Bridge Village Design Guidelines
LIGHTING
Key Features
• A variety of lighting types
should be used to address
the different needs of civic
spaces, pedestrian oriented
streets, and parking areas.
• Lighting should be designed
to provide a uniform
distribution of light while
also addressing safety needs.
• Lighting should be in keeping
with the character of the
spaces and buildings around
them. Industrial poles and
fixtures concerned purely
with functional requirements
should be avoided.
AVOID
A mix of lighting types, including appropriate street lights, helps to establish
the character of a place.
DO
Street lighting has a strong effect
on the character of a place. This
includes both the distribution of
the light, and the character of
the light fixture/pole itself.
STREET LIGHTING IS A KEY
COMPONENT TO THE MAKING
OF A PLACE
Designing site lighting purely to meet functional requirements denies its ability to support character of place.
Street lights should reflect the character of the district, with articulated treatments
for the base, post, and fixture.
Page 6 Design Guidelines for the Mixed-Use Village Center INTRODUCTION
DESIGN GUIDELINES FORMAT
The majority of the design guidelines follow the general format illustrated below:
Design Element
Being Addressed
Design Guidelines
Section Being
Addressed
Importance of
Considering
Particular Design
Element
Key Features and
Examples Showing
Proper Application
Approaches
and Examples
Showing Improper
Application
Design Guidelines for the Mixed-Use Village Center Page 7
BUILDING DESIGN
This section of the Design Guidelines looks at different
elements of site design within the Mixed-Use Village
Center, ranging from pedestrian connectivity within the
public right of way (ROW) to more specific issues related
to individual sites, like building placement and parking
location.
SITE DESIGN SITE DESIGN
DO AVOID
Buildings in
this district
should not,
however,
be set back
behind more
than a single
layer of casual
parking.
Large parking
fi elds alienate
patrons and
remove the
building from
the residentail
fabric.
Buildings in
the neighborhood
buisiness
district
should repeat
the pattern of
the surrounding
residential
district. A
reasonable
setback from
the road
behind a layer
of landscape,
casual seating
or informal
parking is appropriate.
The residentially mixed use architecture the neighborhood district should be modest setback that surrounding context.
Neighborhood Business
Mixed-use neighborhood,
setbacks approximate the residential The more residen?? ally scaled “Neighborhood Business” district is characterized by buildings
of a lower scale that have a deeper setback from the primary road than the tradi?? onal main
street
Page 8 SITE DESIGN Design Guidelines for the Mixed-Use Village Center
BUILDING LOCATION
Landscaping or seating in the front setback provide
visual interest for passing pedestrians and potential
customers.
Retail buildings set back from the street discourage
shoppers since even adjacent shops or those across the
street are separated by expanses of cars and asphalt.
Buildings may have varying
setbacks and an informal
arrangement, but should engage
the street and contribute to the
character of the public realm
ON A TRADITIONAL MIXEDUSE
STREET, BUILDINGS
ENGAGE THE STREET
Buildings in a village have varying setbacks but still relate to the street.
Buildings should
repeat the pattern
of the surrounding
district. A
reasonable
setback from the
road behind a
layer of landscape
or casual seating
is appropriate
DO AVOID
Front setback area
typically used for
parking is hostile
to pedestrians.
TIVERTON COMMERCIAL FORM-BASED CODE D E S I G N G U I D E L I Key Points
• Residentially scaled retail offi ce with deeper setbacks
and more casual parking
• A variety of scales, roof forms
and materials.
• Typically two story
architecture with a third
fl oor possible in dormers occupied attics
Traditional neighborhood retail was a product of a ground fl oor devoted to providing local
goods and services while the owners lived on the level or levels above. The neighborhood
business district is seeking to re-capture this pattern of use and architecture.
The buildings in this district should be inspired by the appearance of a single
family home where the fi rst fl oor has been converted to retail or offi ce and the
upper fl oors are either residential or offi ce in use.
Tiverton’s neighborhood business
character is best characterized homes that have been converted
for retail or professional office Building Scale & Character
Neighborhood Business
Residentially scaled
mixed-use and live/work
architecture refl ects the
patterns of the surrounding
residential neighborhoods.
Characteristics of live-work / neighborhood retail architecture
Smaller openings and shorter
ceiling heights at upper levels.
Strong cornice or string course
between the storefront and uses
above.
ceiling hgt.
Larger scale and higher ceiling
height at public ground level.
Key Points:
• Ground level retail should
have a minimum ceiling
height of 12’, 16’ preferred.
The taller space and larger
scale of the storefront is
appropriate to the retail • Shorter ceiling heights and
smaller scale openings are
appropriate on upper stories
used for offi ce or residential.
Design Guidelines for the Mixed-Use Village Center Page 9
SITE DESIGN
BUILDING ENTRY LOCATION
BUILDINGS SHOULD BE
ENTERED DIRECTLY FROM
THE SIDEWALK
Key Points
• Entries to retail and
commercial uses should be
prominent and large in scale
to be clearly identifiable to
the public.
• Retail entries should be
located directly off the
sidewalk. Gallerias and
indoor malls are prohibited.
• Residential entries should
be separate from public
entries. The location may be
less prominent and the scale
smaller than for retail.
• Residential entries should
have their own address
separate from the retail.
Building entries should engage
and activate the street edge.
In mixed-use conditions, there
should also be a clear separation
and hierarchy between retail
storefronts and secondary
entries for upper floor uses.
Commercial entries connect directly to a public sidewalk
DO
AVOID
Diagram of entry location(s).
Secondary entrance /
exits may be located
facing the rear parking
area, but retail entrances
should never solely be
located at the rear.
A corner entrance
can provide both main
thoroughfare entry as
well as access from rear
parking.
Retail entrances should
always be located
fronting the main
thoroughfare.
Provide a clear walking
path from the rear
parking area to the front
entrance.
Avoid locating the primary entry at
the rear of a building, regardless of
its proximity to a rear parking area.
A corner entry serves customers
arriving from two different directions.
An inset entry allows more display
area and a protected place to view
merchandise.
Page 10 SITE DESIGN Design Guidelines for the Mixed-Use Village Center
PARKING LOCATION
Off-street parking is least disruptive behind or beside the building.
Parking should
occur behind
the building
Alternate parking
location beside
the building
Avoid parking lots in front of the building.
Narrow curb cut
and small curb
radius reduce
traffic speed
Wide entry and exit lanes, yield conditions
and large curb radii allow traffic to enter or
exit parking lots at dangerous speeds.
Off-Street parking should be
hidden to the greatest extent
possible by buildings, fences,
walls or landscaping. See
Site Components section for
more details on screening and
landscape.
Successful mixed-use streets prioritize the connection between building
frontages and the sidewalk, not front-loaded parking lots
Wall screens
parking
DO
VISIBLE OFF-STREET PARKING
HARMS TRADITIONAL MIXEDUSE
STREETS.
AVOID
Page 11
SITE DESIGN
Design Guidelines for the Mixed-Use Village Center
PARKING LOCATION
Screen parking areas from outdoor seating
and sidewalks by the use of masonry
walls and plantings at a minimum of
three feet in height.
The layout and design of all
means of circulation, including
interior drives, parking areas, and
walkways, should provide for safe,
delineated circulation for pedestrians
and vehicles.
Where parking abuts a sidewalk, a curb
at least six inches high should be included
to delineate the two uses.
Sidewalks or walkways should be included
in commercial areas to provide a safe
route from parking areas and retail
establishments.
Lighting in parking areas
should be oriented to reflect
light away from adjacent
uses. Dark Sky cutoff fixtures
recommended.
Site entrances should be minimized,
including sharing access drives with
adjacent properties and creating contiguous
parking areas wherever possible.
Sidewalks should be a hard surface
with provisions for managing
stormwater runoff included as
necessary. Where sidewalks intersect
with automobile lanes, raised surfaces
and/or durable, decorative alternatives
to conventional pavement shall be
used to connect sidewalks or bike lanes
across the automobile lanes.
Opaque fencing and/or dense landscaping should
be included to screen parking areas from adjacent
residential areas.
Secondary
Bioswale
Continuous
Sidewalk
MAIN STREET
Page 12 SITE DESIGN Design Guidelines for the Mixed-Use Village Center
BIKE PARKING
SAFE AND CONVENIENT
PARKING CAN ENCOURAGE
BICYCLE USE.
Entry
Inverted ‘U’ Comb Toast Wave
Bicycle parking areas should well lit
for safety and security.
Separate bicycle parking from auto
parking and roadways.
The bike parking area should be
convenient to building entrances and
street access, but away from normal
pedestrian and auto traffic.
Bicycle parking facilities should be provided wherever
possible. A highly visible location discourages theft and
vandalism. Also, locate bike racks as to not block the
pedestrian path.
DO AVOID
Bike parking should be convenient
to building entrances and street
access but away from normal
pedestrian and auto traffic.
Bike parking should be
well lit and separated from
parking and roadways for
safety and security.
Bike parking should be provided wherever
A highly visible location promotes
use and discourages theft and vandalism.
Page 13
SITE DESIGN
Design Guidelines for the Mixed-Use Village Center
SIDEWALKS
Key Features
• Sidewalks are composed of
three zones: a furnishing
zone (for trees, lighting,
etc.), a pedestrian zone (for
movement), and a frontage
zone (for activities adjacent
to building).
• Ideally each of these has a
dedicated area.
• In highly constrained
locations, these activities
may overlap but doing so
will constrain use and may
eliminate the ability to
include certain elements,
such as street trees.
AVOID
Well designed sidewalks promote pedestrian use by a range of people,
supporting local business, reducing vehicular use, and improving wellness.
DO
Sidewalks support pedestrian
flow and mixed-use activity while
also accommodating elements
such as street trees, lighting and
other street furniture.
WELL DESIGNED
SIDEWALKS ARE CRUCIAL
TO A PEDESTRIAN FRIENDLY
ENVIRONMENT.
Narrow or discontinuous sidewalks end up compromised by other needs and don’t promote pedestrian use.
The ideal sidewalk includes three distinct zones. The furnishing zone
is closest to the roadway and helps define the edge of the sidewalk and
protects pedestrians from vehicular traffic, the pedestrian zone is dedicated
to circulation and should be at least 5’ for comfort and accessibility and
free of obstructions, and the frontage zone is used for objects and activities
associated with the building, like sales, seating, and signage.
FURNISHING
ZONE
PEDESTRIAN
ZONE
FRONTAGE
ZONE
AVOID
Crosswalks that are designed or located to prioritize automobile traffic create hazardous conditions for pedestrians.
Page 14 SITE DESIGN Design Guidelines for the Mixed-Use Village Center
CIRCULATION
Key Features
• Where sidewalks or other
pedestrian or bicycle ways
intersect with automobile
driveways or lanes, raised
surfaces and/or durable,
decorative alternatives to
conventional pavement
should be used to connect
sidewalks or bike lanes
across the automobile lane.
• Striping across the asphalt
used for an automobile lane
to connect the pedestrian or
bicycle way is not adequate.
Continuous sidewalks promote pedestrian use by a range of people,
supporting local business, reducing vehicular speed, and improving wellness.
DO
The networks of circulation
in mixed use areas should be
designed to balance the needs
of motorists, cyclists, and
pedestrians.
SAFE, BROAD, AND CLEARLY
IDENTIFIABLE PEDESTRIAN
AND NON-MOTORIZED
VEHICLE CONNECTIONS
ENCOURAGE ALTERNATIVE
MODES OF TRAVEL
Raised and painted crosswalks serve as traffic calming measures by extending
the sidewalk across the road and bringing vehicles to the pedestrian level.
Page 15
SITE DESIGN
Design Guidelines for the Mixed-Use Village Center
PUBLIC SPACE
Small and scattered green spaces that are not well-defined or well-located will not add to the quality of the public realm
WELL-SHAPED PUBLIC SPACES
CAN CREATE MEANINGFUL
PLACES FOR PEOPLE TO
GATHER
Concentrate public and green
space into meaningful squares,
parks, and greens and avoid
scattered bioswales and green
“features” that do not relate to
each other or the public realm.
DO
AVOID
Stone walls, trees, walking paths, landscape elements, and buildings all help define public green spaces that can serve
as a gathering place for the community, while also helping with water retention and passive stormwater strategies
Design Guidelines for the Mixed-Use Village Center Page 16
BUILDING DESIGN
This section of the Design Guidelines addresses a number
of issues related to new construction, including additions
to existing buildings, within the Mixed-Use Village Center.
The design principles described will help preserve the
existing architectural character of the neighborhood while
allowing for new development and growth.
BUILDING DESIGN
Page 17
BUILDING DESIGN
Design Guidelines for the Mixed-Use Village Center
BUILDING FORM
DO
Simple massing was traditionally
necessitated by the limited time,
skill, and resources available.
Simple forms translated into
buildings that were economical
for homeowners to build and
easy to maintain. Complexity
and interest occurred with
the grouping of structures
at the scale of the street or
neighborhood rather than within
a single building.
TRADITIONAL BUILDINGS
ARE COMPOSED OF SIMPLE
VOLUMES
Simple rectangular volumes are functional and economical
Key Points
• Traditional buildings take
advantage of the efficiency
and economy of simple
building forms
• Roofs can help express
the hierarchy of building
volumes. Generally, a single
dominant roof form is clearly
legible, with the roofs of
secondary volumes deferring
in scale to the main body of
the building.
• Good proportion and proper
detailing can make even a
basic form elegant Classic main streets are comprised of several buildings, each with its own
character but following general principles that create a cohesive whole.
Avoid multiple changes in slope that are expensive to
build and create a visually frenetic composition
AVOID
This building has been overly complicated by too many roof forms.
The additional ridges, valleys and eaves are a maintenance liability.
Page 18 BUILDING DESIGN Design Guidelines for the Mixed-Use Village Center
BUILDING FORM
Traditional buildings change over
time to accommodate the needs
of new generations. Additions
may provide for an expanding
program, but always defer to the
mass of the original building.
ADDITIONAL FORMS CAN
ADD INTEREST AND SPACE TO
A SIMPLE BUILDING
The transformation of a simple primary volume with a succession of
secondary elements
Various ways to expand and transform an existing building. Additions are most successful when they defer in scale
and proportion to the primary form of the original building. Secondary masses may also be used to compose a new
building to create a modern structure with the character of a traditional home that has been around for generations.
DO
Historic buildings have
a variety of additions,
including new porches,
wings, and dormers.
The new spaces provide
room for growth of the
changing inhabitants and
market trends.
Design Key Points
• While buildings will vary by zone, buildings height Village is 2-1/2 stories.
• Smaller buildings Top floor units contained in
roof mass
Shed dormer provides
opportunity for additional
windows and increased
head height on the top floor.
Keeping eave below third
floor level reduces the scale
A large building can be designed to fit with the scale of
a historic village.
Traditionally, buildings the Cape are appropriate scale of a historic structures should attempt a similar scale and massing.
Building design buildings break up mass reduce scale
Design Guidelines
Key Points
• While buildings heights
will vary by zone, the ideal
buildings height for the
Village is 2-1/2 stories.
• Smaller buildings with useful
spaces between are preferred
over long continuous street
facades
A complex of smaller scale buildings is preferable to a single large structure because the varied massing provides
visual interest and human scale.
Top floor units contained in
roof mass
Shed dormer provides
opportunity for additional
windows and increased
head height on the top floor.
Keeping eave below third
floor level reduces the scale
of the building
Spaces created between the
various buildings provide
opportunities for pedestrian
plazas, courtyards and other
outdoor gathering areas.
1/2 Story of
Residential
A large building can be designed to fit with the scale of
a historic village.
Traditionally, buildings on
the Cape are appropriate to the
scale of a historic village. New
structures should attempt to reflect
a similar scale and massing.
Building Scale
design buildings to
break up mass and
reduce scale
avoid
do Page 19
BUILDING DESIGN
Design Guidelines for the Mixed-Use Village Center
HISTORIC INFILL
WHEN SEEKING TO PRESERVE
HISTORIC CHARACTER, NEW
BUILDINGS SHOULD RESPECT
EXISTING PATTERNS
New buildings in historic settings
should attempt to reflect a
similar scale and massing as the
existing historic buildings.
DO
New larger buildings can be designed to fit within a historic village setting.
Key Points
• While building heights will
vary by zone, new buildings
in historic districts should
respect the existing context
• Smaller buildings with
useful spaces between
are preferred over long
continuous street facades
A complex of smaller scale buildings is preferable to a single large structure because the varied massing provides
visual interest and human scale
Shed dormers provide opportunity
for additional windows and increased
head height on the top floor
Top floor units concealed in roof form
Keeping eave below third floor level
reduces the scale of the building
Ground floor activated and
transparent to contribute to
pedestrian-friendly environment
Page 20 BUILDING DESIGN Design Guidelines for the Mixed-Use Village Center
STOREFRONTS
AVOID
Large displays on a storefront
can entice passers-by and invite
them into a store. Visibility is
important to make potential
customers aware of a store’s
offering and create a sense of
welcome.
Optional signage on
glass - to be legible
from across the street
Sign Band
Clear-glazed door
fronting on the
sidewalk
Sign lights with full
cut-off to minimize
light pollution
Durable material,
such as stone, to
meet the ground
Optional transoms
Clear glazing area
is approx. 70% of
ground floor elevation
GROUND-LEVEL RETAIL
DRAWS SHOPPERS AND
ENLIVENS THE SIDEWALK.
DO
Opaque façades do not invite commercial
activity.
Transparency of a storefront invites customers by letting them know what is
offered and if the shop is welcoming business.
The blank walls and windows are uninteresting
and shoppers may pass on by.
Key Points
• Storefronts should contain
approximately 70% clear
glazed area for the display of
goods and services.
• Displays should allow a view
through to the sales floor
for customers to easily see
whether the shop is open.
Design Guidelines for the Mixed-Use Village Center Page 21
The objects and elements that occupy the space between
buildings have a big impact on the “sense of place” in the
neighborhood. This section addresses how items like site
lighting, landscaping, and walls all contribute to the quality
of the public realm.
SITE COMPONENTS SITE COMPONENTS
Page 22 SITE COMPONENTS Design Guidelines for the Mixed-Use Village Center
LIGHTING
Key Features
• A variety of lighting types
should be used to address
the different needs of civic
spaces, pedestrian oriented
streets, and parking areas.
• Lighting should be designed
to provide a uniform
distribution of light while
also addressing safety needs.
• Lighting should be in keeping
with the character of the
spaces and buildings around
them. Industrial poles and
fixtures concerned purely
with functional requirements
should be avoided.
AVOID
A mix of lighting types, including appropriate street lights, helps to establish
the character of a place.
DO
Street lighting has a strong effect
on the character of a place. This
includes both the distribution of
the light, and the character of
the light fixture/pole itself.
STREET LIGHTING IS A KEY
COMPONENT TO THE MAKING
OF A PLACE
Designing site lighting purely to meet functional requirements denies its ability to support character of place.
Street lights should reflect the character of the district, with articulated treatments
for the base, post, and fixture.
Figure 1. Street Trees (Source: http://citytank.org/)
Figure 1. Street Trees (Source: http://citytank.org/)
Figure 1. Street Trees (Source: http://citytank.org/)
entire
communities to
flora and
designed
reduce
elements
comfort;
vegetation
distances,
interfere
buffers to
wayfinding,
Landscape
landscape
streetscape;
scale of the
into
create
provide
mulched
plantings,
infrequent or no mowing, native ground cover sod, or decorative
Development Standards
LANDSCAPE
cultural experience of the physical environment
provision of open space, street trees and vegetation;
transition between land uses through the use of well
landscaping and/or buffers;
dust pollution and glare;
impacts from impervious surfaces including heat island
disruption to the hydrologic cycle;
and water quality;
temperature, precipitation, and humidity through
evapotranspiration and windbreaks;
Design and construct landscapes that have aesthetic value, utilize sustainable practices to
promote a healthy ecosystem, and encompass both the regional context and the vision for the
Landscaping design and installation shall:
Page 23
SITE COMPONENTS
Design Guidelines for the Mixed-Use Village Center
LANDSCAPING
Landscaping is critical
to softening the urban
environment. Arrangements
should be both beautiful and
resilient.
LANDSCAPING CONTRIBUTES
TO A BEAUTIFUL PEDESTRIAN
ENVIRONMENT AND HELPS
ABSORB WATER.
Key Features
• Select plants that are
tolerant of drought, salt, and
heat
• Species should be native
where possible. No invasive
species allowed.
• Use landscaping as part of
stormwater management
wherever possible.
• Use a variety of plants that
will provide some color yearround.
DO
Landscape used as buffer between sidewalk and parked cars
Integrate stormwater management into overall design.
Use plants that complement the scale of the architecture and street.
Landscaping can help define the
pedestrian realm.
TIVERTON COMMERCIAL FORM-BASED CODE APPENDIX
Th e pedestrian realm, commonly referred to as the sidewalk, is composed
of several spaces or zones. Sidewalks provide a comfortable space pedestrians between the roadway and adjacent land uses. Sidewalks city streets are the most important component of pedestrian mobility. provide access to destinations and critical connections between modes travel, including automobiles, transit, and bicycles. General provisions sidewalks include pathway width, slope, space for street furniture, trees and landscaping, and building ingress/egress.
Sidewalks include four distinct zones: the frontage zone, the pedestrian
(aka walking) zone, the furniture zone, and the curb zone. Th e minimum
widths of each of these zones vary based on street classifi cations as land uses. Th e Street Classifi cations section in this chapter describes recommendations in more detail as applied to individual cities. Th at the end of this chapter recommends minimum widths for each diff erent street types and land uses.
THE PEDESTRIAN
REALM
Th e diff erent zones of the Pedestrian Realm
Page 24 SITE COMPONENTS Design Guidelines for the Mixed-Use Village Center
STREET TREES
Key Features
• Continuous, regularly
spaced street trees are best
for creating a consistent
canopy, but even periodic
trees (where feasible) are
worthwhile.
• Proper installation and
maintenance are required
to promote health and avoid
hazardous situations.
AVOID
DO
For pedestrians, street trees can
serve as a buffer to vehicular
flow and as protection from the
elements, while also adding an
element of natural beauty and
softening an otherwise hard
landscape.
STREET TREES PROVIDE
SEVERAL PEDESTRIANFRIENDLY
BENEFITS.
Improper maintenance or tree selection creates hazards.
Street trees can help delineate zones of a street and add character.
Regularly-spaced street trees create
a continuous canopy that covers
sidewalks while physically and
visually separating pedestrians and
cars.
Where space is limited, trees can be
incorporated in curb extensions.
Pedestrian-friendliness is hard to achieve without trees.
Page 25
SITE COMPONENTS
Design Guidelines for the Mixed-Use Village Center
FENCES AND WALLS
Key Points
• Fences and walls can be
used in combination with
landscaping to help create
separation between the
public realm and private
property.
• Construct fences of durable,
paint-able materials such as
wood, fiberglass, or wrought
iron. Walls may be brick or
stone masonry.
• The design of fences should
be appropriate in scale and
style to the building, site,
and surrounding properties.
PVC, plastic and other synthetic fences
have been shown to lower property
values in historic neighborhoods.
AVOID
Tall stockade type fences are typically
not found in a mixed-use setting.
Dressed masonry walls, wrought iron, and decorative wood fences are appropriate
in more urban and/or formal settings and can help define boundaries
like parking edges or deep setbacks.
Chain-link fencing should be confined
to the least visible locations.
Fences and walls can have a big impact on the character of a place.
DO
Low stone walls and fences
can mark the boundaries of a
property to identify the edge of
public and private space. They
can also serve to help screen
parking lots or define open
spaces.
FENCES AND WALLS HELP
HOLD AN EDGE WHERE
BUILDINGS CAN NOT
Page 26 Design Guidelines for the Mixed-Use Village Center
This final section of the Design Guidelines illustrates how
many of the different design guidelines come together in
different scenarios, including sites where infill and other
improvements help older sites contribute more positively
to the Mixed-Use Village Center.
ILLUSTRATIVE EXAMPLES
SITE CONFIGURATION
Page 27
ILLUSTRATIVE EXAMPLES
Design Guidelines for the Mixed-Use Village Center
ILLUSTRATIVE EXAMPLES
AFTER - FORT HILL ROAD AT DEPOT ROAD/NORTH ROAD
BEFORE - FORT HILL ROAD AT DEPOT ROAD / NORTH ROAD
With a particular focus on
residential conversions and infill,
this site plan shows how the
area of Fort Hill Road at Depot/
North could support additional
residential units without losing
the village character of the MVC
district.
For more details on the
Residential Conversion, located
to west of Johnson’s True Value,
see page 30. For more details on
the Residential Infill area, located
to the east of North Road, see
page 31.
Page 28 ILLUSTRATIVE EXAMPLES Design Guidelines for the Mixed-Use Village Center
ILLUSTRATIVE EXAMPLES
AFTER - FORT HILL ROAD AT NEWTOWN ROAD / VERGENNES COURT
BEFORE - FORT HILL ROAD AT NEWTOWN ROAD / VERGENNES COURT
This site plan illustrates how
the design guidlines could be
applied to new commercial and
mixed-use buildings around the
Fort Hill Road / Newtown Road
intersection.
For more details on Commercial
Redevelopment, see page 32.
Page 29
ILLUSTRATIVE EXAMPLES
Design Guidelines for the Mixed-Use Village Center
HISTORIC CONVERSIONS
AFTER
BEFORE
Where residences
exist on main
thoroughfares in
close proximity
to mixed-use
and commercial
buildings, consider
increasing
residential
density and/
or incorporating
a mixed-use
component.
Regularly-spaced
street trees.
Shared drives and
parking lots.
Parking located
behind and beside
buildings
New buildings in
scale with existing
buildings.
Sidewalk on both
sides of Fort Hill
Road
Fewer curb cuts
interrupting
sidewalk
Fort Hill Road, West of Depot Road / North Road
Fort Hill Road, West of Depot Road / North Road
Page 30 ILLUSTRATIVE EXAMPLES Design Guidelines for the Mixed-Use Village Center
INFILL DEVELOPMENT
AFTER
BEFORE
The lack of sidewalk
on the north
side of Fort Hill
Road, the big gap
in development
along North Road,
and the wide
variety of building
setbacks all make
this an uneven and
underutilized site.
Such sites can be
reconfigured to
support greater
residential density
without hurting the
village character of
the MVC District.
Regularly-spaced
street trees.
New street that
connects two
existing streets (no
cul-de-sac).
Parking located
behind and beside
buildings.
New buildings in
line with existing
historic patterns,
setbacks, etc.
Underutilized land
turned into shaped
space that can serve
as public amenity.
Fort Hill Road, East of North Road
Fort Hill Road, East of North Road
Page 31
ILLUSTRATIVE EXAMPLES
Design Guidelines for the Mixed-Use Village Center
COMMERCIAL REDEVELOPMENT
AFTER - NEWTOWN ROAD
BEFORE - NEWTOWN ROAD
Front-loaded
parking, buildings
with deep setbacks,
wide turning radii,
irregular crosswalks,
and inconsistent
landscaping all
combine to create
a hostile pedestrian
experience. This
critical intersection
can and should be
a major contributor
to the village
character of the
MVC District but
in its current
configuration it falls
short.
Regularly-spaced
street trees.
Shared drives and
parking lots.
Parking located
behind and beside
buildings.
Gas station
designed for both
automobiles and
pedestrians.
Pedestrian islands
and special
pavement to slow
vehicular traffic
and create more
comfortable
crossings.
Fort Hill Road at Depot Road / North Road
Page 32 ILLUSTRATIVE EXAMPLES Design Guidelines for the Mixed-Use Village Center
COMMERCIAL REDEVELOPMENT & STREETSCAPE IMPROVEMENTS
Existing conditions at the
intersection of Newtown
Road and Fort Hill Road.
Building frontages converted
to pedestrian uses
Utilities relocated Screening for parking areas
underground
Improved pedestrian
crossings
New buildings and entries
face street
Continuous sidewalks behind
regularly spaced street trees
AFTER
BEFORE
Page 33
ILLUSTRATIVE EXAMPLES
Design Guidelines for the Mixed-Use Village Center
STREETSCAPE IMPROVEMENTS
BEFORE - TOWN HALL
BEFORE - FORT HILL ROAD
Extremely long curb
cuts and frontloaded
parking
lots create an
unattractive and
unsafe environment
for pedestrians.
Lack of street trees
creates a sense of
barren-ness.
Town Hall and
the school are
separated and
surrounded by a
large sea of parking.
Fort Hill Road at Newtown Road / Vergennes Court
AFTER - FORT HILL ROAD
AFTER - TOWN HALL
Relocating the
parking beside/
behind the buildings,
converting parking
into pedestrianfriendly
amenities,
and reducing curb
cuts creates a
more welcoming
streetscape.
Where large parking
lots are necessary,
organize them in a
way that resembles
a typical street and
block structure
with street trees
and a continuous
sidewalk network
throughout.
Page 34 ILLUSTRATIVE EXAMPLES Design Guidelines for the Mixed-Use Village Center
HISTORIC CONVERSION & STREETSCAPE IMPROVEMENTS
Existing conditions at the
Poquonnock Bridge Fire
House
Building frontages converted
to pedestrian uses
Screening for parking areas Utilities relocated
underground
Building entries face street Storefronts allow visibility
into active uses
Continuous sidewalks behind
regularly spaced street trees
AFTER
BEFORE
Design Guidelines for the Mixed-Use Village Center Page 35
For further reading and guidance, see the following resources:
APPENDIX
The Architectural Pattern Book: A Tool for Building Great Neighborhoods
Urban Design Associates, 2004
Designing Walkable Urban Thoroughfares: A Context Sensitive Approach
Institute of Transportation Engineers, 2010
Model Design Manual for Living Streets
Los Angeles County, 2011
SmartCode (version 9.2) & SmartCode: Bicycling Module
The Town Paper, 2009
Street Design Manual
New York City Department of Transportation, 2009
Urban Street Design Guide
National Association of City Transportation Officials, 2013
APPENDIX
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 1
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 2
PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
113
Appendix D: Lighting Design Guidelines
The following guidelines should be used in developing a lighting design or a site.
1. General:
All exterior lights and sign illumination should be designed, located, installed, and directed in such a manner
as to:
1. Prevent direct glare or light trespass on adjacent property;
2. Employ soft, transitional light levels which are consistent from area to area;
3. Minimize contrast between light sources on the site, lit areas, and dark surroundings; and
4. Be confined within the target area.
2. Light Poles:
Foundations for light poles should not exceed twelve inches above the average surrounding grade and should
be located and designed to avoid potential contact with vehicles.
3. Mounting/Tilting of Lights:
The effectiveness of full cut-off or fully shielded/recessed lighting should not be defeated by mounting or
tilting the bottom of the luminaires at an angle above the horizontal plane.
4. Flag Pole Lighting:
Lighting designed to highlight flagpoles should be targeted directly at the flag.
5. Non-Essential Lighting:
All non-essential lighting (such as display, aesthetic, parking, and sign lighting) should be configured for
“photocell on - time clock off” operation and turned off generally after business hours, leaving only the
lighting or reduced lighting levels necessary for site security. Where necessary, lighting for site security may
be configured for motion or infrared sensor operation.
6. Horizontal Illuminance:
To provide uniform site lighting in vehicle and pedestrian areas that improves visibility and safety and
maintain minimum levels of light and appropriate average levels of light in these areas the site should be
designed to “maintain horizontal illuminance recommendations” set by IESNA in accordance with Table
1. The Zoning Official can make the determination of a lighting zone for a site or an adjacent site where
it cannot be clearly determined. The lighting zone of an adjacent vacant site should be designated in
accordance with the likeliest use in the underlying land use zone given the current or proposed use of the
site being developed or modified.
The horizontal illuminance recommendations in Table 1 are measured in footcandles on the ground. These
are guidelines and it is noted that light levels can be affected by many variables on the site and moderate
deviations from the table in a photometric plan is expected, while wholesale deviations in orders of
magnitude should not be proposed.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019
PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
114
Table 1: Horizontal Illuminance
Levels of Activity (E amples) Maintained Horizontal Illuminance (footcandles)
General Parking and/or
Pedestrian Use Areas
Vehicle Use Area Only
Ave. Min. U-Ratio Ave. Min. U-Ratio
Lighting one 4
Major Cultural, Civic, or Sports Facility
Regional Shopping Center
Fast Food Restaurant
3.6 0.9 4:1 2.0 0.67 3:1
Lighting one 3
Village Commercial Center
Community Shopping Center
Cultural, Civic or Recreational Event
Office Park
Transportation Parking (commuter
lots, etc.)
2.4 0.6 4:1 1.0 0.33 3:1
Lighting one 2
Neighborhood Shopping Center
Industrial Employee Parking
Educational Facility
Religious Institution
Multi-Unit Dwelling Neighborhood
0.8 0.2 4:1 0.5 0.13 4:1
Lighting one 1
Single-Unit Dwelling Neighborhood
NA NA NA NA NA NA
Lighting one 0
Rural Housing
Farmland
Open Space
NA NA NA NA NA NA
Source: Illuminating Engineering Society of North America (IESNA)
Ave.: Footcandles over the illuminated surface
Min.: Minimum footcandles anywhere within the illuminated surface
U-Ratio: Uniformity ratio or the ratio of average footcandles to minimum footcandles
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 1
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 2
PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
115
7. Vertical Illuminance:
To control vertical Illuminance at property boundaries that reduces light trespass and protects
the enjoyment and use of the neighboring properties the site should be designed to limit vertical
Illuminance. For any non-residential uses that are adjacent to residential or green districts, a
photometric plan may be required to show how the lighting design is consistent with Table 2 to the
extent practicable. The maximum vertical illuminance on any vertical surface should be less than the
allowed maximum illuminance for the lighting zone of the adjacent affected property.
Table 2: Verti al Illuminance Measured at the Property Line
Lighting one 0 Lighting one 1 Lighting one 2 Lighting one 3 Lighting one 4
0.05 footcandles 0.1 footcandles 0.3 footcandles 0.8 footcandles 1.5 footcandles
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 116
PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
1 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
DEFINITIONS
2
8. Lighting Fixtures:
The following diagram should be used to determine if the type and style of any proposed fixtures will meet the standards, purpose, and intent of the
lighting regulations.
Figure A: Lighting Fixtu e Examples
Fixtures that produce glare and light trespass
Fixtures that shield the light source to minimize
glare and light trespass and to facilitate be?? er
vision at night
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019 1
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 2
PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
117
Lighting Plans
If a lighting plan is required, the following information should be provided:
a. The following measures of maintained horizontal illuminance (in footcandles) should be calculated
separately for both exclusive vehicle areas (e.g. access drives and loading areas) and shared vehicle
and/or pedestrian areas (e.g. parking lots, sidewalks, courtyards, pedestrian plazas, etc.):
• Maximum;
• Minimum;
• Average; and
• Average to Minimum Uniformity Ratio or U-Ratio
b. A photometric plan indicating the location of every luminaire; horizontal footcandle readings
every ten feet, preferably with appropriate isolines; and where required, vertical illuminance
measurements.
c. Description, details, and/or manufacturer’s cut sheets of luminaires, including component
specifications such as lamps, reflectors, optics and angle of cutoff; timers; mounting poles and
foundation details where applicable.
d. The hours of lighting operation.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
Town of GROTON, CT Zoning Regulations
October 1, 2019
PURPOSE &
APPLICATION
ZONING &
DISTRICT MAPS
DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
USE
STANDARDS
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
SPECIAL
REGULATIONS
SITE
STANDARDS
PROCEDURES &
ENFORCEMENT
REPEALER &
VALIDITY
DEFINITIONS
118
Appendix E: Two-Unit Dwelling Design Guidelines
Areas of Application:
All Zones in the Town where 2-unit dwellings are allowed.
Guidelines:
1. Duplexes on corner lots or through lots should be designed to have entrances to each unit facing different
streets.
2. Detached garages and carports are encouraged to be located to the rear of the property, or be placed to
the side of the units, and should be recessed behind the front façade.
3. Garage and carport entrances should be faced away from the street where possible.
4. Garage and carport entrances facing the street should not occupy more than 50% of the width of the
front façade and should be recessed behind the front elevation.
5. Driveways should be minimized in width and shared between units wherever possible.
6. Driveway widths at the property line should be a maximum of 12 ft and may flare out to a
maximum of 20 ft width on the site.
7. Parking areas should be placed in the side and rear yards and not occupy the required front yard.
8. To promote variety of design, two-unit dwellings with front-to-back configurations or up-and-down
layouts should be considered as an alternative to side-by-side and mirror image development. Layouts
should be varied, and units staggered to create architectural diversity.
9. In predominantly single-family neighborhoods, two-unit dwelling development should:
a. Respect the established scale of the street and avoid long continuous façade frontages by
designing the units to meet any one or a combination of the following:
• Maintain the impression of a single-unit development on the lot
• Visually break large massing into smaller individual components to express strong unit
identity
• Offset the units from one another
• Provide separate structures rather than a single large structure
b. Create visual interest by providing variations in height, massing, and articulation of the front
façades and not a mirror image design.
c. If front porches are a part of the neighborhood pattern, a new building or new entry should
consider including this feature similar in size, location, and proportions to the other buildings in the
neighborhood, but at least six feet in depth.

TABLE OF CONTENTS
SECTION 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS Page
1.1 Policy...................................................... 1
1.2 Purposes.................................................... 1
1.3 Adoption.................................................... 2
1.4 Jurisdiction................................................ 2
1.5 Interpretation, Conflict, and Separability.................. 3
1.6 Saving Provision............................................ 3
1.7 Reservation and Appeals..................................... 4
1.8 Amendments and Conditions................................... 4
1.9 Resubdivision of Land....................................... 4
1.10 Waiver of Requirements...................................... 4
1.11 Enforcement, Violations and Penalties....................... 5
SECTION 2 - APPLICATION PROCEDURE AND APPROVAL PROCESS
2.1 General..................................................... 6
2.2 Sketch Plan (Optional)...................................... 6
2.3 Subdivision Plan............................................ 6
SECTION 3 - SPECIFICATIONS FOR DOCUMENTS TO BE SUBMITTED
3.1 Final Plan.................................................. 9
3.2 Construction Plans.......................................... 10
3.3 Sedimentation and Erosion Control Plan...................... 11
3.4 Digital Data for All Subdivisions...........................11A
SECTION 4 - REQUIREMENTS FOR IMPROVEMENTS, RESERVATIONS AND
DESIGN
4.1 General Requirements........................................ 12
4.2 Lot Improvements and Configuration.......................... 14
4.3 Existing and Proposed Streets............................... 15
4.4 Drainage, Storm Sewers and Flood Prevention................. 22
4.5 Water Supply Facilities..................................... 24
4.6 Sanitary Sewerage Facilities................................ 25
4.7 Sidewalks and Curbs......................................... 26
4.8 Underground Utilities and Street Lighting................... 26
4.9 Parks, Playgrounds and Public Area Reservations............. 26
4.10 Preservation of Natural Features and Amenities.............. 27
4.11 Nonresidential Subdivisions................................. 28
SECTION 5 - ASSURANCE FOR COMPLETION AND MAINTENANCE OF
IMPROVEMENTS
5.1 Improvements and Performance Bond........................... 29
5.2 Inspection of Improvements.................................. 29
5.3 Maintenance of Improvements and Maintenance Bonds........... 30
5.4 Issuance of Building Permits................................ 30
SECTION 6 - DEFINITION OF TERMS 32
APPENDIX - ILLUSTRATIONS
AMENDMENTS
December 4, 1981 Sec. 4.1(6) Energy Efficiency
August 2, 1985 Sec. 3.3 Erosion and Sediment (E&S) Control Plan
November 17, 1986 Sec. 4.7(1) Sidewalks and Curbs
November 1, 1989 Sec. 4.3(1)j) Continuation of Roads and k) Dead-End Roads
December 15, 1989 Sec. 4.3, Table 1 Geometric Standards
June 1, 1992 Sec. 4.7(1)a) Required Improvements
July 8, 1994 Sec. 2.3(9) Signing and Recording of Subdivision Plan
August 1, 2004 Sec. 2.2(2)a) Sketch Plan (Optional); Secs. 2.3(1)b), 2.3(2) and 2.3(3) Application Procedure and Requirements; Sec. 2.3(7) Submission and Review; Sec. 2.3(9)a) & b) Signing and Recording of Subdivision Plan; Sec. 2.3(10) Phasing/Sectionalizing Subdivision Plans; Sec. 4.1(1)c) General Requirements; Sec. 4.1(3) Unanticipated Field Conditions; Sec. 4.2(5)b) Double Frontage Lots and Access to Lots; Sec. 4.2(6)d)i) Classification; Sec. 4.2(6)d)ii) Collector Street; Sec. 4.3(3)b) Widening and Realignment of Existing Roads; Sec. 4.6(1)a) and Sec. 4.6(1)b) On-Site Sewerage System; Secs. 4.6(2)a)and 4.6(2)e) Public Community Sewerage Systems and Sec. 5.1(2)a) and 5.1(2)c) Performance Bond.
November 1, 2005 Sec. 4.9 Parks, Playgrounds, and Public Area Reservations; Section 4.9(5) Payment of Fees in Lieu of Parks, Playgrounds, and Public Area Reservation and Land Dedication and 4.9(6) Exemption from Open Space Requirement.
February 3, 2006 Sec. 3.4 Digital Data For All Subdivisions
November 1, 2006 Sec. 2.3(3) Notice of Public Hearing
1
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
SECTION 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS
1.1 Policy
(1) It is hereby declared to be the policy of the Town of Groton Planning Commission to consider the subdivision of land and the subsequent development of the subdivision as subject to the control of the Town pursuant to State Statutes and the Plan of Development for the orderly, planned, efficient, and economical development of the Town.
(2) Land to be subdivided shall be of such character that it can be used safely for building purposes without danger to health or peril from fire, flood, or other menace, and land shall not be subdivided until proper provision has been made for drainage, water, sewerage, park, recreation or open space improvements, and traffic and circulation systems.
(3) The existing and proposed public improvements shall conform to and be properly related to the proposals shown in the Plan of Development and the Capital Improvement Program, and it is intended that these regulations shall supplement and facilitate the administration of the provisions and standards contained in building and housing codes, Zoning Regulations, and Plan of Development.
1.2 Purposes
These regulations are adopted for the following purposes:
(1) To protect and provide for the public health, safety and general welfare of the Town.
(2) To guide the future growth and development of the Town, in accordance with the Plan of Development.
(3) To provide for adequate light, air, and privacy; to secure safety from fire, flood, and other danger; and to prevent overcrowding of the land and undue congestion of population.
(4) To protect the character and the social and economic stability of all parts of the Town and to encourage the orderly and beneficial development of all parts of the Town.
(5) To protect and conserve the value of land throughout the Town and the value of buildings and improvements upon the land, and to minimize the conflicts among the uses of land and buildings.
(6) To guide public and private policy pertaining to the proper subdivision of land so that adequate and efficient circulation, utilities, open space, parks, and other facilities will be provided.
(7) To provide the most beneficial relationship between the uses of land and buildings and the circulation of traffic throughout the Town, having particular regard to the avoidance of congestion in the
2
streets and highways, and to the pedestrian traffic movements appropriate to the various uses of land and buildings, and to provide for the proper location and width of streets and location of building lines.
(8) To establish reasonable standards of design and procedures for subdivisions and resubdivisions, in order to further the orderly layout and use of land; and to insure proper legal descriptions and monumenting of subdivided land.
(9) To insure that public facilities are available and will have a sufficient capacity to serve the proposed subdivision.
(10) To prevent the pollution of air, streams, and ponds; to assure the adequacy of drainage facilities; to safeguard the water table; and to encourage the wise use and management of natural resources throughout the Town in order to preserve the integrity, stability, and beauty of the community and the value of land.
(11) To preserve the natural beauty and topography of the Town to insure appropriate development with regard to these natural features.
(12) To provide for open spaces through the most efficient design and layout of the land while preserving the density of land, as established in the Zoning Regulations of the Town.
1.3 Adoption
(1) By authority of the Planning Commission of the Town of Groton adopted pursuant to the powers and jurisdictions vested through the provisions of Chapter 124 of the General Statutes of the State of Connecticut, as amended, and other applicable laws, the Planning Commission does hereby adopt these regulations and exercise the power and authority to review, approve, modify and approve, and disapprove plans for subdivision or resubdivision of land within the Town which show lots, blocks, or sites with or without new streets or highways.
(2) By similar authority, the Planning Commission does hereby exercise the power and authority to pass and approve the development of plans for subdivisions and resubdivisions in existence, but not submitted to the Planning Commission for required approval, whether or not shown on an existing map or plan or whether or not conveyances have been made of any of the property included in such subdivisions or resubdivisions.
1.4 Jurisdiction
(1) These Subdivision Regulations shall apply to all subdivisions of land, as defined herein, located within the Town, except for land located within the City of Groton and the Groton Long Point Association Inc.
(2) No land shall be subdivided within the Town until:
a) The subdivider or his agent has submitted an application and necessary supporting data to the Planning Commission;
3
b) Obtained approval of the plan by the Planning Commission; and
c) Filed the approved plan with the Town Clerk.
(3) No building permit shall be issued by the Building Official for any parcel of land which was created by subdivision after the effective date of the provisions of these subdivision regulations, and no excavation of such land or construction of any public or private improvements on such land shall take place or be commenced except in conformity with these regulations.
1.5 Interpretation, Conflict and Separability
(1) Conflict with Public and Private Provisions
a) Public Provisions - The regulations are not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute, or other provision of law. Where any provision of these regulations imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other provision of these regulations or any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other provision of law, the more restrictive or the higher standards shall control.
b) Private Provisions - These regulations are not intended to abrogate any easement, covenant or any other private agreement or restriction, provided that where the provisions of these regulations are more restrictive or impose higher standards or regulations that such easement, covenant, or other private agreement or restriction, the requirements of these regulations shall govern.
(2) Separability - If any part or provision of these regulations or application thereof to any person or circumstances is adjudged invalid by any court or competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall be confined in its operation to the part, provision, or application directly involved in the controversy in which such judgment shall have been rendered and shall not affect or impair the validity of the remainder of these regulations or the application thereof to other persons or circumstances. The Planning Commission hereby declares that it would have enacted the remainder of these regulations even without any such part, provision or application.
1.6 Saving Provision
These regulations shall not be construed as:
(1) Abating any action now pending under, or by virtue of, prior existing subdivision regulations; or
(2) Discontinuing, abating, modifying any penalty accruing or about to accrue under prior existing subdivision regulations; or
(3) Affecting the liability of any person under prior existing subdivision regulations; or
(4) As waiving any right of the municipality under any section or provision existing at the time of adoption of these regulations; or
4
(5) Vacating or annulling any rights obtained by any person except as shall be expressly provided for in these regulations.
1.7 Reservations and Appeals
Upon the enactment by an effective date of these regulations in accordance with applicable laws, the Subdivision Regulations of the Town of Groton, Connecticut, adopted November 19, 1956, as amended, are hereby repealed, except such sections expressly retained herein.
1.8 Amendments and Conditions
(1) Amendments - The Planning Commission may from time to time amend these subdivision regulations, in the manner prescribed by the General Statutes of the State of Connecticut, 1958 Revision, as now or hereafter amended.
(2) Conditions - The applicant has the duty to comply with reasonable conditions laid down by the Planning Commission for design, dedication, improvement, and restrictive use of the land so as to conform to the purposes herein.
1.9 Resubdivision of Land
(1) Procedure for Resubdivision - For any resubdivision of land as defined by the Connecticut General Statutes as amended, a map shall be approved by the Planning Commission by the same procedure, rules, and regulations as for a subdivision.
(2) Procedure for Subdivision Where Future Resubdivision is Possible - Whenever a parcel of land is subdivided and the subdivision plan shows one or more lots containing more than one acre of land, and there is the possibility that the lots could eventually be resubdivided into additional building sites, the Planning Commission may require that the subdivision allow for the future opening of streets and the ultimate extension of adjacent streets or that the plan note that the land can not be further subdivided. Easements providing for the future opening and extension of such streets and a general layout of future lots contained within the parcel may be a requirement of the plan.
1.10 Waiver of Requirements
(1) General - Where the Planning Commission finds that extraordinary hardships or practical difficulties may result from compliance with these regulations, it may approve waivers to these Subdivision Regulations so that substantial justice may be done and the public interest secured, provided that such waiver shall not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of these regulations; and further provided the Planning Commission shall not approve waivers unless it shall make findings based upon the evidence presented to it in each specific case that:
a) The granting of the waiver will not be detrimental to the public safety, health, or welfare or have a significant adverse effect on other adjacent property;
5
b) The conditions upon which the request for a waiver is based are unique to the property for which the waiver is sought and are not applicable generally to other property;
c) Because of the particular physical surroundings, shape or topographical conditions of the specific property involved, a particular hardship to the owner would result, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience, if these regulations are carried out;
d) The waiver will not in any manner conflict with the provisions of the Zoning Regulations, Plan of Development, or regulations of any other Town board or commission.
(2) Conditions - In approving waivers, the Planning Commission may require such conditions as will, in its judgment, secure substantially the objectives of the standards or requirements of these regulations.
(3) Procedures - A petition for any such waiver shall be submitted in writing by the subdivider at the time when the subdivision plan is filed for the consideration of the Planning Commission. The petition shall state fully the grounds for the application and all of the facts relied upon by the petitioner. A three-quarters vote of all the members of the Commission shall be required to approve a waiver and the Commission shall state on its record the reasons for granting the waiver.
1.11 Enforcement, Violations, and Penalties
(1) General
a) It shall be the duty of the Planning Commission to enforce these regulations and to bring to the attention of the Town Attorney any violations or lack of compliance herewith.
b) No owner, or agent of the owner, of any parcel of land located in a proposed subdivision shall transfer or sell any such parcel before a plan of such subdivision has been approved by the Planning Commission, in accordance with the provisions of these regulations, and filed with the Town Clerk.
c) No building permit shall be issued for the construction of any building or structure located on a lot or parcel subdivided or sold in violation of the provisions of these regulations.
(2) Violations and Penalties - Any person, firm, or corporation making any subdivision of land without the approval of the Planning Commission shall be subject to a fine of not more than $200 for each lot sold or offered for sale or so subdivided.
(3) Civil Enforcement - Appropriate actions and proceedings may be taken to prevent any violation of these regulations, to prevent unlawful construction, to recover damages, to restrain, correct, or abate a violation, to prevent illegal occupancy of a building structure or premises; these remedies shall be in addition to the penalties described above.
6
SECTION 2 - APPLICATION PROCEDURE AND APPROVAL PROCESS (Eff:8/1/04)
2.1 General
(1) All prospective applicants for subdivision approval shall submit an application to the Commission and receive approval by the Commission in accordance with these regulations before any offer is made for the sale of any part thereof, and before any permit for the erection of a structure is granted. If a subdivider wishes, he may elect to submit a sketch plan prior to submission of the subdivision application.
(2) Official Submission Dates - In all matters wherein a formal application, request or appeal must be submitted to the Planning Commission, the date of receipt of such application, request, or appeal by such Commission shall be the day of the next regularly scheduled meeting of such Commission, immediately following the day of submission to such Commission or its agent of such application, request or appeal, or 35 days after submission, whichever is sooner, as per the Connecticut General Statutes.
2.2 Sketch Plan (Optional)
If the subdivider elects to submit a non-binding sketch plan, the Planning Commission will review it on an informal basis so that information can be exchanged to aid in the preparation of an application.
(1) Timing and Procedure - A sketch plan will be placed on the Commission's agenda after review by the Planning Department. Every effort will be made to expedite the review.
(2) Contents - The sketch plan shall include:
a) A minimum of four copies of the plan at a scale not greater than 1" = 100', showing lots, easements, roads, open spaces, drainage, contours at 10' intervals, utilities, vicinity map and other information pertinent to the subdivision.
b) Any concept sketches previously developed showing alternative layout.
2.3 Subdivision Plan
(1) Application Procedure and Requirements - The application shall:
a) Be made on forms available at the Planning Department together with required fees.
b) Include all the information required in Section 3 of these regulations. A minimum of nine copies of plans for applications and twelve copies for applications in Noank are required.
c) Be accompanied by evidence of submission of application with the necessary plans and data for a permit to the Connecticut Department of Transportation, where a proposed street or highway joins a state highway or drainage system.
7
(2) The Director of Planning and Development shall refer the plan and related documents to all appropriate public agencies for their review, recommendations, and report.
(3) Notice of Public Hearing – Upon official receipt of the application, the Planning Commission shall call, advertise, and conduct a public hearing in accordance with law for all subdivision applications involving creation of new building lots. All resubdivisions require public hearings. In addition to the above requirements, the following additional notice requirements shall be met for these applications: (Effective 11/1/06)
a) Where a public hearing is held on an application for subdivision or resubdivision the applicant shall, at least 10 days but not more than 30 days in advance of the date of the advertised hearing, deposit notice in a Post Office regularly maintained by the U.S. Government, directed to each of the current owners of lots, plots, or parcels located within 150 feet from the boundaries of the subject properties, as such owners and addresses appear on the CAMA database maintained by the Groton Assessor as of the date such notice is mailed.
b) The Applicant requesting the subdivision or resubdivision approval shall, on or before the date of the public hearing, or at the start of a continued hearing, if continued for the purpose of receiving said certificate described herein file with the Planning Commission a certificate of mailing documenting compliance with Section 2.3(3) a). Under no circumstances shall said certificate be filed after the close of the public hearing.
(4) Public Hearing and Determination
a) At the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall give an opportunity to any interested persons to examine or comment upon the subdivision plan and construction plans.
b) Within 65 days of receipt of an application, in the event no public hearing is scheduled, or within 65 days after closing the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall approve, modify and approve, or disapprove the subdivision application and shall set forth in detail any modifications to which the approval is subject, or reasons for disapproval.
c) The period of time stipulated by the Planning Commission for completion of required improvements shall be five years from the date of approval.
(5) Notice of Determination - Notice of the decision of the Commission shall be published as required by the Connecticut General Statutes.
(6) Failure to Act - The failure of the Commission to act within 65 days of receipt of the application in the event no public hearing is scheduled, or within 65 days of the public hearing thereon shall be considered as an approval, and a certificate to that effect shall be issued by the Commission on demand, provided an extension of time is
8
not granted as per the Connecticut General Statutes.
(7) Submission and Review - Subsequent to the approval of the application, and after review of check prints by the Director of Planning and Development or his designee, 3 paper copies of the construction plans, 2 mylar copies of the original subdivision plan (one fixed line photo reproducible mylar) and 8 copies of the subdivision plan on paper shall be submitted to the Director of Planning and Development for final review. In addition, all offers of dedication to the Town shall be submitted, including deeds of all streets, land for local government uses, utility easements, parks and other easements, agreements, etc., in a form approved by the Town Attorney and a title certification satisfactory to the Town Attorney. No final approval shall be endorsed until all requirements of the Commission have been met.
(8) Vested Rights - No vested rights shall accrue to any plan by reasons of any approval until the approval signature has been endorsed on the subdivision plan and it has been filed with the Town Clerk. The burden of compliance with these regulations rests with the owner, applicant, or developer who is executing the plan to insure that all requirements are met and executed.
(9) Signing and Recording of Subdivision Plan (Eff: 7/8/94)
a) Following final review by the Planning Director and Development, the Chairman, Secretary, or their authorized agent shall sign the two reproducible mylar originals of the subdivision plan and eight paper prints of the subdivision plan.
b) It shall be the responsibility of the subdivider to record the plan in the Land Records of the Town Clerk in accordance with the time limits prescribed by the Connecticut General Statutes. Any subdivision plan not filed within the prescribed time shall become null and void, except that the Commission may, upon written request by the applicant, extend the time for such filing in accord with Connecticut General Statutes.
(10) Phasing/Sectionalizing Subdivision Plans - Prior to granting final approval of a subdivision plan, the Planning Commission may permit the plan to be divided into two or more sections or phases and may impose such stipulations upon the sections as it may deem necessary to assure the orderly development of the plan. The Planning Commission may require that the performance bond be in such an amount as is commensurate with the section or phase of the plan and may defer the remaining required performance bond principal amount until the remaining sections/phases of the plan are scheduled for construction.
9
SECTION 3 - SPECIFICATIONS FOR DOCUMENTS TO BE SUBMITTED
3.1 Final Plan
(1) General - The final plan shall be an accurate Class A-2 survey, prepared by and containing the name and stamp of a Connecticut licensed land surveyor, be produced at a scale not more than 1" = 40', be prepared in pen or pencil, numbered in sequence if more than one sheet is used and be of such size as is acceptable for filing in the office of the Town Clerk. Subdivisions containing proposed streets or other improvements shall also contain the name and stamp of a Connecticut registered professional engineer, who is responsible for their design.
(2) Features - The final plan shall show the following:
a) The location of property with respect to surrounding property and streets, the names of all adjoining property owners of record, and the names of adjoining streets.
b) The location of existing streets, easements, water bodies, streams, and other pertinent features such as swamps, railroads, buildings, parks, cemeteries, drainage ditches, bridges, and other significant features.
c) The location and width of all existing and proposed streets, easements, alleys, other public ways, rights-of-way and building setback lines.
d) The locations, dimensions, areas, and numbers of all proposed or existing lots.
e) The location and dimension of all property proposed to be set aside for park or playground use, or other public or private reservation and conditions, if any, of the dedication or reservation.
f) The name of the owner or owners of land to be subdivided and the name of the subdivider if other than the owner.
g) The date of the map, approximate true north arrow and scale.
h) Sufficient data acceptable to the Director of Public Works to determine readily the location, bearing, and length of all lines, and to reproduce such lines upon the ground and the location of all proposed monuments, iron pins, and drill holes.
i) Name of subdivision and all new streets to be approved by the Planning Commission.
j) Indication of the use of any lot other than residential proposed by the subdivider.
k) Any other information deemed necessary, as determined by the Planning Commission.
10
3.2 Construction Plans
(1) General - Construction plans shall be prepared for all required improvements by a Connecticut registered professional engineer. Plans shall be drawn at a scale of no more than 1" = 40', and map sheets shall be of the same size as the subdivision plan. The following shall be shown:
a) Profiles showing existing and proposed elevations along center lines of all roads. Where a proposed road intersects an existing road or roads, the elevation along the center line of the existing road or roads within 200' of the intersection shall be shown. Computed radii and length of all curves, lengths of tangents, and central angles on all streets shall be indicated.
b) Where steep slopes exist if required by the Commission, cross-sections of all proposed streets at 100' stations shall be shown at five points as follows: on a line at right angles to the center line of the street, elevation points shall be shown at the center line of the street, each property line, and points 25' inside each property line.
c) Plans and profiles showing the locations and typical cross-section of street pavements including curbs and gutters, sidewalks, drainage easements, rights-of-way, manholes, and catch basins; the location of street trees, street lighting standards, and street signs; the location, size and invert elevations of existing and proposed sanitary sewers, drainage pipes and structures, and fire hydrants, showing connections to any existing or proposed utility systems; and exact location and size of all water, gas, or other underground utilities or structures.
d) Location, size, elevation, and other appropriate description of any existing facilities or utilities, including but not limited to, existing streets, sewers, drains, water mains, easements, water bodies, streams, other pertinent features such as swamps, railroads, buildings, and features outside the subdivision at the point of connection to proposed facilities and utilities within the subdivision, the water elevations or adjoining lakes or streams at the date of the survey, and the approximate high and low water elevation of such lakes or streams. All elevations shall be referred to the U.S.G.S. datum plane.
e) Topographic information with a contour interval of 2', referred to as sea-level datum. All datum provided shall be latest applicable U.S. Coast and Geodetic Survey datum and should be so noted on the plan.
f) All specifications and references required by the Town construction standards and specifications, including a site grading plan for the entire subdivision. Where required by the Planning Commission, said grading plan shall show schematic building locations and grading in relation to the buildings to insure proper drainage of building lots.
11
g) Base flood elevation data for all subdivisions greater than either five lots or five acres, located in a flood prone area.
3.3 Erosion and Sediment (E&S) Control Plan (Eff: 8/2/85)
Whenever plans for the proposed subdivision show that it will result in the cumulative disturbance of more than one-half acre of land, the applicant will submit with the subdivision plan an erosion and sediment control plan that presents, in mapped and narrative form, the measures to be taken to control erosion and sedimentation both during and after construction. The E&S plan shall be based on "Connecticut Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control", available from the Council on Soil and Water Conservation of the Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection.
(1) The E&S Control Plan shall include the following:
a) A description of the project and construction activities and a schedule of the major activities to be conducted on the land, including the sequence and anticipated timing of major improvement phases such as clearing, grading, paving, installation of drainage features, utilities and the like.
b) Location of areas to be regraded, disturbed or stripped of vegetation, contour data indicating existing and proposed grades, and location of wetlands and watercourses.
c) Location, design and timing of temporary and final soil erosion and sediment control measures, such as, but not limited to, phasing of construction, haybale dikes, sediment fence, diversions, waterways, stabilization structures, sediment and debris basins, seeding, sodding, revegetation plans and specifications for all unprotected areas, and the like.
d) The design criteria used in the design of control measures.
e) A description of procedures to be followed to maintain sediment control measures.
The plan shall consider and follow the format and outline as described in Chapter 4, Requirements for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Plans, of the Connecticut Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control (January 1985 and as revised).
(2) After review of the E&S Control Plan by the Commission or its designee, the Commission shall certify that the plan is in compliance with these regulations. Certification of the E&S Control Plan shall be included in the Commission's vote to approve a subdivision plan.
(3) The Commission, through its members, agents, and consultants, shall periodically inspect construction projects for which subdivision plans have been approved to verify that E&S controls are consistent with the certified plan.
(4) The bond required for subdivision improvements shall also cover the costs of E&S control measures prescribed by the E&S plan.
12
3.4 Digital Data For All Subdivisions (eff. 2/4/06)
(1) General - The Town has invested significant resources into Computer Aided Drafting and Design (CADD) and Geographic Information Systems (GIS) to further the orderly layout and use of land, insure maintenance of proper legal descriptions, and share data with the public and governmental agencies. The digital data submittal standards herein are intended to assist the Town to receive, process and integrate approved subdivision data into its existing digital data layers to further the intent of the Subdivision Regulations.
(2) Digital data as described in this section shall be provided
to the Planning Department prior to the recording of the
final mylars in the land records, provided that plans
developed without the use of CADD or GIS software shall be
exempt from the requirements of Section 3.4, inclusive.
(3) Features - The final digital data submittal shall address
the following:
a.) Submittal of all information shown on the final plan in a digital format, although the Town does not require that a specific layering or level standard be followed.
b.) An explanation of how the coordinate system was established if it is not shown or indicated on the final plan.
c.) If the submission was developed using Computer Aided Drafting & Design (CADD) or Geographic Information Systems (GIS) software, the following are the requirements for the file types that the Town requires as part of the digital data submittal:
• The latest version of Autodesks, AutoCAD software or any earlier version. If the plans were developed by a software package other than AutoCAD the information shall be provided in Drawing Exchange File (DXF) file format.
• Geographic Information Systems (GIS): ESRI Geodatabase file format (.MDB), ESRI export file format (.E00) or ArcView Shapefile format (.SHP).
d.) The Town can accept a number of delivery media types to facilitate the delivery of the digital data required, including:
• CD-ROM
• Iomega Zip Disk
• IBM formatted 3.5” 1.44 MB Floppy diskette
The Town can accept information compressed using PKZIP or WINZip 7.0. The Town will also accept files attached to an email provided the email attachment does not exceed 3 mb in file size. The Town will also receive files over the internet using File Transfer Protocol (FTP) software providing the file size is under 500 mb. The Town will not accept digital files spanned across multiple floppy diskettes.
13
SECTION 4 - REQUIREMENTS FOR IMPROVEMENTS, RESERVATIONS, AND DESIGN
(Eff: 8/1/04)
4.1 General Requirements
(1) Conformance to Applicable Rules and Regulations - In addition to all requirements established herein, all subdivision plans shall comply with the following:
a) All applicable statutory provisions.
b) The Town Zoning Regulations, building and housing code, and all applicable Town laws, codes or regulations.
c) The Plan of Conservation and Development, Capital Improvement Program of the Town, including all streets, drainage systems, parks, and other items shown on the Plan of Conservation and Development as adopted.
d) The rules of the Connecticut Department of Transportation if the subdivision or any lot contained therein abuts a state highway or connecting street.
e) The policies and the purposes of these regulations as established in Sections 1.2 and 1.3.
(2) Plans Abutting or Straddling Municipal Boundaries
a) Wherever a subdivision of land is planned, the area of which will abut or include land in two or more municipalities, the Planning Commission shall, prior to granting approval, submit the plan to the Regional Planning Agency for an advisory report, in accordance with Section 8-26b of the Connecticut General Statutes, Revision of 1958, as amended.
b) Whenever access to the subdivision is required across land in another local government, the Planning Commission may request assurance from the Town Attorney that access is legally established, and from the Director of Public Works that the access road is adequately improved, and that a performance bond has been duly executed and is sufficient in amount to assure the construction of the access road. In general, lot lines should be laid out so as not to cross municipal boundary lines.
(3) Unanticipated Field Conditions - Where field conditions require additional construction techniques, such as the need for curtain drains to intercept a previously unknown drainage problem which will interfere with a subdivision improvement, the Director of Public Works may require additional measures to be taken. This information shall be relayed by the subdivider to the Director of Planning and Development, whose approval for such additional construction techniques shall be obtained. Failure to take corrective action may result in not issuing any further building permits within the subdivision.
(4) Property Markings - The applicant shall show the location of all concrete monuments, drill holes, and iron pins on the subdivision plan according to the following requirements:
a) Monuments shall be installed on street right-of-way lines, at street intersections and at angle points of curves and block corners. They shall be spaced if possible so as to be within
14
sight of each other, the sight line being contained wholly within the street line. In addition, concrete monuments shall be installed at the corners of all land to be deeded to the Town. The installation of bronze plaques in ledge or large boulders may be substituted for concrete monuments with the approval of the Town Engineer.
b) The external boundaries of a subdivision shall be marked in the field by concrete monuments, iron pins or drill holes as specified and required by the Director of Public Works. These markings shall be placed not more than 1400' apart in any straight line, at all corners, at each end of all curves, at the point where a curve changes its radius, and at all angle points in any line.
c) All such markings shall be set flush with the proposed finished grade, installed in such a manner that they will not be disturbed, and shall be Town of Groton referenced permanent concrete markers with a brass plug identifying the point.
d) All markings shall be properly set in the ground and certified by a Connecticut registered land surveyor on the as-built drawings prior to the time the Planning Commission recommends acceptance of any improvements.
e) The corners of all lots shall be identified with iron pins or drill holes in ledge or large boulders.
(5) Character of Land - Land which the Planning Commission finds to be unsuitable for subdivision or development due to flooding, improper drainage, steep slopes, rock formations, adverse earth formations or topography, utility easements, or other features which could be harmful to the safety, health, and welfare of the inhabitants of the subdivision or its surrounding area, shall not be subdivided or developed unless adequate methods are formulated to solve the problems created by the unsuitable land conditions.
(6) Energy Efficiency - All subdivisions shall be designed to promote energy efficiency, and site design techniques shall include, but not be limited to: 1) house orientation; 2) street and lot layout; 3) vegetation; 4) natural and manmade topographical features; and 5) protection of solar access within the development. An analysis and report concerning these types of factors shall be submitted if deemed necessary by the Commission.
(7) Development Free Area - Where the subdivision borders a manmade facility such as an interstate highway or rail line from which the subdivision should be protected, or a natural feature such as an aquifer or wetland, which should be protected from the subdivision, the Planning Commission may require that no structure, including a septic system in the case of an aquifer, wetland, brook, etc., be constructed within a distance of up to 100' of the facility or feature. In such cases, the Planning Commission may also require plantings, berms, screening, fencing, or additional measures to reduce adverse impacts.
(8) Subdivision and Street Names - The proposed name of the subdivision or streets therein, shall not duplicate or too closely approximate
15
the names of other streets or subdivisions in the Town. The Planning Commission shall have final authority to designate the name of the subdivision and streets therein.
4.2 Lot Improvements and Configuration
(1) Lot Arrangement - The lot arrangement shall be such that there will be no foreseeable difficulties in providing for buildable lots from the standpoint of public health, safety, and general welfare.
(2) Lot Dimensions - Where lots are more than double the minimum required area for the zoning district, the Planning Commission may require that the plan note that the land cannot be further subdivided or that such lots be arranged so as to allow further subdivision and the opening of future streets where they would be necessary to serve such potential lots. Side lot lines shall be at right angles to street lines (or radial to curving street lines) unless a variation from this rule will give a better street or lot plan. Depth and width of properties reserved or laid out for business, commercial, or industrial purposes shall be adequate to provide for the off street parking and loading facilities required for the type of use and development contemplated, as established in the Zoning Regulations.
(3) Lot Configuration - The configuration of each lot shall be laid out generally to approximate a rectangular shape.
(4) Lot access and frontage shall be as per the Town of Groton Zoning Regulations except that the Planning Commission, at its discretion, may impose special stipulations or requirements to insure that all lots are capable of receiving emergency and regular Town services. In cases where proposed lot design and layout may result in marginal service to lots, the Commission may withhold approval if deemed in the public interest.
(5) Double Frontage Lots and Access to Lots
a) Double Frontage Lots - Double frontage and reversed frontage lots shall be avoided, except where necessary to provide separation of residential development from traffic thoroughfares or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation.
b) Access from Principal and Secondary Thoroughfares - Lots shall not, in general, derive access from a principal or secondary thoroughfare. Where driveway access from a principal or secondary thoroughfare may be necessary for several adjoining lots which cannot be served from an interior road, or which cannot be served from an interior road, or which cannot be served by a frontage service road, the Planning Commission may require that such lots be served by a combined access drive in order to limit possible traffic hazards on such street.
(6) Soil Preservation, Grading and Seeding
a) Soil Preservation and Final Grading - In all subdivisions with ten or more lots, no streets shall be accepted until final grading has been completed in accordance with the approved final subdivision plan for 60% of the lots in a subdivision or
16
section thereof where grading is required. At least 4" of topsoil shall be placed and graded on each lot and suitably stabilized.
b) Lot Drainage - Lots shall be laid out so as to provide positive drainage away from all buildings and individual lot drainage shall be coordinated with the general storm drainage pattern for the area. Drainage shall be designed as much as possible to avoid concentration of storm drainage water from each lot to adjacent lots where concentration may negatively impact the adjacent lots and shall be shown on the subdivision plan.
c) Lawn-Grass Seed and Sod - Lawn-grass seed shall be sown in accord with suggested practices as outlined in "Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook" 1972, U.S.D.A. All lots shall be seeded from the curb line back a distance of 25' from the right-of-way line. Sod and other suitable stabilization techniques may be substituted for seeding.
(7) Debris and Waste - No cut trees, timber, debris, junk, rubbish or other waste materials of any kind shall be buried in any lot or left or deposited on any lot, street, or other area within the subdivision unless the disposal area is inspected by the Town Sanitarian and is certified as being safe. Removal of same from a lot shall be required prior to issuance of any Certificate of Occupancy for that subdivision lot. No such material shall be left or deposited in any area of the subdivision at the time of dedication of public improvements.
(8) Fencing - Each subdivider and/or developer shall be required to furnish and install fences wherever the Planning Commission determines that a hazardous condition may exist. The fences shall be constructed according to standards established by the Director of Public Works. Fence specifications and details shall be included on the plans. No acceptance of public improvements shall be made until said fence improvements have been duly installed.
(9) Waterbodies and Watercourses - If a tract being subdivided contains a waterbody, or portion thereof, lot lines shall be so drawn as to distribute the entire ownership of the waterbody among the fees of adjacent lots. The Planning Commission may approve an alternative plan whereby the ownership of and responsibility for safe maintenance of the waterbody is assured. No more than 25% of the minimum area of a lot required under the Zoning Regulations may be satisfied by land which is under water. Where a watercourse separates the buildable area of a lot from the street by which it has access, provisions shall be made for installation of a culvert or other structure, of design approved by the Director of Public Works.
4.3 Existing and Proposed Streets
(1) General Requirements
a) Proposed streets shall be in harmony with existing or proposed roads as shown on the Plan of Development adopted by the Commission, especially with regard to safe intersections and so arranged and of such width as to provide an adequate and
17
convenient system for present and prospective traffic needs.
b) In general, lots which will be created as a result of a subdivision shall be served by a public street to insure safety and health.
c) Access to Accepted Street
i) All subdivisions shall have frontage on and vehicular access from an existing Town accepted street, state highway, or street shown on a plan approved by the Planning Commission and recorded in the Land Records of the Town of Groton. In subdivisions containing 25 or more lots, the Commission may require that the development be accessible from two directions.
ii) Such street or highway shall be suitably improved so as to provide for safe circulation and shall be capable of accommodating the increased traffic generated by the subdivision.
iii) When land fronting on an existing street or an unaccepted street is proposed for subdivision and the street does not meet the construction standards and right-of-way width required by Town standards, the Commission may require dedication of additional right-of-way and construction of improvements by the developer.
d) Classification - All streets shall be laid out, designed, and constructed in accordance with the following classifications:
i) Thoroughfares - Thoroughfare streets are the major arteries in the Town and consist of principal and secondary types which are indicated below:
Principal - A major traffic street carrying comparatively long distance, fast moving traffic between communities and defined as a principal thoroughfare in the Plan of Conservation and Development.
Secondary - A street designed to carry heavy volumes of intra-town traffic between important points in the Town and defined as a secondary thoroughfare in the Plan of Conservation and Development.
ii) Collector Street - A street carrying moderate volumes of traffic and serving areas which do not generate high traffic volumes. These streets provide links between access streets and thoroughfares and are defined as collector streets in the Plan of Conservation and Development.
iii) Access Street - A street primarily providing access to individual properties and not likely to be used by traffic other than that having an origin or destination on the street.
iv) Village Road - A street whose purpose is to serve a fixed number of lots (dwelling units) which will not overburden the roadway. The primary function of this street is access to property, not traffic movement.
18
v) Sub-village Road - A short street such as a cul-de-sac, loop street, or one-way loop, which serves a limited number of properties and which cannot be extended to serve undeveloped areas in the future.
e) Topography and Arrangement
i) Streets that are appropriately related to the general topography of the land are encouraged. A combination of steep grades and curves shall be avoided. Specific standards are contained in the design standards of these regulations.
ii) All streets shall be properly related to special traffic generators, such as industries, business districts, schools, churches and shopping centers, to population densities and to the pattern of existing and proposed land uses.
iii) Access, village, and sub-village roads shall be laid out to discourage use by through traffic, to permit efficient drainage and utility systems, and to require the minimum number of streets necessary to provide convenient and safe access to property.
iv) The gridiron street pattern need not be adhered to, and the use of curvilinear streets and loop streets is encouraged, where such use will result in a more desirable layout (see Appendix, Figure 1).
v) Proposed streets shall be extended to the boundary line of the tract to be subdivided, unless prevented by topography or other physical conditions, or unless, in the opinion of the Planning Commission, such extension is not necessary or desirable for the coordination of the layout of the subdivision with the existing layout or the more advantageous future development of adjacent land.
vi) Where the Commission determines that the street pattern for a proposed development should connect to an existing, proposed, or previously laid out street or right-of-way, the Commission may require the extension and construction of the street or right-of-way by the applicant to assure a safe, efficient circulation system.
vii) In business and industrial developments, the streets and other accessways shall be planned in connection with the grouping of buildings, location of rail facilities, and the provision of alleys, walks, parking areas and truck loading and maneuvering areas, and so as to minimize conflict of movement between the various types of traffic, including pedestrian.
f) Blocks
i) Blocks shall have sufficient width to provide for two tiers of lots of appropriate depths. Exceptions to this prescribed block standard shall be permitted when deemed
19
appropriate by the Planning Commission. Blocks adjacent to major streets, railroads, and waterways are examples where exceptions might be appropriate.
ii) Block lengths in residential areas shall not exceed 1000' or ten times the minimum lot width required in the zoning district, whichever is less, nor be less than 400' in length, unless specifically permitted by the Planning Commission. Wherever practicable, blocks along thoroughfares shall be not less than 500' in length.
iii) In long blocks, the Planning Commission may require the reservation of easements through the block to accommodate utilities, drainage facilities, or pedestrian traffic. Such easements shall not be less than 20' wide and shall be improved and dedicated as required by the Planning Commission.
iv) Blocks designed for industrial uses shall be of such length and width as may be determined suitable by the Planning Commission for prospective use.
g) Generally, access from lots directly onto principal or secondary thoroughfares shall be discouraged unless specifically authorized by the Commission. The Commission may also require screening or a buffer between lots and thoroughfares where appropriate.
h) Traffic Control Devices and Signs - The applicant shall provide, at his expense, and install, all traffic control devices and signs required by the Town Traffic Authority prior to acceptance of the street by the Town. Street name signs are to be furnished and installed by the developer at all intersections within or abutting the subdivision, the type and location of which are to be approved by the Director of Public Works.
i) Reserve Strips - The creation of privately owned reserve strips of land that control access to any part of the subdivision from any land dedicated to the public use, including streets, shall not be permitted.
j) Continuation of Roads - The arrangement of streets shall provide for the continuation of existing or proposed streets between adjacent properties when such continuation is necessary for convenient movement of traffic, effective fire protection, for efficient provision of utilities, and/or where such continuation is compatible with the Plan of Development. (Eff: 11/1/89)
k) Dead-end Roads - Permanent dead-end roads in residential subdivisions shall be limited to serving 15 lots and shall not exceed an extreme length of 1,200' (measured to the end of the turnaround right-of-way). A cul-de-sac turnaround shall be provided at the end of all permanent dead-end streets, having a diameter of 110' at the right-of-way line and 90' at the curb line. The Commission may require a center island with a 15' radius which shall be planted as provided by the Planning Commission.
Where a road does not extend beyond the boundary of the property and its continuation is not required by the Planning Commission for access to adjoining property, the Planning Commission may require the reservation of an appropriate easement to adjacent property to accommodate drainage facilities, utilities, or pedestrian traffic.
Where in the opinion of the Commission, a road is likely to be extended in the future, the Commission may allow a temporary dead-end road serving not more than 20 lots and not exceeding an extreme length of 1,500' (measured to the end of the turnaround right-of-way). A temporary turnaround, built to the same standards as for a permanent dead-end road, shall be provided for all temporary dead-end roads, with the notation on the subdivision plan that land outside the normal street right-of-way shall revert to abutters whenever the street is continued. It shall also be noted on the plan that this is a temporary cul-de-sac, designed to be connected in the future to neighboring properties and the road right-of-way necessary to make this connection shall be reserved on the plan and deeded to the Town.
In commercial and industrial park developments, the Commission may approve longer dead-end roads where the potential amount and type of development poses no detriment to the health, safety, and general welfare of the public.
Where no public water is present to serve the subdivision, the Commission may reduce the maximum length of and number of lots served on the cul-de-sac. (Eff: 11/1/89)
(2) Design Standards
a) General - The design standards for roads contained in Table 1 are hereby required. The Commission has the responsibility of determining the appropriate classifications of the circulation system as per 4.3(1)d) servicing the subdivision, as well as the appropriate width of pavement.
b) Geometric Design
i) The design and surfacing of all streets, roads, and facilities and improvements within the public right-of-way shall be undertaken by the applicant in accordance with all Town standards and the standards and details of the Road and Drainage Construction Standards of the Town. Said design shall be incorporated into the construction plans required to be submitted by the developer for plan approval.-
ii) After sewer, water, and utilities have been installed, the applicant shall construct curbs and shall surface the roadways. Adequate provision shall be made for culverts, drains, and bridges.
c) Excess Right-of-way - Right-of-way widths in excess of the standards designed in these regulations shall be required whenever, due to topography, additional width is necessary to provide adequate earth slopes.
20
21
TABLE 1
GEOMETRIC STANDARDS
Thoroughfare Collector Access Village-vage
Subill Road Road
Right-of-way Width 60-100' 60' 50' 50' 40'
Pavement Width 40-44' 34-40' 30' 26' 20'
Max./Min. Grade (%) 6/0.5 7/0.5 10/0.5 10/0.5 10/0.5
Min. Radius of Curve
on Center Line 750-1500' 500' 150' 150' 150'
Min. Sight Distance
Stopping/Passing 500'/1700' 300'/NA 200'/NA 200'/NA 200'/NA
Design Speed (MPH) 50 45 30 25 25
Intersection Street
Line Curve Radii
Thoroughfare 35' 30' 25' 25' 25'
Collector 30' 30' 25' 25' 25'
Access 25' 25' 25' 25' 25'
1) Village Road standard shall not be considered where there are more than 20 dwelling units having access onto the proposed road or where total through traffic on the road exceeds substantially more than 400 Average Daily Traffic (ADT) (approximately 40 dwelling units). The applicant shall demonstrate that there are at a minimum two off-street parking spaces for each dwelling unit proposed. (Eff: 12/15/89)
2) Sub-village Road standard shall not be considered where there are more than 10 dwelling units having access onto the proposed road or where total through traffic on the road exceeds substantially more than 200 Average Daily Traffic (ADT) (approximately 20 dwelling units). The applicant shall demonstrate that there are at a minimum two off-street parking spaces for each dwelling unit proposed. Cul-de-sac roads to which this standard is applied shall not exceed a length of 450'. (Eff: 12/15/89)
3) Grades up to 10% may be used but not for a distance greater than 500 feet.
20
d) Railroads and Limited Access Highways - Railroad rights-of-way and limited access highways, where so located as to affect the subdivision of adjoining lands, shall be treated as per the following:
i) In districts zoned for business, commercial, or industrial uses, the nearest street extended parallel or approximately parallel to the railroad shall, wherever practicable, be at a sufficient distance therefrom to ensure suitable depth for commercial or industrial sites.
ii) Streets parallel to the railroad and limited access highway, when intersecting a street which crosses a railroad at grade shall, to the extent practicable, be at a distance of at least 150' from the railroad right-of-way.
e) Intersections
i) Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at right angles. No more than two streets shall intersect in close proximity to any one point along a roadway so as to create a safety hazard.
ii) Proposed new intersections along one side of an existing street shall, wherever practicable, coincide with any existing or proposed intersections on the opposite side of such street. Street jogs with center-line offsets of less than 150' shall not be permitted except where the intersected street has separated lanes without median breaks at either intersection (see Appendix). Intersections of thoroughfares shall be at least 1000' apart.
iii) At intersections of streets, the rights-of-way shall be joined by curves with not less than 25' radius and minimum length of tangent of 25' for sub-village roads, village roads, and access streets; 30' for collector streets; and 35' for thoroughfares.
iv) Intersections shall be designed with a flat grade wherever practical. In hilly or rolling areas, at the approach to an intersection, a leveling area shall be provided having not greater than a 2% slope for a distance of 50', measured from the nearest right-of-way line of the intersecting street.
v) Where any street intersection or driveway access will involve earth banks or existing vegetation that would create a traffic hazard by limiting visibility, the developer shall remove such ground and/or vegetation (including trees) in connection with the grading of the public right-of-way to the extent deemed necessary to provide an adequate sight distance.
21
f) Bridges and Other Improvements - Bridges and other improvements of primary benefit to the applicant, as determined by the Planning Commission, shall be constructed at the expense of the applicant without reimbursement from the Town.
(3) Road Dedication and Reservations
a) Reservations - The Commission may require the reservation of the full right-of-way for any existing or proposed street and may require the construction of all or part of the facilities within the right-of-way required for the appropriate classification.
b) Widening and Realignment of Existing Roads - Where a subdivision borders an existing road or when the Plan of Conservation and Development indicates or the Commission determines a need for realignment or widening of a road that would require use of some of the land in the subdivision, the applicant may be required to improve and dedicate at his expense such areas for widening or realignment of such roads. Such frontage roads and streets shall be improved and dedicated by the applicant at his own expense to the full width as required by these Subdivision Regulations, provided that if the applicant owns land on only one side of said road, he need only realign that side and only provide one-half the necessary width. Land reserved for any road purpose may not be counted in satisfying yard or area requirements of the Zoning Regulations, whether the land is to be dedicated to the Town in fee simple, or an easement is to be granted to the Town.
c) Perimeter Streets - No new perimeter half streets shall be permitted in new subdivisions (see Appendix, Figure 4).
4.4 Drainage, Storm Sewers, and Flood Prevention
(1) General Requirements
a) The Planning Commission shall not approve any plan of subdivision which does not make adequate provision for storm or flood water runoff control. The storm water management system shall be separate and independent of any sanitary sewer system and shall, wherever possible, utilize techniques designed to recharge ground water, minimize downstream flooding, etc.
b) Storm sewers, where required, shall be designed in accordance with the Town Road and Drainage Construction Standards and a copy of design computations shall be submitted along with plans.
c) Inlets shall be provided so that surface water is not carried across or around any intersections, nor for a distance of more than 350' in the gutter. When capacities are exceeded at a point, catch basins shall be used to intercept flow at that point.
(2) Nature of Storm Water Facilities
22
a) Location - The applicant may be required by the Planning Commission to carry away by pipe or open ditch any spring or surface water that may have existed previous to or may result from the subdivision. Such drainage facilities shall be located in the road right-of-way where feasible, or in perpetual unobstructed easements of appropriate width, and shall be constructed in accordance with the Town Road and Drainage Construction Standards.
b) Accessibility to Public Storm Sewers - If a connection to a public storm sewer will be provided eventually, as determined by the Director of Public Works and the Planning Commission, the developer shall make arrangements for future storm water disposal at the time the plan receives approval. Provision for such connection shall be incorporated in the performance bond required for the subdivision plan.
c) Accommodation of Upstream Drainage Areas - A culvert or other drainage facility shall be large enough to accommodate potential runoff from its entire upstream drainage area whether inside or outside the subdivision. The Director of Public Works shall determine the necessary size of the facility, based on applicable construction standards and specifications assuming conditions of maximum potential watershed development permitted by the Zoning Regulations.
d) Effect on Downstream Drainage Areas - The applicant shall study the effect of the subdivision on existing downstream drainage facilities outside the area of the subdivision. Where it is anticipated that the additional runoff incidental to the development of the subdivision will overload an existing downstream drainage facility, the Planning Commission may require the developer to take steps to minimize the impact on downstream properties.
e) Flood Prone Areas
i) If a proposed subdivision is in a flood prone area, (1) it shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage within the flood prone area; (2) all public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electric, and water systems, shall be located and constructed to minimize and eliminate flood damage; and (3) adequate drainage shall be provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
ii) Flood prone areas shall be preserved from any and all destruction or damage resulting from clearing, grading, or dumping of earth, waste material, or stumps (refer to Section 3.2(1)g)).
iii) All subdivisions greater than five lots, located in a flood prone area, shall include base flood elevation data.
(3) Dedication of Drainage Easements
23
a) General Requirements - Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse or drainageway, a storm water easement or drainage right-of-way may be required which conforms to the lines of such watercourse or drainageway and is adequate for retaining potential drainage flows within the easement or right-of-way. Wherever possible, drainage should be contained by an open channel with landscaped, gently sloping banks (See Appendix, Figure 7).
b) Drainage Easements
i) Where topography or other conditions make impractical the inclusion of drainage facilities within road rights-of-way, perpetual unobstructed easements at least 20' in width for such drainage facilities shall be provided across property outside the road right-of-way and with satisfactory access to the road. Drainage easements shall be carried from the road to a natural watercourse or to other drainage facilities.
ii) When a proposed drainage system will carry water across private land outside the subdivision, appropriate drainage rights must be secured and indicated on the plan at no cost to the Town. Said rights may be required to be deeded to the Town.
iii) Where necessary for drainage or protection of watercourses, the Commission may require the applicant to grant drainage or conservation easements to the Town along watercourses.
iv) Low-lying lands along watercourses subject to flooding or overflowing during storm periods, whether or not included in areas for dedication, shall be preserved and retained in their natural state as drainage ways.
4.5 Water Supply Facilities
(1) General Requirements - If a public water supply is within 1000' of a subdivision boundary, the lines shall be extended to serve the subdivision. When a public water supply is more than 1000' from the subdivision boundary, the Commission may require a public water system capable of providing domestic water use and fire protection if it finds that the size of the proposed development requires public water to insure the public health and safety.
(2) Fire Hydrants - Where public water is available or required, fire hydrants may be required where necessary to insure the public health and safety. Fire hydrants shall be located no more than 1000' apart and within 500' of any structure and shall be approved by the applicable protection unit. To eliminate future street openings, all underground utilities for fire hydrants, together with the fire hydrants themselves, and all other supply improvements shall be installed before any final paving of a street shown on the
subdivision plan.
24
4.6 Sanitary Sewerage Facilities
(1) On-site Sewerage Systems - Individual on-site sewerage systems shall be allowed provided that:
a) There is no public sewerage system existing within 1000' of any boundary of the subdivision and public sewers will not be available within a period of five years as determined by the Town Sewer Authority, or where said subdivision is within the sewer avoidance area on the latest Facilities Plan Update of the Water Pollution Control Authority, or where sewers will be available within a period of five years and a capped sewer system is installed along with the on-site system in accordance with subsection (2) Public Community Sewerage Systems of this regulation.
b) All lots on which such systems are proposed shall be approved for on-site systems by the applicable Health District, and a comprehensive sewerage report shall be submitted to the Planning Commission prior to approval of the subdivision.
c) Where the need for easements for future sewer construction can be identified, such easements shall be indicated on the subdivision plan and shall be dedicated to the Town at the time of subdivision approval.
(2) Public Community Sewerage Systems
a) Public Community Sewerage Systems shall be constructed throughout the subdivision and connected to existing public sewerage facilities when such facilities are within 1000' of any boundary of the proposed subdivision, unless such connection would result in extension of sewer lines in a manner inconsistent with the latest Facility Plan Update of the Water Pollution Control Authority.
b) When public sewerage facilities will be made available to the area within five years, as determined by the Town Sewer Authority, public community sewerage systems shall be installed throughout the subdivision and up to the boundary for future connections. Such systems shall be capped and shall include all underground sewer lines for a complete system from the homes, along streets or easements, to the subdivision boundary.
c) Where a subdivision has frontage on an existing street, sewer lines may be required within the existing right-of-way.
d) Sanitary sewers shall be located within street or alley rights-of-way as required by utility line assignment in the Town Road and Drainage Construction Standards, unless topography dictates otherwise. When located in easements on private property, access shall be provided to all manholes. The proposed location of sewer lines shall be shown on the final plan of subdivision, and easements to the Town shall not be less than 20' wide.
e) Approval to connect to sewers shall be obtained from the Director of Public Works, acting as agent to the Water Pollution Control Authority, prior to obtaining subdivision approval. Sanitary sewer facilities shall be in conformance with Town Public Works Department design criteria and engineering requirements. All sanitary sewerage facilities shall be compatible with the long range planning for sewering the entire tributary area as specified in the latest Facility Plan Update of the Water Pollution Control Authority.
25
4.7 Sidewalks and Curbs
(1) Required Improvements
a) Four-foot wide concrete sidewalks shall be included in the non-pavement right-of-way on both sides of proposed local roads such as access, village and subvillage roads, and five-foot wide sidewalks shall be similarly included in arterial and collector roads and any other roads, regardless of classification which border commercial, industrial or multi-family tract subdivisions. Where subdivisions front on existing roads, the Commission may require sidewalks along the respective subdivision lot frontage. In addition, in order to promote pedestrian safety and provide for a convenient sidewalk system for present and prospective needs, the Commission may require extension of the sidewalk for a reasonable distance beyond the subdivision lot frontage. These requirements shall apply to all subdivisions, unless waived by the Commission in accordance with Section 1.10 of these regulations. This section shall not supersede the requirements for sidewalk installation prescribed in the Zoning Regulations for sites subject to site plan review and approval by the Planning Commission. (Eff: 6/1/92)
b) Concrete curbs shall be provided on both sides of all streets in all subdivisions and shall be constructed to provide for driveway curb cuts and sidewalk ramps at intersections at the time of construction.
c) All sidewalk and curb construction shall comply with the Town Road and Drainage Construction Standards.
d) All curbs shall be designed with cuts at all pedestrian crosswalks to provide adequate and reasonable access for the safe and convenient movement of physically handicapped persons. The following specifications shall be complied with: 1) the cut shall have a surface that is textured and nonslip; 2) the cut shall be at least 36" wide; and 3) the cut shall have a slope not greater than 1" per foot and shall be beveled at the bottom.
e) In lieu of the required sidewalks, the Commission may require construction of a 6' wide bituminous concrete sidewalk/bike path to encourage the use of bikes.
(2) Pedestrian Access - The Planning Commission may require, in order to facilitate pedestrian access from the roads to schools, parks, playgrounds, or other nearby roads, perpetual unobstructed easements at least 20' in width. Easements shall be indicated on the plan and shall be improved as required by the Planning Commission.
4.8 Underground Utilities and Street Lighting
(1) Underground utilities (electric, telephone, CATV, etc.) shall be provided in all subdivisions in accordance with the design criteria and engineering requirements of the Department of Public Works. Street lighting fixtures shall be provided in all subdivisions and shall not be spaced more than 300' apart. The developer shall install fixtures prior to the acceptance of the street.
26
(2) All utilities shall be located in accordance with the requirements of the Town Road and Drainage Construction Standards.
4.9 Parks, Playgrounds, and Public Area Reservations (New Eff: 11/1/05)
(1) General - The Planning Commission shall require that land be reserved for parks and playgrounds, natural open space areas, or other public purposes. In determining the land to be reserved under this Section, the Commission may consider not only the tract or tracts of land proposed to be immediately subdivided, but also any other tract or tracts owned, controlled or under agreement to buy or optioned by the subdivider.
(2) Standards
a) Each reservation shall be of suitable size, dimensions, topography, and general character and shall have adequate road or pedestrian access for the particular purposes envisioned by the Planning Commission.
b) The applicant shall dedicate all such areas to the Town as a condition of subdivision plan approval. Any reservation shall be shown on the subdivision plan and indicated as "To be deeded to the Town of Groton."
(3) Size of Reservations
a) The total area to be reserved shall be no less than 10% of the gross area of the subdivision unless otherwise approved by the Commission.
b) The Commission may require that the area be located at a suitable place, such as on the edge of the subdivision, so that additional land may be added at such time as the adjacent land is subdivided.
(4) Sites
a) Land so reserved shall be of a character and location suitable for use as a playground, playfield, or for other public purposes, and shall be relatively level and dry; and shall be improved by the applicant to reasonable standards required by the Planning Commission, which improvements shall be included in the performance bond. Said improvements may include providing access, landscaping, play equipment, and any other reasonable improvements. The Commission may permit the dedication of sites which contain unique, distinctive characteristics such as a marsh or a swamp if it is determined that there would be no demand for an active recreation area and if the area possesses some unusual qualities.
b) A site shall have a total frontage on one or more streets of at least 50', and no other dimension of the site shall be less
27
than 200', unless otherwise specifically approved by the Commission.
(5) Payment of Fees in Lieu of Parks, Playgrounds, and Public Area Reservation and Land Dedication
Where dedication of open space will not meet the purposes of this section, the subdivider may, with approval by the Commission, pay a fee to the town or pay a fee to the town and transfer land to the town in lieu of the requirement to provide open space. Lands offered for open space under this Section may be located off the subject property. Any lands dedicated for open space under this Section shall be deeded to the Town of Groton as specified in Section 4.9(2)(b) and comply with the requirements set forth in Section 4.9(1)-(4) as required by the Commission.
The formula for payments or combination of payments and dedication of land will be established based on the following procedures:
a) Such payments or combination of payment and the fair market value of land transferred shall be equal to not more than ten percent (10%) of the fair market value of the land to be subdivided prior to the approval of the subdivision.
b) The fair market value of the land shall be determined by a licensed appraiser jointly approved by the Commission and the applicant and the appraisal made part of the record. The cost of the appraisal shall be the responsibility of the applicant.
c) In cases where there is a combination of both payment and dedication of land, the deed, accompanied by a Certificate of Title, per Section 5.1(1)(a), for the land shall be transferred at the time the subdivision plans are recorded.
d) Payments due to the Town under this section are payable at the time the final subdivision maps are presented for signature by the Chairman of the Planning Commission and shall be paid, in full, prior to the recording of the signed subdivision mylars.
e) Payments generated under the provisions of this Section shall be deposited in a designated fund which shall be used for the purposes of preserving open space or acquiring additional land for open space or for recreational or agricultural purposes.
(6) Exemption from Open Space Requirement
The Commission shall require reservations of land for parks, playground and natural open space or other public purposes or may accept a fee in lieu of public area reservation and land dedication or combination of payment and land in all subdivisions except in the following instances:
a) The open space requirements of this section shall not apply where the transfer of all land in a subdivision of less than
28
five parcels is to a parent, child, brother, sister, grandparent, grandchild, aunt, uncle or first cousin for no consideration, or if the subdivision is to contain affordable housing, as defined in section 8-39a, equal to twenty per cent or more of the total housing to be constructed in such subdivision. Eligibility for an exemption hereunder shall be evidenced by covenants, restrictions, contracts, or other legally binding documents as the Commission may approve, which documents shall be filed in the Land Records.
4.10 Preservation of Natural Features and Amenities
(1) General - Existing features which would add value or be of benefit to residential development or to the Town as a whole, such as trees, watercourses and falls, beaches, historic spots, and similar irreplaceable assets, shall be preserved in the design of the subdivision. No trees shall be removed from any subdivision nor any change of grade of the land effected until approval of the plan has been granted. All trees on the plan required to be retained shall be preserved, and all trees where required shall be welled and protected against change of grade.
(2) Shade Trees
a) The applicant shall plant shade trees at front lot lines in the subdivision. In general, one tree shall be planted for every 75' of frontage along both sides of each road.
b) New trees to be provided pursuant to these regulations shall be shown on the subdivision plan, and such trees shall have a minimum trunk diameter (measured 12" above ground level) of not less than 2". Only long-lived shade trees such as Sugar Maple, Red Oak, or London Plane, acceptable to the Planning Commission, shall be planted.
4.11 Nonresidential Subdivisions
(1) General - A nonresidential subdivision shall be subject to all the requirements of these regulations.
(2) Standards - In addition to these regulations, the applicant shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Commission that the street, parcel, and block pattern proposed is specifically adapted to the uses anticipated and takes into account other uses in the vicinity. The following principles and standards shall be observed:
a) Street rights-of-way and pavement shall be adequate to accommodate the type and volume of traffic anticipated to be generated thereupon and special requirements may be imposed by the Town with respect to street, curb, gutter, and sidewalk design and construction.
b) Special requirements may be imposed by the Town with respect to the installation of public utilities, including water, sewer, and storm water drainage.
c) Streets carrying nonresidential traffic, especially truck traffic, shall not normally be extended to the boundaries of adjacent, existing or potential residential areas.
29
SECTION 5 - ASSURANCE FOR COMPLETION AND MAINTENANCE OF IMPROVEMENTS
(Eff: 8/1/04)
5.1 Improvements and Performance Bond
(1) Completion of Improvements - All applicants shall be required to complete all the street and other improvements as specified in the subdivision plan or as required in these regulations, and to dedicate public improvements to the Town, free and clear of all liens and encumbrances.
a) The applicant shall submit a "Certificate of Title" prior to conveying any land to the Town indicating all title restrictions.
(2) Performance Bond
a) The applicant shall post an acceptable form of surety or collateral prior to the time of filing the subdivision plan in the Land Records in an amount estimated by the Commission.
b) Such performance bond shall be satisfactory to the Town Attorney. The period within which required improvements must be completed shall be incorporated in the bond and shall not in any event exceed five years. Said bond shall remain in full force and effect until it is officially released by the Commission.
c) Such performance bond shall include a cash reserve in an amount of 1% of the total project cost or $1,000, whichever is greater, for emergency street maintenance including snow plowing, drainage structure maintenance and the like. This reserve may be drawn against by the Town for expenses incurred. Said cash reserve shall annually be restored by the developer prior to November 1st to insure adequate funds are available for emergency work in a subsequent year. Failure to restore the funds annually as required shall render the approval of the subdivision plan null and void.
(3) Failure to Complete Subdivision - Where a performance bond has been posted and required improvements have not been installed within the terms of such performance bond, the Town may thereupon declare the bond to be in default and require that all the improvements be installed.
(4) In the case of water mains, sewer lines, electric, CATV, or other utility lines, a statement that the work will be done within a reasonable time is sufficient to exclude costs from bonding.
5.2 Inspection of Improvements
(1) General Procedure - The Director of Public Works shall provide for inspection of required improvements during construction and insure satisfactory completion. If the Director of Public Works finds upon inspection that any of the required improvements have not been constructed in accordance with the Town's construction standards and specifications, the applicant shall be responsible for completing the improvements in accordance with said standards and specifications.
30
(2) Modification of Improvements - If the applicant finds that a deviation from the approved plan is necessary, he shall notify the Directors of Public Works and Planning of the extent and type of modifications prior to executing any change. The item will be reviewed at the next Planning Commission meeting.
(3) Release or Reduction of Performance Bond
a) Certificate of Satisfactory Completion - The Commission will not recommend acceptance or dedication of required improvements, nor release a performance bond, until the Director of Public Works has indicated that all required improvements have been satisfactorily completed and until the applicant's engineer or surveyor has certified to the Director of Public Works, through submission of detailed "as-built" survey plans of the subdivision, that the layout of the line and grade of all public improvements are in accordance with construction plans for the subdivision and are ready for dedication to the local government. Upon such approval and recommendation, the Town may thereafter accept the improvements for dedication.
b) Reduction of Performance Bond - A performance bond may be reduced upon actual completion of public improvements and then only to the ratio that the public improvement dedicated bears to the total public improvements of the plan. In no event shall a performance bond be reduced below 10% of the principal amount.
5.3 Maintenance of Improvements and Maintenance Bonds
(1) The applicant shall be required to maintain all improvements in the subdivision and provide for snow removal, street cleaning, drainage, and general maintenance on streets and sidewalks until acceptance of said improvements by the Town. In the event that the applicant fails to comply, the Town is authorized, through the Director of Public Works, to perform the necessary work, without incurring any liability, and charge such work to the applicant in accordance with Section 5.1(2)c).
(2) The applicant shall be required to file a maintenance bond with the Commission in a form acceptable to the Town Attorney, prior to acceptance, in an amount equal to 10% of the original cost of the public improvements, in order to assure the satisfactory maintenance of the required improvements, for a period of one year after the date of their acceptance by the Town.
5.4 Issuance of Permits
(1) No building permit shall be issued for the final 10% of lots in a subdivision or section of the subdivision until all public improvements required by the Commission for the plan have been fully completed and offered for acceptance by the Town. If 10% of the lots in the subdivision consist of less than two lots, then building permits shall not be issued for the last two lots until the public improvements have been completed and offered for acceptance by the Town.
31
(2) Prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy, the extent of street improvements shall be adequate for vehicular access by the prospective occupant and by police and fire and any other emergency equipment. At a minimum, the street shall be improved with a base course and one layer of paving up to that portion of the street which provides direct access onto the lot for which a Certificate of Occupancy is requested.
32
SECTION 6 - DEFINITION OF TERMS
For the purpose of these regulations, certain terms or words shall be defined as below. Words in the present tense include the future, the singular number includes the plural, and vice versa. The word "lot" includes the word "plot". The word "building" includes the word "structure". The word "shall" is mandatory, and not directory. The word "used" shall be deemed also to include "designed, intended, or arranged to be used." Unless otherwise specified, all distances shall be measured horizontally.
1) Applicant, Subdivider, or Developer shall mean an individual, partnership, firm, corporation, legal entity or agent thereof, who or which undertakes the subdivision or resubdivision of land or any activity included in these regulations. For the purpose of these regulations, these three terms shall be synonymous.
2) Bond shall mean a type of surety or collateral posted by the applicant which guarantees that all required improvements shall be completed as per the approved plans and these regulations.
3) Certification means a signed, written approval by the Planning Commission (its designated agent or the New London County Soil and Water Conservation District) that a soil erosion and sediment control plan complies with the applicable requirements of these regulations.
4) Commission shall mean the Town of Groton Planning Commission.
5) Cul-de-sac shall mean a street or a portion of a street with only one vehicular outlet.
6) Development shall mean any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations.
7) Disturbed Area means an area where the ground cover is destroyed or removed leaving the land subject to accelerated erosion.
8) Easement shall mean the right to use land owned by another for a special limited purpose.
9) Erosion means the detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by water, wind, ice or gravity.
10) Grading means any excavating, grubbing, filling (including hydraulic fill) or stockpiling of earth materials or any combination thereof, including the land in its excavated or filled condition.
11) Improvements shall mean all things constructed or placed within the subdivision including, but not limited to the following:
a) Roads, streets, alleys, driveways, accessways, entrances into rights-of-way, street signs, and lights.
b) Grading, slopes, retaining walls and monuments.
c) Sidewalks, crosswalks, pedestrian paths and bicycle paths.
33
d) Curbs, gutters and curb returns.
e) Water mains, utility pipes and utility conduit lines.
f) Sodding, landscaping, tree planting and erosion control measures.
12) Land Dedication shall mean reserving land to the Town for some public purpose in accordance with these regulations.
13) Loam, Topsoil shall mean a rich, easily pulverized soil, consisting of a mixture of varying proportions of clay, sand and organic matter capable of supporting cultivated vegetation.
14) Lot shall mean a plot or parcel of land occupied or capable of being occupied by one principal building and the accessory buildings or uses incidental to it including such open spaces as are required by these regulations. In the case of multi-family dwellings and public, institutional, commercial, or industrial buildings, a group of buildings under the same ownership may be considered as occupying the same lot.
15) Plan shall mean the subdivision plan including maps, profiles and supporting documents.
16) Resubdivision as set forth in the Connecticut General Statutes shall mean a change in the map of an approved or recorded subdivision or resubdivision if such change:
a) Affects any street layout shown on such map;
b) Affects any area reserved thereon for public use; or
c) Diminishes the size of any lot shown thereon and creates an additional building lot, if any of the lots shown thereon have been conveyed after the approval or recording of such map.
17) Sediment means solid material, either mineral or organic, that is in suspension, is transported or has been moved from its site of origin by erosion.
18) Soil means any unconsolidated mineral or organic material of any origin.
19) Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Plan means a scheme that minimizes soil erosion and sedimentation resulting from development and includes, but is not limited to a map and narrative.
20) Street shall mean a public way or a way opened to public use or other right-of-way giving access to the lot, but excluding an alley used for service access only. "Street" shall be deemed to include the entire width of the right-of-way.
21) Street Right-of-way or Right-of-way shall mean that portion of land between property lines over which a street, path, driveway, utility lines, and other public improvements are built or reserved for future use.
22) Subdivision as set forth in the Connecticut General Statutes, shall mean the division of a tract or parcel of land into three or more parts or lots made subsequent to the adoption of subdivision regulations by the Commission, for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale or building development expressly excluding development for municipal, conservation or agricultural purposes, and includes resubdivisions.

INLAND WETLANDS
AND
WATERCOURSES REGULATIONS
TOWN OF GROTON, CONNECTICUT
LAST AMENDED: JULY 1, 2011
AMENDMENTS
April 1, 1990 New Sec. 7.4 and associated section renumbering; Sec. 10.2; Sec. 10.4; Sec. 13.1; Sec. 13.7; Sec. 18.1
February 15, 1993 Sec. 10.6 Permit Duration and Sec. 13.6 Public Hearing Notification Requirements
February 4, 1994 Sec. 10.6 Permit Duration
April 21, 1995 Sec. 4.1 Permitted Uses as of Right and Nonregulated Uses
March 15, 1997 Sec. 2 Definitions; Sec. 6 Application Requirements; Sec. 9 Considerations for Decision; Sec. 10 Decision Process and Permit; Sec. 13 Amendments
January 1, 2000 Sec. 6.4 d., 13.1 a., 13.2, 13.6, 13.7, 13.8, 17.1, 18.1 References to New Wetlands and Watercourses Map; Sec. 10.2 Public Hearings
March 15, 2002 Sec. 2 Definitions; Sec. 8.3 Public Hearing Notification Requirements; Sec. 10.8 Filing Permits in Land Records
May 1, 2006 Sec. 18.1 Application Fees; 18.2 Complex Application Fee and associated section renumbering; Sec. 18.3
August 1, 2009 Sec. 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 12, 13, and 15 to address changes to the Connecticut General Statutes.
July 1, 2011 Sec. 2, 5.2, and 6.6 to address definitions, regulated activities to be allowed by permit, and application requirements
TOWN OF GROTON
INLAND WETLANDS AND WATERCOURSES REGULATIONS
TABLE OF CONTENTS
SECTION PAGE
1 TITLE, AUTHORITY AND PURPOSE ...................................................... 1-1
2 DEFINITIONS .............................................................................................. 2-1
3 INVENTORY OF REGULATED AREAS ................................................... 3-1
4 PERMITTED USES AS OF RIGHT AND NONREGULATED USES .... 4-1
5 REGULATED ACTIVITIES TO BE ALLOWED BY PERMIT ................. 5-1
6 APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS ............................................................. 6-1
7 APPLICATION PROCEDURES .................................................................. 7-1
8 PUBLIC HEARINGS .................................................................................... 8-1
9 CONSIDERATIONS FOR DECISION ....................................................... 9-1
10 DECISION PROCESS AND PERMIT ...................................................... 10-1
11 BOND AND INSURANCE ....................................................................... 11-1
12 ENFORCEMENT ....................................................................................... 12-1
13 AMENDMENTS ........................................................................................ 13-1
14 APPEALS ..................................................................................................... 14-1
15 CONFLICT AND SEVERANCE ............................................................... 15-1
16 OTHER PERMITS ..................................................................................... 16-1
17 EFFECTIVE DATE OF REGULATIONS .................................................. 17-1
18 APPLICATION FEES ................................................................................. 18-1
APRIL 1, 1989
1-1
SECTION 1
TITLE, AUTHORITY AND PURPOSE
1.1 The inland wetlands and watercourses of the State of Connecticut are an indispensable, irreplaceable, and fragile natural resource with which the citizens of the State have been endowed. The wetlands and watercourses are an interrelated web of nature essential to: an adequate supply of surface and underground water; hydrological stability and control of flooding and erosion; the recharging and purification of groundwater; and the existence of many forms of animal, aquatic, and plant life. Many inland wetlands and watercourses have been destroyed or are in danger of destruction because of unregulated use by reason of the deposition, filling or removal of material, the diversion or obstruction of water flow, the erection of structures, and other uses, all of which have despoiled, polluted, and eliminated wetlands and watercourses. Such unregulated activity has had, and will continue to have, a significant adverse impact on the environment and ecology of the State of Connecticut and has and will continue to imperil the quality of the environment, thus adversely affecting the ecological, scenic, historic, and recreational values and benefits of the State for its citizens now and forever more.
The preservation and protection of the wetlands and watercourses from random, unnecessary, undesirable, and unregulated uses, disturbance, or destruction is in the public interest and is essential to the health, welfare, and safety of the citizens of the State. It is, therefore, the purpose of these regulations to protect the citizens of the State by making provisions for the protection, preservation, maintenance, and use of the inland wetlands and watercourses by minimizing their disturbance and pollution; maintaining and improving water quality in accordance with the highest standards set by federal, state, or local authority; preventing damage from erosion, turbidity, or siltation; preventing loss of fish and other beneficial aquatic organisms, wildlife, and vegetation and the destruction of the natural habitats thereof; deterring and inhibiting the danger of flood and pollution; protecting the quality of wetlands and watercourses for their conservation, economic, aesthetic, recreational, and other public and private uses and values; and protecting the State's potable fresh water supplies from the dangers of drought, overdraft, pollution, misuse, and mismanagement by providing an orderly process to balance the need for the economic growth of the State and the use of its land with the need to protect its environment and ecology in order to forever guarantee to the people of the State, the safety of such natural resources for their benefit and enjoyment and for the benefit and enjoyment of generations yet unborn.
1-2
1.2 These regulations shall be known as the "Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations of the Town of Groton."
1.3 The Inland Wetlands Agency of the Town of Groton was established in accordance with Ordinance No. 112 adopted October 1, 1973, and shall implement the purposes and provisions of the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Act in the Town of Groton.
1.4 These regulations have been adopted and may be amended, from time to time, in accordance with the provisions of the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Act and these regulations.
1.5 The Agency shall enforce all provisions of the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Act and shall grant, deny, or limit any permit, and in granting a permit the Inland Wetlands Agency may grant it upon such terms, conditions, limitations, or modifications for all regulated activities or activities in accord with Section 4, in inland wetlands and watercourses in the Town of Groton pursuant to Sections 22a-36 to 22a-45, inclusive, of the Connecticut General Statues, as amended.
2-1
SECTION 2
DEFINITIONS
2.1 As used in these regulations:
"Accessory structure" means a subordinate use or structure incidental to the primary use of the site.
"Act" means the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Act, Sections 22a-36 through 22a-45 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
"Agency" means the Inland Wetlands Agency of the Town of Groton.
"Agency member" means a member or an alternate member of the Inland Wetlands Agency of the Town of Groton.
"Aquifer" means areas of stratified drift which may conduct or yield significant quantities of groundwater. Areas are generally shown on the Groton Stratified Drift Map.
"Bogs" are watercourses distinguished by evergreen trees and shrubs recognized as bog species and underlain by peat deposits, poor drainage, and highly acidic conditions.
"Building structure" means any structure intended for the shelter, housing, or enclosure of persons, animals, or materials associated with the primary use of the site.
“CAMA” means a Computer Aided Mass Appraisal system used by the Groton Assessor to establish fair market value for all land and improvements within the Town of Groton. (New Eff: 3/15/02)
"Clear-cutting" means the harvest of timber which removes all trees down to a two inch (2") diameter at breast height.
"Commissioner of Environmental Protection" means the Commissioner of the State of Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection.
2-2
“Continual flow” means a flow of water which persists for an extended period of time; this flow may be interrupted during periods of drought or during the low flow period of the annual hydrological cycle, June through September, but it recurs in prolonged succession.
"Deposit" includes, but shall not be limited to fill, grade, dump, place, discharge, or emit.
"Designated agent" means an individual designated by the Agency to carry out its functions and purposes.
"Discharge" means emission of any water, substance, or material into wetlands or watercourses whether or not such substance causes pollution.
"Disturbing the natural and indigenous character of the land" means that the activity will significantly alter the inland wetlands and watercourses by reason of removal or deposition of material, clear-cutting, alteration or obstruction of water flow, or will result in the pollution of the wetland or watercourse.
“Essential to the farming operation” means that the proposed activity is necessary and indispensable to sustain farming activities on the farm.
"Farming" shall be consistent with the definition as noted in section 1-1(q) of the Connecticut General Statutes. (see Appendix A)
"Feasible" means able to be constructed or implemented consistent with sound engineering principles. (New Eff: 3/15/97)
"Flood plain" means a nearly level alluvial plain that borders a stream and is subject to flooding unless protected artificially.
"Flood zone" means areas of the 100-year flood as shown on the most recent Flood Insurance Rate Map by the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
"Gardening" means the tilling of soil, planting, cultivating, and harvesting of vegetable matter.
"Grazing" means using any tract of land to feed or supply farm animals with grass or pasture, to tend farm animals, or feeding or growing silage and herbage.
"Harvesting of crops" means gathering plants or animals or plant and animal products which have been grown to be harvested.
2-3
"Major activity" means any activity including, but not limited to, the following activities which may have a major effect or significant impact on the area for which an application has been filed or on another part of the inland wetland or watercourse system:
1. Any activity involving a deposition or removal of material which will or may have a major effect or significant impact on the regulated area or on another part of the inland wetland or watercourse system (this generally shall be 100 cubic yards or more); or
2. Any activity which substantially changes the natural channel or may inhibit the natural dynamics of a watercourse system; or
3. Any activity which substantially diminishes the natural capacity of an inland wetland or watercourse to support desirable fisheries, wildlife, or other biological life, prevent flooding, supply water, assimilate waste, facilitate drainage, or other functions; or
4. Any activity which causes substantial turbidity, siltation, or sedimentation in a wetland or watercourse; or
5. Any activity which causes a substantial change in the flow of a natural watercourse or in the groundwater levels of the regulated area; or
6. Any activity which causes or has the potential to cause pollution of a wetland or watercourse, as may be measured by the Department of Environmental Protection Water Quality Standards and Classifications; or
7. Any activity which destroys or adversely affects unique wetland or watercourse areas having demonstrable scientific or educational value.
"Marshes" are areas with soils that exhibit aquic moisture regimes that are distinguished by the absence of trees and shrubs and are dominated by soft-stemmed herbaceous plants. The water table in marshes is at or above the surface throughout the year, but seasonal fluctuations are encountered, and areas of open water six inches (6") or more in depth are common.
"Material" means any substance, solid or liquid, organic or inorganic, including but not limited to, soil, sediment, aggregate, earth, gravel, clay, bog, peat, mud, debris, sand, refuse, or waste.
"Minor activity" means a proposed activity which is not a major activity.
"Municipality" means the Town of Groton, New London County, State of Connecticut.
"Nurseries" means land used for propagating trees, shrubs, or other plants for transplanting, sale, or for use as stock for grafting.
2-4
"Permit" means the whole or any part of any license, certificate or approval or similar form of permission which may be required of any person by the provisions of these regulations under the authority of the Inland Wetlands Agency.
"Permittee" means the person to whom such permit has been issued.
"Person" means any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, organization, or legal entity of any kind, including municipal corporations, government agencies, or subdivisions thereof.
"Pollution" means harmful thermal effect or the contamination or rendering unclean or impure of any waters of the State by reason of any waste or other materials discharged or deposited therein by any public or private sewer or otherwise so as directly or indirectly to come in contact with any waters. This includes, but is not limited to, erosion resulting from any filling or excavation activity.
"Prudent" means economically and otherwise reasonable in light of the benefits to be derived from the proposed regulated activity provided cost may be considered in deciding what is prudent and further provided a mere showing of expense will not necessarily mean an alternative is imprudent. (New Eff: 3/15/97)
"Regulated activity" means any operation or use of a wetland or watercourse involving removal or deposition of material; or any obstruction, construction, alteration, or pollution of such wetlands or watercourses but shall not include the specified activities in Section 4 of these regulations. Furthermore, any clearing, grubbing, filling, grading, paving, excavating, construction, depositing or removing of material and discharging of stormwater on the land within the following upland review areas is a regulated activity;
(1) within 150 feet measured horizontally from Eccleston Brook, Bindloss Brook, Fort Hill Brook and Birch Plain Creek;
(2) within 200 feet measured horizontally from Great Brook, Beaver Dam Brook, Hatching House Brook, Hempstead Brook and Haley Brook;
(3) within 100 feet measured horizontally from the boundary of any other wetland or watercourse.
2-5
The Agency may rule that any other activity located within such upland review area or in any other non-wetland or non-watercourse area is likely to impact or affect wetlands or watercourses and is a regulated activity.
"Remove" includes, but shall not be limited to, drain, excavate, mine, dig, dredge, suck, grub, clear-cut timber, bulldoze, dragline, or blast.
"Rendering unclean or impure" means any alteration of the physical, chemical, or biological properties of any waters of the State including, but not limited to, change in odor, color, turbidity, or taste.
"Soil Scientist" means an individual duly qualified in accordance with standards set by the Federal Office of Personnel Management. (Eff: 3/15/97)
"Soil type" means soil type as identified in the National Cooperative Soil Survey, by the Soil Conservation Service of the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA).
"Swamp" means an area with a water table at or near the surface of the ground throughout most of the year and containing vegetation dominated by an association of trees and/or shrubs recognized as swamp species.
"Submerged lands" means those lands which are inundated by water on a seasonal or more frequent basis.
"Town" means the Town of Groton, New London County, State of Connecticut.
"Waste" means sewage or any substance, liquid, gaseous, solid or radioactive, which may pollute or tend to pollute any of the waters of the Town.
"Watercourses" means rivers, streams, brooks, waterways, lakes, ponds, marshes, swamps, bogs, and all other bodies of water, natural or artificial, vernal or intermittent, public or private, which are contained within, flow through, or border upon the Town or any portion thereof, not regulated pursuant to Sections 22a-28 through 22a-35, inclusive, of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended. Intermittent watercourse shall be delineated by a defined permanent channel and bank and the occurrence of two or more of the following characteristics: (A) evidence of scour or deposits of recent alluvium or detritus, (B) the presence of standing or flowing water for a duration longer than a particular storm incident, and (C) the presence of hydrophytic vegetation. (Eff: 3/15/97)
2-6
"Wetlands" means lands, including submerged lands as defined in Section 2.1 of these regulations, not regulated pursuant to Sections 22a-28 through 22a-35, inclusive, of the Connecticut General Statutes, which consist of any of the soil types designated as poorly drained, very poorly drained, alluvial, and floodplain by the National Cooperative Soil Survey, as it may be amended from time to time, of the Natural Resources Conservation Service of the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA). Such areas may include filled, graded, or excavated sites which possess an aquic (saturated) soil moisture regime as defined by the USDA National Cooperative Soil Survey. (Eff: 3/15/97)
3-1
SECTION 3
INVENTORY OF REGULATED AREAS
3.1 The map of regulated areas, entitled "Wetlands and Watercourses Map, Groton, Connecticut," delineates the general location and boundaries of inland wetlands and the general location of watercourses. In all cases, the precise location of regulated areas shall be determined by the actual character of the land, the distribution of wetland soil types, and locations of watercourses. Such determinations shall be made by field inspection by the Agency's designated agent and/or testing conducted by a soil scientist where soil classifications are required, or where watercourse determinations are required, by other qualified individuals deemed acceptable to the Agency. Copies of this map are available for inspection in the Office of the Town Clerk or the Planning Department.
3.2 Any property owner who disputes the designation of any part of his or her land as a regulated area on the Wetlands and Watercourses Map may petition the Agency to change the designation. All petitions for a map change shall be submitted in writing and shall include all relevant facts and circumstances which support the change. The petitioner shall provide proof that the designation is inapplicable. Documentation in accordance with Section 13 of these regulations may be required of the property owner when the Agency requires an accurate delineation of regulated areas.
3.3 The Inland Wetlands Agency or its designated agent shall inventory and maintain current records of all regulated areas within the Town. The Agency may amend its map from time to time as information becomes available relative to more accurate delineation of wetlands and watercourses within the Town. Such map amendments are subject to the public hearing process outlined in Section 13 of these regulations.
4-1
SECTION 4
PERMITTED USES AS OF RIGHT AND NONREGULATED USES
4.1 The following operations and uses shall be permitted in inland wetlands and watercourses, as of right:
a. Grazing, farming, nurseries, gardening and harvesting of crops and farm ponds of three acres or less essential to the farming operation and activities conducted by, or under the authority of, the Department of Environmental Protection for the purposes of wetland or watercourse restoration or enhancement or mosquito control. The provisions of this section shall not be construed to include road construction or the erection of buildings not directly related to the farming operation, relocation of watercourses with continual flow, filling or reclamation of wetlands or watercourses with continual flow, clear-cutting of timber except for the expansion of agricultural crop land, or the mining of topsoil, peat, sand, gravel, or similar material from wetlands or watercourses for the purpose of sale.
b. A residential home (i) for which a building permit has been issued or (ii) on a subdivision lot, provided the permit has been issued or the subdivision has been approved by the Groton Planning Commission as of June 30, 1974, and further provided no residential home shall be permitted as of right pursuant to this subsection unless the building permit was obtained on or before July 1, 1987. The individual claiming a use of wetlands permitted as of right under this subsection shall document the validity of said right by providing a certified copy of the building permit and a site plan showing house and well locations, septic system, driveway, approval dates, and/or other necessary information to document his entitlement.
c. Boat anchorage or mooring, not to include dredging or dock construction.
d. Uses incidental to the enjoyment or maintenance of residential property, such property defined as equal to or smaller than the largest minimum residential lot site permitted anywhere in the municipality and containing a residence. Such incidental uses shall include maintenance of existing structures and landscaping, but shall not include removal or deposition of significant amounts of material from or into a wetland or watercourse, or diversion or alteration of a watercourse.
4-2
e. Construction and operation by water companies, as defined by Section 16-1 of the Connecticut General Statutes or by municipal water supply systems, as provided for in Chapter 102 of the Connecticut General Statutes, of dams, reservoirs, and other facilities necessary to the impounding, storage, and withdrawal of water in connection with public water supplies, except as provided in Sections 22a-401 and 22a-410 of the General Statutes.
f. Maintenance relating to any drainage pipe which existed before the effective date of any municipal regulations adopted pursuant to Section 22a-42a or July 1, 1974, whichever is earlier, provided such pipe is on property which is zoned as residential but which does not contain hydrophytic vegetation. For purposes of this subdivision, "maintenance" means the removal of accumulated leaves, soil, and other debris whether by hand or machine, while the pipe remains in place. (New Eff: 4/21/95)
4.2 The following operations and uses shall be permitted as nonregulated uses in wetlands and watercourses, provided they do not disturb the natural and indigenous character of the wetlands or watercourses by removal or deposition of material, alteration or obstruction of water flow, or pollution of the wetland or watercourse.
a. Conservation of soil, vegetation, water, fish, shellfish, and wildlife. Such operation or use may include, but is not limited to, minor work to control erosion or to encourage proper fish, wildlife and silviculture practices.
b. Outdoor recreation including play and sporting areas, golf courses, field trails, nature study, hiking, horseback riding, swimming, skin and scuba diving, camping, boating, water skiing, trapping, hunting, fishing and shellfishing, and cross-country skiing where otherwise legally permitted and regulated.
4.3 All activities in wetlands or watercourses involving filling, excavation, dredging, clear-cutting, grading, and excavation or any other alteration or use of wetlands or watercourses not specifically permitted by this section and otherwise defined as a regulated activity by these regulations shall require a permit from the Agency in accordance with Section 5 of these regulations.
4.4 To carry out the purposes of this section, any person proposing to carry out a permitted or nonregulated operation shall, prior to commencement of such operation or use, notify the Agency on a form, and provide the Agency with sufficient information to enable it to properly determine that the proposed operation and use is a permitted or nonregulated use of the wetland or
4-3
watercourse. The Agency or its designated agent shall rule that the proposed operation and use or portion of it is a permitted or a nonregulated use and operation or that the proposed operation and use is a regulated activity and a permit is required. Such ruling shall be in writing and shall be made no later than the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Agency following the meeting at which the request was received. The designated agent for the Agency may make such ruling on behalf of the Agency at any time and such ruling will be reviewed by the Agency at its next regular meeting.
5-1
SECTION 5
REGULATED ACTIVITIES TO BE ALLOWED BY PERMIT
5.1 No person shall conduct or maintain a regulated activity without first obtaining a permit for such activity from the Inland Wetlands Agency of the Town of Groton.
5.2 Any person found to be conducting or maintaining a regulated activity without the prior authorization of the Town of Groton Inland Wetlands Agency, or violating any other provision of these regulations shall be subject to the enforcement proceedings and penalties prescribed in Section 12 of these regulations and any other remedies as provided by law.
6-1
SECTION 6
APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS
6.1 Any person wishing to undertake a regulated activity shall apply in writing for a permit on a form provided by the Agency. The application shall include an application form and such information as prescribed by Section 6.4 and, in the case of a major activity, by Section 6.5 of these regulations. Application forms may be obtained from the Planning Department.
6.2 If an application to the Town of Groton Planning Commission for subdivision or resubdivision of land involves land containing a wetland or watercourse, the application shall, in accordance with Section 8-3(g), 8-3c, or 8-26, as applicable, of the Connecticut General Statutes, submit an application for a permit to the Agency in accordance with this section, no later than the day the application is filed with such Planning Commission.
6.3 All applications shall contain such information as is necessary for a fair and informed determination of the issues.
6.4 The Agency and the applicant may hold a pre-application meeting to preliminarily review the project or to determine whether or not the proposed application involves a major activity. The pre-application request shall be in writing. Whenever possible, the determination relative to major activities should be made at the pre-application meeting.
6.5 All applications shall include the following information in writing or on maps or drawings:
a. The applicant's name, home and business addresses, and telephone numbers; if the applicant is a Limited Liability Corporation or a Corporation the managing member’s or responsible corporate officer’s name, address and telephone number.
b. The owner's name, address and telephone number and written consent if the applicant is not the owner of the property involved in the application.
c. Applicant's interest in the land.
d. The geographical location of the land which is the subject of the proposed activity and a description of the land in sufficient detail to allow
6-2
identification of the inland wetlands and watercourses, the area(s) in acres or square feet of wetlands or watercourses to be disturbed, soil type(s) and wetland vegetation.
e. The purpose and a description of the proposed activity and proposed erosion and sedimentation controls and other management measures which may be considered as a condition of issuing a permit for the proposed regulated activity including, but not limited to, measures to (1) prevent or minimize pollution or other environmental damage, (2) maintain or enhance existing environmental quality, or (3) in the following order of priority: restore, enhance and create productive wetland or watercourse resources.
f. Alternatives considered by the applicant and why the proposal to alter wetlands set forth in the application was chosen.
g. A site plan drawn to scale showing the proposed activity and existing and proposed conditions in relation to wetlands and watercourses and identifying any further activities associated with, or reasonably related to, the proposed regulated activity which are made inevitable by the proposed regulated activity and which may have an impact on wetlands or watercourses. Where inland wetlands have been field identified, numbered wetland flags shall be shown on the site plan.
h. Certification that the applicant is familiar with all the information provided in the application and is aware of the penalties for obtaining a permit through deception or through inaccurate or misleading information.
i. Authorization for the members of the Agency and its designated agent to inspect the property, at reasonable times, both before and after a final decision has been issued.
j. Any other information the Agency deems necessary to the understanding of what the applicant is proposing, including specific information required under Section 6.5.
k. Submission of the appropriate filing fee based on the fee schedule established in Section 18 of these regulations.
6.6 If proposed activity involves a major activity as determined by the Agency and defined in Section 2.1 of these regulations, additional information may be
6-3
required based on the nature and anticipated effects of the activity including, but not limited to, the following:
a. Site plans for the proposed use or operation of the property which will be affected, which show existing and proposed conditions, wetland and watercourse boundaries, land contours, boundaries of land ownership, proposed alterations and uses of wetlands and watercourses, and other pertinent features of the development drawn by a licensed surveyor, professional engineer, or landscape architect registered in the State of Connecticut or by such other qualified persons.
b. Engineering and other reports, analyses, and additional drawings to fully describe and assess the proposed project and any associated filling, excavation, drainage or wastewater discharges, hydrologic or hydraulic modifications affecting wetlands, watercourses, or water quality. Reports may be required to be prepared by professionals in those particular fields. Hydrologic analysis may be required to examine the project's effect upon the entire watercourse watershed and may be required to be by a method approved by the Agency's agent.
c. Mapping of soil types consistent with the categories established by the National Cooperative Soil Survey of the U.S. Natural Resources Conservation Service. The Agency shall require the applicant to have the wetlands delineated in the field by a soil scientist and that the field delineation be incorporated into the site plans.
d. Description of the ecological communities and functions of the wetlands or watercourses and adjacent uplands involved with the application and a description of how the proposed activity will change, diminish, or enhance the ecological communities and functions of the wetlands or watercourses involved in the application.
e. An alternative analysis and a description of each alternative considered and why it was deemed neither feasible nor prudent. The Agency may require the applicant to submit written information concerning consideration of alternative actions to minimize wetland and watercourse impacts.
f. Analysis of chemical or physical characteristics of any fill material.
g. Measures which would mitigate the impact of the proposed activity. Such measures include, but are not limited to, plans or actions which avoid destruction or diminution of wetland or watercourse functions,
6-4
recreational uses and natural habitats, which prevent flooding, degradation of water quality, erosion and sedimentation, and obstruction of drainage, or which otherwise safeguard water resources.
h. Subsurface sewerage disposal system buffers may be required to be verified by a Department of Environmental Protection approved hydraulic and/or effluent renovation/treatment analysis to be conducted by the applicant. The Agency is authorized to impose separating distances that exceed the above or Connecticut Department of Health Services requirements based on the magnitude of discharge, soil, and geologic condition, and potential degradation of water quality.
i. An Erosion and Sediment Control Plan developed using the principles, methods, and practices outlined in the Connecticut Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control (2002), as amended.
j. A Stormwater Management Plan developed using the principals outlined in the 2004 Connecticut Stormwater Quality Manual, as amended.
6.7 The applicant shall certify whether:
a. Any portion of the property on which the regulated activity is proposed is located within 500 feet of the boundary of an adjoining municipality;
b. Traffic attributable to the completed project on the site will use streets within the adjoining municipality to enter or exit the site;
c. Sewer or water drainage from the project site will flow through and impact the sewage or drainage system within the adjoining municipality; or,
d. Water runoff from the improved site will impact streets of other municipal or private property within the adjoining municipality.
6.8 The application form and five copies of the plans and supporting documents accompanying the application form shall be submitted to comprise a complete application or as is otherwise directed, in writing, by the Inland Wetlands Agency.
6.9 Any application to extend the expiration date of a previously issued permit or amend an existing permit shall be filed with the Agency sixty-five (65) days prior to the expiration date for the permit in accordance with Sections 6.4 through 6.7
6-5
of these regulations. Any application for amendment, modification, renewal, or extension shall be made in accordance with this section provided:
a. The application may incorporate, by reference, the documentation and record of the original application;
b. The application shall state the reason why the authorized activities were not initiated or completed within the time specified in the permit;
c. The application shall describe any changes in facts or circumstances involved with or affecting wetlands or watercourses or the property for which the permit was issued;
d. The Agency may accept an untimely application to extend the expiration date of a permit if the authorized activity is ongoing and may allow the continuation of work beyond the expiration date if, in its judgment, the permit is likely to be extended and the public interest or environment will be best served by not interrupting the activity. The application shall describe the extent of work completed at the time of filing and the schedule for completing the activities authorized in the permit;
e. (Deleted; effective 3/15/97)
6.10 Any application to renew a permit shall be granted upon request of the permit holder unless the Agency finds that there has been a substantial change in circumstances which requires a new permit application or an enforcement action has been undertaken with regard to the regulated activity for which the permit was issued provided no permit may be valid for more than ten years.
6.11 For any permit application involving property subject to a conservation restriction or preservation restriction, the following shall apply:
a. for purposes of this section, “conservation restriction” means a limitation, whether or not stated in the form of a restriction, easement, covenant or condition, in any deed, will or other instrument executed by or on behalf of the owner of the land described therein, including, but not limited to, the state or any political subdivision of the state, or in any order of taking such land whose purpose is to retain land or water areas predominantly in their natural, scenic or open condition or in agricultural, farming, forest or open space use.
6-6
b. for the purposes of this section, “preservation restriction” means a limitation, whether or not stated in the form of a restriction, easement, covenant or condition, in any deed, will or other instrument executed by or on behalf of the owner of land, including, but not limited to, the state or any political subdivision of the state, or in any order of taking of such land whose purpose is to preserve historically significant structures or sites.
c. No person shall file a permit application, other than for interior work in an existing building or for exterior work that does not expand or alter the footprint of an existing building, relating to property that is subject to a conservation restriction or a preservation restriction unless the applicant provides proof that the applicant has provided written notice of such application, by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the party holding such restriction not later than sixty days prior to the filing of the permit application.
d. In lieu of such notice pursuant to subsection 6.11c, the applicant may submit a letter from the holder of such restriction or from the holder’s authorized agent, verifying that the application is in compliance with the terms of the restriction.
7-1
SECTION 7
APPLICATION PROCEDURES
7.1 All applications shall be filed with the Office of Planning and Development Services of the Town of Groton.
7.2 The Agency or its agent shall, by certified mail, return receipt requested within seven (7) days of application receipt, notify the clerk of any adjoining municipality of the pendency of any application to conduct a regulated activity when:
a. Any portion of the property affected by a decision of the Agency is located within 500 feet of the boundary of an adjoining municipality;
b. A significant portion of the traffic to the completed project on the site will use streets within the adjoining municipality to enter or exit the site;
c. A significant portion of the sewer or water drainage from the project site will flow through and significantly impact the sewage or drainage system within the adjoining municipality; or
d. Water runoff from the improved site will impact streets or other municipal or private property within the adjoining municipality.
7.3 When an application is filed to conduct or cause to be conducted a regulated activity upon an inland wetland or watercourse, any portion of which is within the watershed of a water company as defined in Section 25-32a of the General Statutes, the applicant shall provide written notice of the application to the water company and the Commissioner of Public Health in a format prescribed by said commissioner provided such water company or said commissioner has filed a map showing the boundaries of the watershed on the land records of the municipality in which the application is made and with the inland wetlands agency of such municipality. Such notice shall be certified mail, return receipt requested, and shall be mailed not later than seven days after the date of the application. The water company and the Commissioner of Public Health, through a representative, may appear and be heard at any hearing on the application.
7.4 The date of receipt of any petition, application, request, or appeal shall be the day of the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Agency immediately following
7-2
the day of submission to the Agency or its agent of such application, or thirty-five (35) days after such submission, whichever is sooner.
7.5 At any time during the review period, the Agency may require the applicant to provide additional information. Requests for additional information shall not stay the time limitations as set forth in Section 10.2.
7.7 All applications shall be open for public inspection.
7.8 Incomplete applications may be withdrawn or denied.
7.9 The Agency shall classify the application as one of the following:
a. Nonregulated Activity - This classification shall be given to any application which the Agency determines does not involve a regulated activity. Upon assignment of such classification, a permit shall not be necessary to conduct the proposed activity.
b. Minor Activity
c. Major Activity
The Agency shall inform the applicant, or the applicant's authorized agent, in writing of the classification.
8-1
SECTION 8
PUBLIC HEARINGS
8.1 The Agency shall not hold a public hearing on an application unless the Agency determines that the proposed activity may have a significant impact on wetlands or watercourses, a petition signed by at least twenty-five persons who are eighteen years of age or older and who reside in the municipality in which the regulated activity is proposed, requesting a hearing is filed with the Agency not later than fourteen days after the date of receipt of such application, or the Agency finds that a public hearing regarding such application would be in the public interest. The Agency may issue a permit without a public hearing provided no petition provided for in this section is filed with the Agency on or before the fourteenth day after the date of receipt of the application. Such hearing shall be held no later than sixty-five days after the receipt of such application. All applications and maps and documents relating thereto shall be open for public inspection. At such hearing any person or persons may appear and be heard.
8.2 Notice of the public hearing shall be published at least twice at intervals of not less than two (2) days, the first not more than fifteen (15) days and not fewer than ten (10) days, and the last not less than two (2) days before the date set for the hearing in a newspaper having a general circulation in the Town.
8.3 Adjacent property owners within 150 feet of the property boundary on which the proposed regulated activity will take place shall be given written notice by the applicant of the location and nature of the proposed activity and the date, time, and place of the public hearing. Notice shall be sent to the current owners, as such owners and addresses appear on the CAMA database maintained by the Groton Assessor not less than fifteen (15) days before the scheduled public hearing. Proof of mailing shall be evidenced by a certificate of mailing and furnished to the Agency prior to the start of the public hearing or at the start of a continued hearing, if continued for the purpose of receiving proof of the notice described herein.
9-1
SECTION 9
CONSIDERATIONS FOR DECISION
9.1 The Agency may consider the following in making its decision on an application:
a. The application and its supporting documentation.
b. Public comments, evidence, and testimony.
c. Reports from other agencies and commissions including, but not limited to, the Town of Groton Conservation Commission, Planning Commission, Zoning Commission, Building Official, and Health Official.
d. The Agency may also consider comments on the application from the Department of Environmental Protection, Eastern Connecticut Conservation District, the Southeastern Connecticut Regional Planning Agency, or other regional organizations or agencies in adjacent municipalities which may be affected by the proposed activity, or other technical agencies or organizations which may undertake additional studies or investigations.
e. Non-receipt of comments from municipal or Town agencies and commissions and as listed in "c." above, within the prescribed time, shall neither delay nor prejudice the decision of the Agency.
9.2 Standards and Criteria for Decision
In carrying out the purposes and policies of sections 22a-36 to 22a-45, inclusive, of the Connecticut General Statutes, including matters relating to regulating, licensing and enforcing of the provisions thereof, the Agency shall consider all relevant facts and circumstances in making its decision on any application for a permit including, but not limited to, the following:
a. The environmental impact of the proposed regulated activity on wetlands or watercourses.
b. The applicant's purpose for, and any feasible and prudent alternatives to, the proposed regulated activity which alternatives would cause less or no environmental impact to wetlands or watercourses.
9-2
c. The short-term and long-term impacts of the proposed regulated activity on wetlands or watercourses and the maintenance and enhancement of long-term productivity of such wetlands or watercourses.
d. Irreversible and irretrievable loss of wetland or watercourse resources which would be caused by the proposed regulated activity, including the extent to which such activity would foreclose a future ability to protect, enhance or restore such resources, and any mitigation measures which may be considered as a condition of issuing a permit for such activity including, but not limited to, measures to (A) prevent or minimize pollution or other environmental damage, (B) maintain or enhance existing environmental quality, or (C) in the following order of priority: restore, enhance and create productive wetland or watercourse resources.
e. The character and degree of injury to, or interference with, safety, health, or the reasonable use of property, including abutting or downstream property, which would be caused or threatened by the proposed regulated activity.
f. Impacts of the proposed regulated activity on wetlands or watercourses outside the area for which the activity is proposed and future activities associated with, or reasonably related to, the proposed regulated activity which are made inevitable by the proposed regulated activity and which may have an impact on wetlands or watercourses.
9.3 In the case of an application which received a public hearing pursuant to a finding by the Inland Wetlands Agency that the proposed activity may have a significant impact on wetlands or watercourses, a permit shall not be issued unless the Agency finds on the basis of the record that a feasible and prudent alternative does not exist. In making this finding, the Agency shall consider the facts and circumstances set forth in Section 9 of these regulations. This finding and the reasons thereof shall be stated on the record, in writing, in the decision of the Agency.
9.4 In the case of an application which is denied on the basis of a finding that there may be feasible and prudent alternatives to the proposed regulated activity which have less adverse impact on wetlands and watercourses, the Agency shall propose on the record, in writing, the types of alternatives which the applicant may investigate provided this section shall not be construed to shift the burden from the applicant to prove that he is entitled to the permit or to present alternatives to the proposed regulated activity.
9-3
9.5 For purposes of this section (1) “wetlands and watercourses” includes aquatic, plant or animal life and habitats in wetlands or watercourses, and (2) “habitats” means areas or environments in which an organism or biological population normally lives or occurs.
9.6 The Agency shall not deny or condition an application for a regulated activity in an area outside wetlands or watercourses on the basis of an impact or effect on aquatic, plant, or animal life unless such activity will likely impact or affect the physical characteristics of such wetlands or watercourses.
9.7 In reaching its decision on any application after a public hearing, the Agency shall base its decision on the record of that hearing. Documentary evidence or other material not in the hearing record shall not be considered by the Agency in its decision.
9.8 In the case of an application where the applicant has provided written notice pursuant to subsection 6.11c of these regulations, the holder of the restriction may provide proof to the Agency that granting of the permit application will violate the terms of the restriction. Upon a finding that the requested land use violates the terms of such restriction, the Agency shall not grant the permit approval.
9.9 In the case of an application where the applicant fails to comply with the provisions of subsections 6.11c or 6.11d of these regulations, the party holding the conservation or preservation restriction may, not later than fifteen days after receipt of actual notice of permit approval, file an appeal with the Agency, subject to the rules and regulations of such agency relating to appeals. The Agency shall reverse the permit approval upon a finding that the requested land use violates the terms of such restriction.
10-1
SECTION 10
DECISION PROCESS AND PERMIT
10.1 The Agency may grant the application as filed, grant it upon such terms, conditions, limitations or modifications necessary to carry out the purposes of the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Act, as amended, or deny it. Such terms may include any reasonable measures which would mitigate the impacts of the regulated activity and which would (A) prevent or minimize pollution or other environmental damage, (B) maintain or enhance existing environmental quality, or (C) in the following order of priority: restore, enhance and create productive wetland or watercourse resources.
10.2 No later than sixty-five days after receipt of an application the Agency may hold a public hearing on such application. At such hearing any person or persons may appear and be heard and may be represented by agent or attorney. The hearing shall be completed within thirty-five (35) days of its commencement. Action shall be taken on such applications within thirty-five (35) days after completion of a public hearing or in the absence of a public hearing within sixty-five (65) days from the date of receipt of the application. The applicant may consent to one or more extensions of the periods specified in this subsection, provided the total extension of all such periods shall not be for longer than sixty-five (65) days, or may withdraw such application. The failure of the Inland Wetlands Agency to act within any time period specified in this subsection, or any extension thereof, shall not be deemed to constitute approval of the application. (An application deemed incomplete by the Agency must either be withdrawn by the applicant or denied by the Agency.)
10.3 The Agency shall state upon its records the reasons and basis for its decision.
10.4 The Agency shall notify the applicant and any person entitled to such notice of its decision within fifteen (15) days of the date of the decision by certified mail, return receipt requested, and the Agency shall publish notice of its decision in a newspaper having general circulation in the town wherein the inland wetland or watercourse lies. In any case in which such notice is not published within such fifteen day period, the applicant may provide for the publication of such notice within ten days thereafter.
10.5 If an activity authorized by the inland wetland permit also involves an activity or project which requires zoning or subdivision approval, a special permit, variance, or special exception, a copy of the decision and report on the application shall be filed with the Town of Groton Planning Commission and/or Zoning Commission within fifteen (15) days of the date of the decision.
10-2
10.6 Any permit issued under this section for the development of property for which zoning approval, subdivision approval, or special permit approval is also required shall be valid for five years provided the Agency may establish a specific time period within which any regulated activity shall be conducted. Any permit issued under this section for any other activity shall be valid for not less than two years and not more than five years.
10.7 No permit shall be assigned or transferred without written notice to the Agency.
10.8 The original permit shall be filed in the Land Records the Town Clerk.
10.9 If a bond or insurance is required in accordance with Section 11 of these regulations, no activity shall commence until such bond or insurance is provided.
10.10 General provisions in the issuance of all permits:
a. In evaluating applications in which the Agency relied in whole or in part on information provided by the applicant, if such information subsequently proves to be false, deceptive, incomplete, or inaccurate, the permit may be modified, suspended, or revoked.
b. All permits issued by the Agency are subject to and do not derogate any present or future rights or powers of the Agency or the Town of Groton, and convey no rights in real estate or material nor any exclusive privileges, and are further subject to any and all public and private rights and to any federal, state, and municipal laws or regulations pertinent to the property or activity.
c. If the activity authorized by the inland wetland permit also involves an activity or a project which requires zoning or subdivision approval, special permit, variance, or special exception, no work pursuant to the wetland permit may begin until such approval is obtained.
d. In constructing the authorized activities, the permittee shall implement such management practices consistent with the terms and conditions of the permit as needed to control stormwater discharges and to prevent erosion and sedimentation and to otherwise prevent pollution of wetlands and watercourses.
11-1
SECTION 11
BOND AND INSURANCE
11.1 Upon approval of the application and prior to commencement of any activity, the applicant may, at the discretion of the Agency, be required to file a Letter of Credit, Passbook, or bond with such surety satisfactory to the Agency in such amount and in a form approved by the Agency.
11.2 The bond or surety shall be conditioned on compliance with all provisions of these regulations and the terms, conditions, and limitations established in the permit.
11.3 The Agency may require a person or applicant to take reasonable precautions to protect persons and property from injury and damage which may forseeably result from the activity in the wetlands. These measures may include, but are not limited to, requiring the person or applicant or any agent or contractor to acquire or have public liability insurance during construction or work.
12-1
SECTION 12
ENFORCEMENT
12.1 The Agency may appoint an agent or agents to act in its behalf with the authority to inspect property and issue notices of violation or cease and desist orders and carry out other actions or investigations necessary for the enforcement of these regulations.
12.2 The Agency may condition a permit upon it or its agents making regular inspections of the regulated activities. In no event shall a permit condition hereunder limit the authority of the Agency or its agents to make inspections under any other provision of these regulations as any statute, law, order, or decree.
12.3 In the case in which a permit has not been issued or a permit has expired, the Agency or its agent may make regular inspections at reasonable hours with the consent of the property owner or the authorized agent of the property owner.
12.4 If the Agency or its duly authorized agent finds that any person is conducting or maintaining any activity, facility, or condition which is in violation of the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Act, Sections 22a-36 through 22a-45 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended, or these regulations or any provisions thereof, the Agency or its duly authorized agent may:
a. Issue a written order by certified mail, return receipt requested, to such person conducting such activity or maintaining such facility or condition to immediately cease such activity or to correct such facility or condition. Within ten (10) calendar days of the issuance of such order the Agency shall hold a hearing to provide the person an opportunity to be heard and show cause why the order should not remain in effect. The Agency shall consider the facts presented at the hearing and within ten (10) days of the completion of the hearing notify the person by certified mail that the original order remains in effect, that a revised order is in effect, or that the order has been withdrawn. The Agency shall publish notice of its decision in a newspaper having general circulation in the municipality. The original order shall be effective upon issuance and shall remain in effect until the Agency affirms, revises, or withdraws the order. The issuance of an order pursuant to this section shall not delay or bar an action pursuant to Section 22a-44(b) of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended;
12-2
b. Issue a notice of violation to such person conducting such activity or maintaining such facility or condition, stating the nature of the violation, the jurisdiction of the Agency, and prescribing the necessary action and steps to correct the violation including, without limitation, halting work in wetlands or watercourses. The Agency may request that the individual appear at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Agency to discuss the unauthorized activity, and/or provide a written reply to the notice or file a proper application for the necessary permit. Failure to carry out the action(s) directed in a notice of violation may result in issuance of the order as provided in subsection "a." of this section or other enforcement proceedings as provided by law.
12.5 Suspend or revoke a permit if it finds that the applicant has not complied with the terms, conditions, or limitations set forth in the permit or has exceeded the scope of the work as set forth in the application, including application plans. Prior to revoking any permit, the Agency shall issue notice to the permittee, personally or by certified mail, return receipt requested, setting forth the facts or conduct which warrants the intended action. The permittee shall be given an opportunity at a hearing to show that it is in compliance with its permit and any and all requirements for retention of the permit. The permittee shall be notified of the Agency's decision to suspend, revoke, or maintain a permit by certified mail within fifteen (15) days of the date of its decision.
All of the Agency's actions, rights, and remedies herein are in addition to any other rights, remedies, claims, and courses of action arising under any provision of these regulations or of any provision of any statute, law, order, or decree. All Agency rights, remedies, and actions shall be cumulative and the Agency's act or failure to act under any provision of these regulations or of any statute, law, order, or decree, shall not be construed as limiting or impairing in any way or manner the authority of the Agency or its agents to act under any other provision of these regulations or of any statute, law, order, or decree.
13-1
SECTION 13
AMENDMENTS
13.1 a. These regulations and the Wetlands and Watercourses Map for the Town of Groton may be amended, from time to time, by the Agency in accordance with the provisions of the Connecticut General Statutes.
b. An application filed with the Inland Wetlands Agency which is in conformance with the applicable inland wetlands regulations as of the date of receipt of such application shall not be required thereafter to comply with any change in inland wetlands regulations, including changes to setbacks and buffers, taking effect on or after the date of such receipt and any appeal from the decision of such Agency with respect to such application shall not be dismissed by the Superior Court on the grounds that such a change has taken effect on or after the date of receipt. The provisions of this subsection shall not be construed to apply:
1. to the establishment, amendment or change of boundaries of inland wetlands or watercourses; or,
2. to any change in regulations necessary to make such regulations consistent with the provisions of Chapter 440 of the General Statutes as of the date of such receipt.
13.2 These regulations and the town of Groton Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Map shall be amended in the manner specified in section 22a-42a of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended. The Agency shall provide the Commissioner of Environmental Protection with a copy of any proposed regulations and notice of the public hearing to consider any proposed regulations or amendments thereto, except map amendments, at least thirty-five days before the public hearing on their adoption.
13.3 Petitions requesting changes or amendments to the Wetlands and Watercourses Map, for the Town of Groton, shall contain at least the following information:
a. The applicant's name, address, and telephone number.
b. The owner's name (if not the applicant), address, telephone number.
c. Applicant's interest in the land.
13-2
d. The geographic location of the property involved in the petition including a description of the land in sufficient detail to allow identification of the disputed wetland or watercourse area.
e. The reasons for the requested action.
f. Documentation by a soil scientist of the distribution of wetland soils on such land. Such documentation shall at a minimum include the report of the soil scientist documenting the location of wetland soils on the land and a map of the said land indicating the flag locations set by the soil scientist and defining the boundaries of wetland soil types.
Any person who submits an application to amend the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Map shall bear the burden of proof for all requested map amendments. Such proof may include, but is not limited to, professional interpretation of aerial photography and remote sensing imagery, resource mapping, soils mapping, or other information acceptable to the Agency.
13.4 Watercourses shall be delineated by a soil scientist, geologist, ecologist, or other qualified individual.
13.5 Petitions requesting changes or amendments to the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations shall contain at least the following information:
a. The applicant's name, address, and telephone number.
b. The existing and proposed text.
c. The reasons for the proposed amendment or change.
13.6 A public hearing shall be held on petitions to amend the Wetlands and Watercourses Map or Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations. Notice of the hearing shall be published in a newspaper having substantial circulation in the municipality at least twice at intervals of not less than two (2) days, the first not more than fifteen (15) days nor less than ten (10) days, and the last not less than two (2) days, before the hearing. All materials including maps and documents relating to the petition shall be open for public inspection.
13.7 The Agency shall hold a public hearing on an application to amend the regulations and the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses map within sixty-five days after receipt of such application. The hearing shall be completed within thirty-five days after commencement. The Agency shall act upon the changes
13-3
requested in such application within sixty-five days after completion of such hearing. At such hearing, any person or persons may appear and be heard and may be represented by agent or attorney. The petitioner may consent to one or more extensions of the periods specified in this subsection for the holding of the hearing and for action on such petition, provided the total extension of all such periods shall not be for longer than sixty-five days, or may withdraw such petition. The failure of the Inland Wetlands Agency to act within any time period specified in this subsection, or any extension thereof, shall not be deemed to constitute approval of the petition.
13.8 The Agency shall make its decision and state, in writing, the reasons why the change in the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations or Wetlands and Watercourses Map was made.
14-1
SECTION 14
APPEALS
14.1 Appeal on actions of the Agency shall be made in accordance with the provisions of Section 22a-43 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
14.2 Notice of such appeal shall be served upon the Agency and the Commissioner of Environmental Protection.
15-1
SECTION 15
CONFLICT AND SEVERANCE
15.1 If there is a conflict among the provisions of these regulations, the provision which imposes the most stringent standards for the use of wetlands and watercourses shall govern. The invalidity of any word, clause, sentence, section, part, subsection or provision of these regulations shall not affect the validity of any other part which can be given effect without such invalid part or parts.
15.2 If there is a conflict between the provisions of these regulations and the provisions of the Act, the provisions of the Act shall govern.
16-1
SECTION 16
OTHER PERMITS
16.1 Nothing in these regulations shall obviate the requirements for the applicant to obtain any other assents, permits, or licenses required by law or regulation by the Town of Groton, State of Connecticut, and the Government of the United States, including any approval required by the Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. Obtaining such assents, permits, or licenses is the sole responsibility of the applicant. In all cases, Planning and Zoning decisions must give due consideration to the decisions of the Inland Wetlands Agency.
17-1
SECTION 17
EFFECTIVE DATE OF REGULATIONS
17.1 These regulations, including the Wetlands and Watercourses Map, Groton, Connecticut, application forms, fee schedule, and amendments thereto, shall become effective upon filing in the Office of the Town Clerk and publication of a notice of such action in a newspaper having general circulation in the Town of Groton.
18-1
SECTION 18
APPLICATION FEES
18.1 Fee Schedule
MINOR MAJOR
One (1) lot/one (1) to two (2) $150 $400
dwelling units
Two (2) or more lots/three (3) $150 $400
or more dwelling units
One (1) lot/one (1) commercial $150 $400
or industrial building
Permit amendment or modification $150 $400
Inland Wetlands and Watercourses $400
Regulations or Wetlands
and Watercourses Map amendments
(Eff: 5/1/06)
All fees include a $30.00 state land use fee where applicable.
18.2 Complex Application Fee: If an application is deemed to be complex, the Inland Wetland Agency may charge an additional fee sufficient to cover the cost of reviewing and acting on complex applications. Such fee may include, but not be limited to, the cost of retaining experts to analyze and review reports submitted by the applicant as part of the complex application. The Agency’s designated agent shall estimate the Complex Application Fee within 21 days of the Agency’s receipt of the application. The fee shall be paid prior to the Agency taking action on the complex application. Any portion of the complex application fee in excess of the actual costs incurred shall be refunded to the applicant after publication of the agency’s decision. (Eff: 5/1/06)
18.3 Boards, commissions, councils, and departments of the Town of Groton are exempt from all fee requirements under Section 18 of these regulations. (Eff: 5/1/06)
18-2
Appendix A
Connecticut General Statute Section 1-1(q)
Except as otherwise specifically defined, the words “agriculture” and “farming” shall include cultivation of the soil, dairying, forestry, raising or harvesting any agricultural or horticultural commodity, including the raising, shearing, feeding, caring for, training and management of livestock, including horses, bees, poultry, fur-bearing animals and wildlife, and the raising or harvesting of oysters, clams, mussels, other molluscan shellfish or fish; the operation, management, conservation , improvement or maintenance of a farm and its buildings, tools and equipment, or salvaging timber or cleared land of brush or other debris left by storm, as an incident to such farming operations; the production or harvesting of maple syrup or maple sugar, or any agricultural commodity, including lumber, as an incident to ordinary farming operations or the harvesting of mushrooms, the hatching of poultry, or the construction, operation or maintenance of ditches, canals, reservoirs or waterways used exclusively for farming purposes; handling, planting, drying, packing, packaging, processing, freezing, grading, storing or delivering to storage or to market, or to a carrier for transportation to market, or for direct sale any agricultural or horticultural commodity as an incident to ordinary farming operations, or, in the case of fruits and vegetables, as an incident to the preparation of such fruits or vegetables for market or for direct sale. The term “farm” includes farm buildings, and accessory buildings thereto, nurseries, orchards, ranges, greenhouses, hoophouses and other temporary structures or other structures used primarily for the raising and, as an incident to ordinary farming operations, the sale of agricultural or horticultural commodities. The term “aquaculture” means the farming of the waters of the state and tidal wetlands and the production of protein food, including fish, oysters, clams, mussels and other molluscan shellfish, on leased, franchised and public underwater farm lands. Nothing herein shall restrict the power of a local zoning authority under chapter 124.