Part I, Administrative Legislation 

Chapter 1 
GENERAL PROVISIONS 

1:1 

ARTICLE I 
Adoption of Code[Adopted 1-10-2002] 
§ 1-1. Adoption.
A. The compilation of the ordinances and regulations of the Town 	of Griswold, codified and consolidated into parts, chapters and sections inthe form attached hereto and made a part hereof, is hereby approved,adopted, ordained and enacted as the "Code of the Town of Griswold, Connecticut," hereinafter called the "Code." All provisions contained inthe compilation provided for herein and known as the "Code of the Townof Griswold" shall be in force and effect on and after the effective date of this ordinance. 
B. The adoption of the Code of the Town of Griswold shall have no affect onnor shall the adoption of this ordinance in any way affect the authority, powers, duties or responsibilities of the Planning and ZoningCommission, Conservation Commission or Water Pollution Control Authority by virtue of the inclusion in said Code of the regulations adopted by said Commissions and Authority, nor shall the regulationsof the Planning and Zoning Commission, Conservation Commission orWater Pollution Control Authority be affected thereby, except as the regulations may have been amended by action of the respectiveCommission or Authority. 
§ 1-2. Continuation of existing provisions. 
The provisions of the Code, insofar as they are substantively the same as those ordinances and regulations in force immediately prior to theenactment of the Code by this ordinance, are intended as a continuation of such ordinances and regulations and not as new enactments, and theeffectiveness of such provisions shall date from the date of adoption of theprior ordinance or regulation. All such provisions are hereby continued in full force and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as to their adoption by theTown Meeting. 
§ 1-3. Repeal of inconsistent ordinances. 
All ordinances and regulations or parts thereof of the Town of Griswoldof a general and permanent nature in force on the date of the adoptionof this ordinance which are inconsistent with any provisions of the Code are hereby repealed from and after the effective date of this ordinance;provided, however, that nothing herein shall be construed as repealing oraltering the zoning, subdivision, sewer or inland wetlands regulations of the Town. 
§ 1-4. Severability. 
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section, article or part of this ordinance or of any ordinance or regulation appearing in the Code or included in thisCode through supplementation shall be adjudged by any court of competent 
1:3 

jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidatethe remainder thereof but shall be confined in its operation to the clause, sentence, paragraph, section, article or part thereof directly involved in thecontroversy in which judgment shall have been rendered. 
§ 1-5. Copy of Code on file. [Amended 5-22-2017 STM] 
A copy of the Code, in loose-leaf form, has been filed in the office of theTown Clerk of the Town of Griswold and shall remain there for use and examination by the public until final action is taken on this ordinance; and, if this ordinance shall be adopted, such copy shall be certified to by the TownClerk of the Town of Griswold by impressing thereon the Seal of the Townof Griswold, and such certified copy shall remain on file in the office of said Town Clerk to be made available to persons desiring to examine the sameduring all times while said Code is in effect. The enactment and publicationof this ordinance, coupled with the availability of a copy of the Code for inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and considered to be dueand legal publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes. Said bookcan be purchased through the Town Clerk's Office at the current rate and can also be obtained from the Town's website at www.griswold-ct.org at no cost. 
§ 1-6. Amendments to Code. 
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to any of theordinances or regulations known collectively as the "Code of the Town ofGriswold," or any new ordinances or regulations, when enacted or adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of the Town Meeting to be apart thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into such Code so thatreference to the Code shall be understood and intended to include such additions, deletions, amendments or supplements. Whenever such additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code shall be enacted or adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder, inserted in the loose-leaf book containing said Code, as amendments and supplements thereto. Nothing contained in this ordinanceshall affect the status of any ordinance or regulation contained herein, and such ordinances and regulations may be amended, deleted or changed fromtime to time as the Town Meeting deems desirable. 
§ 1-7. Code book to be kept up-to-date. 
It shall be the duty of the Town Clerk to keep up-to-date the certified copyof the book containing the Code of the Town of Griswold required to be filedin the office of the Town Clerk for use by the public. All changes in said Code and all ordinances adopted by the Town Meeting subsequent to theenactment of this ordinance in such form as to indicate the intention of said Meeting to be a part of said Code shall, when finally enacted or adopted, be included therein by temporary attachment of copies of such changes untilsuch changes are printed as supplements to said Code book, at which timesuch supplements shall be inserted therein.1 
1:4 

§ 1-8. Penalties for tampering with Code. 
Any person who, without authorization from the Town Clerk, changes or amends, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of the Code of theTown of Griswold, or who alters or tampers with such Code in any mannerwhatsoever which will cause the legislation of the Town of Griswold to be misrepresented thereby, or who violates any other provision of thisordinance, shall be guilty of an offense and shall, upon conviction thereof,be subject to a fine of not more than $90. 
§ 1-9. Changes in previously adopted legislation. 
In compiling and preparing the ordinances and regulations for publicationas the Code of the Town of Griswold, no changes in the meaning or intent of such ordinances or regulations have been made, except as have been madeby formal amendment thereto. Certain grammatical changes and otherminor nonsubstantive changes were made in one or more of said ordinances and regulations, as authorized by the Town Meeting. It is the intention ofthe Town Meeting that all such changes be adopted as part of the Code asif the ordinances and regulations had been previously formally amended to read as such. 
§ 1-10. When effective. 
This ordinance shall be effective 15 days after publication in a newspaper having a circulation in the Town of Griswold. 
1. Editor's Note: Former § 1-8, Sale of Code book; supplementation, which immediatelyfollowed this section, was repealed 5-22-2017 STM. This legislation also provided for theredesignation of §§ 1-9 through 1-11 as §§ 1-8 through 1-10, respectively. 
1:5 
Chapter 4 

AGING, COMMISSION ON 
§ 4-1. Establishment. 
There is hereby established a Commission on Aging for the Town of Griswold. 
§ 4-2. Appointment; membership; terms. [Amended 5-22-2017 STM]
A. The Commission shall consist of five voting members. The MunicipalAgent for the Elderly and a health professional licensed and registered by the State of Connecticut shall each be members of the Commission.The other three members shall be electors of the Town of Griswold and appointed by the Board of Selectmen, and shall include, to the extent practicable, a liaison for each senior citizen organization in Griswold.The First Selectman shall be a sixth, nonvoting, ex officio member of theCommission. 
B. The initial terms of each member, other than those of the MunicipalAgent for the Elderly and a health professional, shall be deemed to beginon July 1, 2018, and shall be as follows: 
(1) 
One member shall serve for a period for three years;

(2) 
One member shall serve for a period of two years;

(3) 
One member shall serve for a period of one year; and 

(4) 
Thereafter, prior to the expiration of the initial term of each ofthe three respective members set forth above in this § 4-2B, theBoard of Selectmen shall appoint or reappoint a successor member to serve on the Commission for a term of two years and until hisor her successor is appointed and has qualified; provided, the sameindividual may be reappointed as a successor member, but shall not have a right to such reappointment. The Board of Selectmen retainall rights and authority to appoint, reappoint and/or nonreappointany member of the Commission for a successor term. 


§ 4-3. Meetings. 
The Commission shall meet regularly no less than once during every threeconsecutive calendar months, but the Commission may otherwise meet as often as it deems necessary. 
§ 4-4. Chairman and Vice Chairman. [Amended 5-22-2017 STM] 
On or before January 1, 2018, the Commission members shall elect a Chairman and a Vice Chairman for a term of office to commence January1, 2018 and to expire December 31, 2018. Annually thereafter, at the lastregularly scheduled meeting of the Commission prior to the expiration of the terms of the then-current Chairman and Vice Chairman, the Commission shall elect Chairman and Vice Chairman for subsequent one-year terms(each to commence on January 1 and expire on December 31 of the then-applicable year). If the position of Chairman or Vice Chairman should 
1:6 

become vacant for any reason, the Commission shall elect a replacementfor the balance of the relevant term as soon as possible after the vacancy occurs. The Vice Chairman shall act in place of the Chairman whenever theChairman is absent or the Chairman's position is vacant. If the Commissionshould fail to elect a Chairman or Vice Chairman in accordance with this section, the Board of Selectmen may appoint such office for the relevant term. 
§ 4-5. Powers and duties. 
The duties of the Commission on Aging shall be as follows:
A. Determine the needs and problems of the elderly and alert the Board ofSelectmen and the Senior Citizen Center Director to them. 
B. Review and evaluate the services offered and available to the elderly.
C. 	Advise the elderly of the Town of Griswold of the services and programsavailable to them and encourage their participation in the use of such services. 
D. 	Serve as advisers to the Board of Selectmen and the Board of Finance in relation to the financial support of the programs for the elderly of the Town of Griswold. 
E. Assist and cooperate with the senior organizations in the Town 	of Griswold and endeavor to coordinate programs and services through those organizations.
F. 	Review and recommend local applications for federal and state fundingto be used to provide services and programs for the elderly, including transportation, health, information and referral, companionship,outreach and recreation. 
§ 4-6. Compensation. 
The members of the Commission shall serve without compensation but thenecessary expenses of the Commission shall be paid by the Town throughproper appropriation procedures. 
Chapter 5 
AMBULANCE SERVICE 
§ 5-1. Statutory authority. 
The authority for this chapter is found in Chapter 98, Section 7-148(c)(4)(D)of the Connecticut General Statutes. 
§ 5-2. Provision of service; agreements. 
In the public interest and for the benefit of the inhabitants of the Town ofGriswold, including those residing within the Borough of Jewett City limits,the Griswold Board of Selectmen shall provide for ambulance service to serve in the Town of Griswold and the Borough of Jewett City. 
1:7 

A. The Board of Selectmen, with the advice and consent of the legislativebody of the Town of Griswold, is authorized to enter into an agreement with an ambulance service authorized to serve in the town and to compensate the same through an agreement with the parties.
B. Any and all agreements between the parties shall be binding upon the Town of Griswold and the ambulance service.2 
Chapter 6 

AQUIFER PROTECTION AGENCY 
GENERAL REFERENCES 
Conservation Commission — See Ch. 18. Inland Wetlands and Watercourses — See Ch. 
221. 

Water Pollution Control Authority — See Ch.
111. 
§ 6-1. Designation and membership.
A. In accordance with the provisions of Conn. Gen. Stat. § 22a-354a, etseq., the Griswold Inland Wetlands and Watercourses & ConservationCommission is hereby designated as the Aquifer Protection Agency (hereinafter the "Agency") of the Town of Griswold. (The staff of theGriswold Inland Wetlands and Watercourses & Conservation Commission shall serve as the staff of the Agency.) 
B. Members 	of the Griswold Inland Wetlands and Watercourses & Conservation Commission shall serve coexisting terms on the Agency.The membership requirements of the Agency shall be the same as those of the Griswold Inland Wetlands and Watercourses & Conservation Commission including, but not limited to the number of members, terms,method of selection and removal of members, and filling of vacancies. 
C. 	At least one member of the Agency or staff of the Agency shall completethe course in technical training formulated by the Commissioner ofEnvironmental Protection of the State of Connecticut, pursuant to Conn. Gen. Stat. § 22a-354v. 
§ 6-2. Regulations to be adopted. [Amended 5-22-2017 STM] 
The Agency adopted regulations on March 15, 2012 in accordance with Conn. Gen. Stat. § 22a-354p and Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies(R.C.S.A.) § 22a-354i-3. Said regulations shall provide for:
A. The manner in which boundaries of aquifer protection areas shall be established and amended or changed.
B. Procedures for the regulation of activity within the area. 
2. Editor's Note: Former § 5-3, Definitions, § 5-4, Benefits, § 5-5, Volunteers serving anotherambulance company, § 5-6, Budget, § 5-7, Expenditures, § 5-8, Construal of provisions, and§ 5-9, Inventory of real and personal property, which immediately followed this section,were repealed 5-22-2017 STM. 
1:8 
C. 	The form for an application to conduct regulated activities within the area. 
D. 	Notice and publication requirements.
E. Criteria and procedures for the review of applications.
F. 	Administration and enforcement. 
§ 6-3. Inventory of land use.
A. The 	Griswold Aquifer Protection Area was delineated throughConnecticut's Level A Mapping process by DEEP. The Griswold Aquifer Protection Area was delineated for active public water supply wells instratified drift that serve more than 1,000 people, in accordance withSections 22a-354c and 22a-354z of the Connecticut General Statutes. Level A Mapping delineates the final Aquifer Protection Area, whichbecomes the regulatory boundary for land use controls designated to protect the well area from contamination. [Amended 5-22-2017 STM]
B. Not later than three months after approval by the Commissioner ofthe Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection of Level 13 Mapping of aquifers, the Agency will inventory land uses overlying themapped zone of contribution and recharge areas of such aquifers inaccordance with guidelines established by the Commissioner pursuant to Conn. Gen. Stat. § 22a-354f. Such inventory shall be completed notmore than one year after authorization of the Agency. [Conn. Gen. Stat.§ 22a-354e] 
Chapter 10 


BUDGET AND APPROPRIATIONS 
GENERAL REFERENCES 
Contracts — See Ch. 24. 	Board of Finance — See Ch. 40. 
§ 10-1. Limitation on budget expenditures; exceptions. [Amended5-22-2017 STM; 3-26-2019] 
The total budget expenditures for any given year shall not be increased over the preceding annual Town budget year by an actual dollar amount inexcess of revenue generated by the projected increase in the grand list, thereceipt of state and federal income in excess of the amounts of such income received in the preceding fiscal year and other miscellaneous income. Theincrease in monies generated from an increase in the grand list shall becalculated by using the previous year's mill rate. This revision is subject to the following:
A. In the event that the long-term bonding debt and associated debt serviceor long-term public obligation shall increase the budget as the result of Town Meeting action or public referendum, the budget may be increasedby this amount and the additional funding may be raised by taxation. 
1:9 

B. In the event that a specific revenue account, other than property taxes,is projected to decrease, the limit on total budget expenditures shall be reduced by the amount of the projected decrease unless the service isfunded with the proviso that the Board of Selectmen recommend suchfunding as necessary to protect the public health, safety or welfare and the same is approved by the Board of Finance as per Section 7-348 ofthe Connecticut General Statutes and approved by simple majority ofthe electors and voters voting in a Special Town Meeting or referendum called for that purpose.
C. 	In the event of an increase in the grand list due to revaluation, the actualdollar amount of increase in the projected budget shall be limited to the dollar amount of increase in the previous year's budget or the averageamount of increase of the previous three years' budgets, whichever islarger. 
D. 	This limitation on budget expenditures for any fiscal year shall not applyto any expenditure necessary to pay:
(1) 
Deficits or projected deficits from any prior year's budget or notes given to pay the same.

(2) 
Expenditures and appropriations for special projects that will befunded by bonds, notes or other forms of borrowing. 

(3) 
Debt service on bonds, notes or other obligations of the Town.

(4) 
Judgments or settlements of claims against the Town.

(5) 
Expenditures mandated by the state and federal government in excess of the mandated expenditures included in the annual Townbudget adopted for the preceding fiscal year.

(6) 
Expenditures occasioned by natural disasters, civil disorders 	or other definable emergencies, provided that the Board of Finance,upon recommendation of the Board of Selectmen, determines thatsuch expenditure is necessary to alleviate a serious condition endangering the public health, safety or welfare.

(7) 
Expenditure increases which will be paid solely from grants, gifts orrevenues other than property taxes. 


§ 10-2. Secret ballots. [Added 12-10-1987 STM; amended 9-11-2003STM] 
Whenever an Annual or Special Town Meeting is duly warned and called for the purpose of voting on any of the Town's budgetary/fiscal matters,including but not limited to supplemental appropriations thereto, involvingamounts in excess of $10,000, the substantive vote on said budgetary/fiscal matters shall be by secret ballot. The secret ballot vote required hereundershall not apply to ministerial or procedural matters that may arise duringthe course of a meeting or to supplemental appropriations to the extent such appropriations are to be funded by state, federal or other grants ordonations that have previously been approved by the relevant agencies. 
1:10 

§ 10-3. Annual Budget Meetings and Board of Finance hearings.[Added 12-12-1991 STM; amended 6-2-2000 STM; 5-14-2008referendum; 11-15-2016 ATM; 5-22-2017 STM; 3-26-2019] 
The Annual Budget Meeting shall be held no later than the second Mondayof the month of June immediately preceding the fiscal year. In accordance with Section 7-344 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as it may beamended, the Board of Finance shall hold a public hearing not less thantwo weeks before the Annual Budget Meeting. At such hearing, the Board of Finance will present itemized estimates of the expenditures of the Town forthe ensuing fiscal year and shall allow all persons to be heard with respectto such appropriations as they are desirous that the Board of Finance should recommend or reject. Following such hearing, the Board of Finance shallhold a public meeting at which it shall adopt a final budget report to besubmitted to the Annual Budget Meeting as required by Section 7-344 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as it may be amended. The Board of Financeshall submit such report to the Board of Selectmen and the Town Clerk in asufficiently timely fashion to allow publication of the report on a date prior to the date of the Annual Budget Meeting. Upon completion of any and allother business that may properly come before the Annual Budget Meetingand after a reasonable opportunity for discussion of and action on the Board of Finance's recommended appropriations, the Annual Budget Meeting shallbe adjourned to a referendum to be held on a date not less than sevendays nor more than 14 days thereafter. At such referendum, the question of whether to approve the proposed total appropriation for the Board ofEducation shall be voted on separately from the question of whether toapprove the promised Town operating budget, as each may have been reduced by the Annual Budget Meeting. The date of such referendum shallbe set by the Annual Budget Meeting or, if the Meeting does not set a date,by the Board of Selectmen. The hours of such vote shall be between 6:00 
a.m. and 8:00 p.m. In the event that the proposed appropriation is defeated,the Board of Finance shall promptly prepare a revised proposal which willbe considered and adjourned to a referendum to be held on a date not less than seven nor more than 14 days thereafter. As authorized by said Section7-344 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as it may be amended, budgetreferendum ballots may contain nonbinding, advisory questions to inquire whether the Town portion of the budget is too high or too low, and whetherthe Board of Education portion of the budget is too high or too low. 
§ 10-4. Appropriations for contracts involving unusualexpenditures. [Added 12-12-1991 STM] 
The approval of an additional appropriation for any department as providedfor in Section 7-348 of the Connecticut General Statutes, which appropriation, together with the sum of any other additional appropriationsmade for said department within the same fiscal year, exceeds $50,000shall require the affirmative vote of a majority of those qualified voters voting in a referendum called for such purpose. No request for an additionalappropriation shall be submitted to a referendum by the terms of thissection without first having been submitted to the Board of Finance for its 
1:11 

recommendations and to the Town at an informational Town Meeting (forsuch amendments as may be adopted at such a Town Meeting) called by the Board of Selectmen. 
A. Nothing contained herein shall affect any contract and/or appropriationmade under Section 7-348 of the Connecticut General Statutes relating to the repair of highways, bridges, sidewalks and water and sewer systems and the care of the Town poor.
B. The date of any such referendum shall be set by the Board of Selectmen no longer than 30 days nor less than five days after said informationalTown Meeting. 
C. 	The provisions of this section requiring a referendum vote shall not apply to any request for a supplemental appropriation to the extent suchappropriation is to be funded by one or more state, federal or othergrants or donations that have previously been approved by the relevant agencies, officials or organizations. [Added 9-11-2003 STM] 
Chapter 14 
CLERK 
14:12 

ARTICLE I 
Compensation
[Adopted 10-13-1969 STM] 

§ 14-1. Salary in lieu of fees. 
The salary of the Town Clerk of the Town of Griswold, for the term of office beginning on the first Monday of January 1970 and all the terms thereafter,shall be paid in lieu of all fees presently received by the Town Clerk ascompensation and on condition that all fees to which he is entitled under the state statutes be made payable to the Town of Griswold as a revenue ofthe Town. 
14:13 

ARTICLE II 
Term of Office 
[Adopted 3-14-1985 STM] 

§ 14-2. Term established. 
In accordance with Section 9-189a of the General Statutes of Connecticut, revised to January 1, 1985, the Town Clerk for the Town of Griswold shall,at the next succeeding regular election for such office and thereafter, beelected for a term of four years from the first Monday of January succeeding such election. 
14:15 

Chapter 18 
CONSERVATION COMMISSION 
GENERAL REFERENCES 

Meetings — See Ch. 56. Conservation Commission Bylaws — See Ch. 
231. 
Inland wetlands and watercourses — See Ch. 
221. 
18:16 

ARTICLE I 
Establishment 
[Adopted 11-18-1971 STM] 

§ 18-1. Membership; qualifications. 
There shall be a Conservation Commission of the Town of Griswold to consist of five members who shall be electors of the Town of Griswold. 
§ 18-2. Powers and duties. 
The Conservation Commission of the Town of Griswold shall have all the authority provided Conservation Commissions under the General Statutesof the State of Connecticut. 
§ 18-3. Appointment; terms of office. 
The initial membership of the Commission shall be appointed so that theterms of office of two of its members shall expire on the date of the biennialelection for the Town of Griswold in November 1973 and the terms of office of three of its members shall expire on the date of the biennial election forthe Town of Griswold in November 1975. Thereafter, as the term of each member of the Commission expires, the successor shall be appointed to serve a term of four years. 
§ 18-4. Residency requirements. 
In the event that any member of the Conservation Commission shall cease to be a resident of the Town of Griswold, his office shall be deemed vacant. 
18:17 

ARTICLE II 
Promulgation of Regulations[Adopted 11-19-1973 STM] 
§ 18-5. Authority. 
The Griswold Conservation Commission is hereby designated the agency authorized to promulgate regulations under Sections 22a-37 through22a-45 of the Connecticut General Statutes (Revision of 1958), the InlandWetlands and Watercourses Act, for the purpose of protecting the wetlands and watercourses of the Town of Griswold.3 
§ 18-6. Hearings; notices. 
The Commission shall hold a public hearing prior to the adoption or amendment of any regulations. Notice of the time and place of such hearingshall be published in a newspaper having a circulation in the Town not lessthan five days prior to the date of such hearing. A copy of the proposed regulations or amendment shall be on file in the office of the Town Clerkat least five days prior to such hearing. The regulations and amendmentsshall become effective upon notice of their adoption by publication in a newspaper having a circulation in the Town. 
3. Editor's Note: See Ch. 221, Inland Wetlands and Watercourses. 
18:19 
Chapter 21 
CONSTABLES 
§ 21-1. Elected position abolished. 
The position/office only of such Constables as elected on the ballot shall beeliminated and abolished. 
Chapter 24 
CONTRACTS 

GENERAL REFERENCES 

Budget and appropriations — See Ch. 10. 
§ 24-1. Advertising for bids. 
Except as provided in §§ 24-2 and 24-3 of the Code of Ordinances, nocontract for services or purchases that are anticipated to cost $7,500 or more shall be authorized by the Board of Selectmen until a proposed contract, or a request for proposals, for such services or purchases has beenput out to bid by advertising in a newspaper having a general circulationin the Town of Griswold and the bids received have been opened and announced in the public view. For purposes of this section, the term"services" shall mean services to be provided in connection with discretematters of limited duration, such as, but not limited to, specific building or construction projects. 
§ 24-2. Exemptions.
A. Routine professional services. Unless otherwise required by law, this chapter shall not apply to services provided by professional consultantswho are appointed to handle on-going, routine Town business on a regular basis and whose appointment may be terminated at will by the Town, such as, but not limited to, the Town Attorney and Town Engineer.
B. Emergencies. Nothing in this chapter shall preclude the Board ofSelectmen from acting in an emergency, provided that the facts constituting the emergency have been stated in writing and placed onthe record of the special meeting of the Board of Selectmen called forthat purpose. For purposes of this subsection, the term "emergency" shall mean a breakdown in machinery or equipment resulting in theinterruption of an essential service or a distinct threat to public health,safety, or welfare. 
C. 	Proprietary or limited-source items. When required supplies, materials,equipment, or services are of a proprietary nature, or are otherwise ofsuch specific design or construction as to be available from one or few vendors, or are specifically desired for purposes of maintaining cost­
21:20 

effective system consistency, the Board of Selectmen may waive bidding
procedures; provided, however, that where such items or services are 
available from more than one source, the Board of Selectmen must make 
a specific finding, either:

(1) 
That reasonable efforts were made to seek bids or proposals from all 
known sources of the items or services; or 


(2) 
That, because of the Town's history of securing such items 	or 
services from one provider, the Town would be best served by 
continuing the relationship with that provider. 


D. 	
Continuing provision of goods or services. The Board of Selectmen maywaive bidding when: 

(1) 
Supplies, materials, equipment, or services are to be provided in
connection with discrete matters of limited duration, such as, but 
not limited to, specific building or construction projects that extend 
beyond the end of any fiscal year;


(2) 
The Town used bidding procedures to designate the provider(s) of
such supplies, materials, equipment, or services when the relevant 
matter was initiated, or as soon thereafter as the supplies, materials,
equipment or services were needed;


(3) 
The same or similar supplies, materials, equipment or services would 
continue to be delivered by the same providers; and


(4) 
The relevant provider or providers have performed satisfactorily and
have not defaulted on any obligations to the Town. 


E. 
Cooperative purchasing. The Board of Selectmen may waive biddingprocedures when the Town would be joining with other municipalities toprocure supplies, materials, equipment, or services through cooperative purchasing or service agreements.

F. 	
State or federal requirements. The procedures established pursuant to§ 24-1 shall be deemed to be superseded whenever state or federal laws or regulations proscribe different procedures.

G. 	
State procurements. The Board of Selectmen may waive biddingprocedures when the State of Connecticut has performed a bid process and allows municipalities' access to their bid rates. 


§ 24-3. Invalidity of contracts. 
Any contract for services or purchases costing $7,500 or more shall be deemed null and void if it has not been properly bid in accordance with§ 24-1 and it is not exempt from bidding requirements pursuant to § 24-2. 
§ 24-4. Bid preference for Town-based businesses. [Added8-12-2014]
A. Definition; applicability; affidavit.
(1) For the purpose of this section "Town-based business" shall mean a business with a principal place of business located within the legal boundaries of theTown of Griswold, including the Borough of Jewett City (the "Town"), for morethan 18 months, in a location appropriately zoned for that business and which operates on a day-to-day basis. A business shall not be considered a Town-based business unless evidence satisfactory to the Board of Selectmen hasbeen submitted with each bid submitted by such business to establish that the 
21:21 

business has a bona fide principal place of business within the Town. Suchevidence may include evidence of ownership of, or a long-term lease (greater than one year) for, the real estate from which the principal place of businessis operated at the time of bid submission and for the duration of the business'Town contract and/or payment of property taxes to the Town on the personal property of the business to be used in the performance of the bid. This proof,together with the affidavit provided for in Subsection A(2), must be submittedat the same time and in the same manner as any bid in order to be considered a Town-based business. Late or incomplete submissions will not be reviewed.No bid will be considered if the Town-based business is delinquent, as of thedate of the submission of its bid, on its real estate, personal property and/ or motor vehicle tax obligations to the Town. Post office boxes, secondary orsatellite offices shall not be considered for purposes of determining whether ornot the business constitutes a Town-based business. Determination of whether or not the business qualifies as a Town-based business shall be made by theTown and shall be final. This section shall not apply in any situation wherethe preference created by this section would violate federal or state law or any existing contracts. Further, this section shall not apply when the bid inquestion involves a cooperative purchasing agreement between the Town andother municipalities or the State of Connecticut. 
(2) 
Subject to any other provisions set forth herein, the provisions of SubsectionA(1) are applicable to contracts for the procurement of goods and/or serviceswhere competitive bidding or a request for proposal ("RFP") is required or elected by the Town and the total contract price or value is over $7,500.

(3) 
In publishing its RFP for a Town contract for goods or services, the Town shallinclude a copy of this section and the following affidavit: 


AFFIDAVIT PURSUANT TO THE 
ORDINANCE PROVIDING FOR BID PREFERENCE FOR TOWN-BASED BUSINESSES 
The undersigned, being duly sworn, disposes and says as follows: 
1. 	
That he/she is over the age of 18 years of age; 

2. 	
That he/she believes in and understands the obligations of an oath; 

3. 	
That he/she is submitting a bid as a Town-based business, pursuant tothose conditions delineated in the Town of Griswold's Ordinance Providingfor Bid Preference for Town-based businesses. 

4. 	
That he/she believes that his/her business, qualifies as a Town-based business, pursuant to those conditions delineated in the Town of Griswold'sOrdinance Providing for Bid Preference for Town-based businesses. 


Name of Local Bidder Date 
(Please Print) 
Signature of Local Bidder 

B. After opening all bids that 	were presented on time and according to bidspecifications, the lowest qualified and complete bid shall be determined. If thelowest qualified and complete bid is not a Town-based business, the bid may 
21:22 

be offered to a Town-based business if the business also submitted an on-time, qualified and complete bid and is within 10% of the determined low bid. If there is more than one Town-based business who qualifies and who is within10% of the determined low bid, then the bid will be offered to the Town-based business with the lowest submitted bid first; if declined, then it would be offered to the next lowest Town-based business who submitted an on-time, qualified andcomplete bid and is within 10% of the determined low bid and so on and soforth until it is accepted by a Town-based business or offered to all who meet the criteria previously mentioned. If the bid is accepted by a qualified Town-based business that was within 10% of the determined low bid, the Town-based business bidder must agree to match the determined low bid. If there are no qualified and complete Town-based businesses within 10% of the determinedlow bid, or if the bid is refused by all such Town-based businesses within 10% ofthe determined low bid, then the determined lowest qualified and complete bid shall be deemed to be awarded. In all instances, the acceptance by the biddershall be submitted, in writing, to the Town, and received by the Town, duringthe next business day following the offer made by the Town. The Town's decision hereunder shall be final. 
C. 	General contractors or professional service companies who are awarded thebid and who will subcontract services or materials must place a RFP in a publication of general circulation within the Town, or send the RFP to theTown's Finance Director for placement on the Town website, for anytradespersons or materials needed to complete the Town project. When bids for the subcontract work are received, the same process noted in SubsectionB above shall be followed. The general contractor or professional servicecompany shall verify with the Board of Selectmen the Town-based business qualification of any proposed Town-based business subcontractor. The Boardof Selectmen may provide a waiver from using a Town-based business subcontractor if the general contractor or professional service company presents reasonable cause (as determined by the Board of Selectmen) to not use a Town-based business subcontractor. After bids from any proposedsubcontractor (both Town-based business and non-Town-based business) are opened by the general contractor or professional service company, a list of suchbids, along with their bid price, a designation of whether they qualify as aTown-based business and the determined low bid price, must be submitted by the general contractor or professional service company to the Town's FinanceDirector within seven calendar days. The Town's decision hereunder shall befinal. 
D. 	The foregoing section shall apply to all Town bids for all Town departments,with the following exceptions:
(1) 
Professional services awarded 	on subjective and objective criteria, in addition to cost. 

(2) 
Contracts 	using state, federal or other funds that have governingregulations disallowing such practice, including school construction subject to statutorily required competitive bidding.

(3) 
In the event where any federal or state grant, in whole or in part, is used tofund any part of the project, purchase or contract, and the state or federal guidelines or requirements prohibit or restrict local preferences, then thereshall be no local preference. 


21:23 

E. This section will become effective 30 days after publication in accordance withlaw. 
Chapter 29 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION 
GENERAL REFERENCES 

Meetings — See Ch. 56. 
§ 29-1. Acceptance of statutory provisions. [Amended 7-11-2006STM] 
Section 7-136 of the General Statutes of Connecticut, as revised to January1, 2005, is hereby accepted and adopted. 
§ 29-2. Establishment; purpose; powers and duties. [Amended7-11-2006 STM]
A. There shall be, and the same is hereby established, in the Town of Griswold an Economic Development Commission for the promotion anddevelopment of the economic resources of the Town of Griswold, hereinafter referred to as the "Commission," exercising the powers conferred upon the Commission by said § 7-136 and all other powers andauthority thereto enabling.
B. The Commission shall conduct research into the economic conditions and trends in its municipality, shall make recommendations to appropriate officials and agencies of its municipality regarding action to improve its economic condition and development, shall seek to coordinate the activities of and cooperate with unofficial bodies organized to promote such economic development and may advertiseand may prepare, print and distribute books, maps, charts and pamphlets which in its judgment will further its official purposes. 
§ 29-3. Membership; appointment; qualifications; terms of office;vacancies. [Amended 2-7-1985 STM; 6-6-1991 STM] 
The Commission shall consist of five members appointed by the Board ofSelectmen. All members shall be electors of the Town of Griswold. The original members shall be appointed for the following terms: two for two years and three for three years, and thereafter, upon the expiration of suchoriginal terms, each new appointment shall be for a term of five years. TheSelectmen shall fill any vacancy by appointment for the unexpired portion of the term then becoming vacant. 
21:24 

§ 29-4. Removal; hearings. 
Any member may be removed by the Selectmen for cause and, on request of such member, after public hearing at which he shall be provided reasonableopportunity to be heard in his own defense. 
§ 29-5. Officers; rules and regulations; records. [Amended5-22-2017 STM] 
Said Commission shall elect a Chairman, Vice Chairman and Secretary fromamong its members, for such terms as the Commission shall designate, to hold such office until a successor shall have been elected and qualified.The Commission shall have the power to make rules and regulations for thetransaction of its business and shall keep a record of all votes and of the proceedings of its meetings. The Chairman and/or Vice Chairman shall havethe responsibility to provide information to the media. 
§ 29-6. Financial report. [Amended 4-26-1984 STM; 2-7-1985 STM;7-11-2006 STM] 
The Economic Development Commission shall submit an audited financialreport to the Town's Board of Finance at the time of the annual audit. The Commission's audited financial report shall indicate and itemize allincome and revenues received from any source, be it federal, state or Town,including but not limited to moneys, grants, real estate, gifts or in-kind services. Further, said audited financial report shall indicate and itemize allexpenditures of said Commission and state whether the same were paid bycash or check. 
§ 29-7. Annual report. [Added 7-11-2006 STM4] 
The Commission shall annually prepare and transmit to the legislative bodyof its municipality a report of its activities and of its recommendations for improving such economic conditions and development. 
§ 29-8. Salaries and compensation. [Amended 7-11-2006 STM] 
No member of the Commission shall receive compensation except for his necessary expenses incurred in the performance of his official duties. 
§ 29-9. Expenditures. [Amended 7-11-2006 STM] 
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to authorize or empower the Commission to expend funds other than within the appropriation made to itpursuant to law or funds derived from gifts, grants or other sources madeavailable for its use for the purposes prescribed by statute. 
Chapter 35 

4. Editor's Note: This enactment also redesignated former §§ 29-7 and 29-8 as §§ 29-8 and29-9, respectively. 
21:25 


ETHICS, CODE OF 
§ 35-1. Title. [Amended 10-24-2017 STM] 
This chapter shall be known and referred to as the “Code of Ethics” of theTown of Griswold. The forms referenced in this Code of Ethics (Form A,Request for Advisory Opinion; Form B, Complaint of Alleged Ethics Code Violation; and Form C, Agreement to Comply with the Griswold Code ofEthics) are located at the end of this chapter and are also available inthe office of the Griswold Town Clerk. The Commission may modify or discontinue use of such forms, or create new forms, upon the affirmativevote of at least four concurring members of the Commission during themeeting of the Commission duly called for such purpose. 
§ 35-2. Statement of purpose. [Amended 10-24-2017 STM] 
Public office is a public trust. The trust of the public is essential forgovernment to function effectively. Public policy developed by government officials and employees affects every citizen of the Town of Griswold, and itmust be based on honest and fair deliberations and decisions. This processmust be free from threats, favoritism, undue influence, conflicts of interest and all forms of impropriety so that the confidence of the public is noteroded. By enacting this chapter, the Town of Griswold seeks to avoid anyloss of trust and to maintain and increase the confidence of its citizens in the integrity and fairness of their government. 
§ 35-3. Application. 
This chapter shall be applied to and be binding upon every officer, official, agent, employee, consultant, agency and every member of any board,commission or committee of the Town of Griswold. 
§ 35-4. Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words shall have themeanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
ADVISORY OPINION — A written opinion of the Commission interpreting this Ethics Code or applying any of its provisions to a given statement offacts. 
BUSINESS WITH WHICH HE OR SHE IS ASSOCIATED — Any sole proprietorship, partnership, firm, corporation, trust or her entity throughwhich business for profit or not for profit is conducted in which the Townofficial or employee or a member of his or her immediate family is a director, officer, owner, limited or general partner, beneficiary of a trust or holder ofstock constituting 5% or more of the total outstanding stock of any class. 
COMMISSION — The municipal ethics commission established in this Chapter 35. 
21:26 

CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION — Information, whether transmitted orallyor in writing, that a person obtains by reason of the public position or office he or she holds and is of such nature that it is not, at the time of transmission, a matter of public record or public knowledge. 
CONFLICT OF INTEREST — No person subject to this Code of Ethics shall have any interest, financial or otherwise, direct or indirect, or engage inany business, employment, transaction or professional activity, or incur anyobligation of any nature, which is in substantial conflict with the proper discharge of his or her public duties or employment. Without limitationof the generality of the foregoing sentence, a person subject to this Codeof Ethics has an interest which is in substantial conflict with the proper discharge of his or her duties or employment in the public interest and ofhis or her responsibilities as prescribed by applicable law and/or the Townof Griswold if he or she has reason to believe or expect that he or she, or his or her immediate family member or a business with which he or she orsuch immediate family member is associated, will derive a direct monetarygain or suffer a direct monetary loss, as the case may be, by reason of his or her official activity. Such person does not have an interest which is insubstantial conflict with the proper discharge of his or her duties in thepublic interest and of his or her responsibilities as prescribed by applicable law and/or the Town of Griswold if any benefit or detriment accrues to suchperson, his or her immediate family member or a business with which suchperson or his or her immediate family member is associated as a member of a profession, occupation or group to no greater extent than any othermember of such business, profession, occupation or group. All personssubject to this Code of Ethics shall seek to avoid even the appearance of impropriety as it relates to this section. A person subject to this Code ofEthics who has a substantial conflict may not take official action on such matter.[Added 10-24-2017 STM] 
EMPLOYEE — See "Town employee." 
GIFT — Anything of value, including entertainment, food, beverage, travel, and lodging given or paid to a Town official or employee, unless consideration of equal or greater value is given by the Town official oremployee in return. A gift does not include: 
A. 	A political contribution, as defined in C.G.S. § 9-601a (formerly§ 9-333b) that is otherwise reported as required by law, or any type ofpayment or donation of personal property described in that statute; 
B. 	Services provided to the Town, or to a Town commission, board oragency, by persons volunteering their time; 
C. 	A commercially reasonable loan made on terms not more favorable than loans made in the ordinary course of business; 
D. 	A gift received from an individual's spouse, fiance, parent, brother,sister, child, grandparent, great-grandparent, aunt, uncle, niece, or nephew, or from a parent of the individual's spouse or a spouse of theindividual's child; 
21:27 

E. 	Goods or services that are provided to the Town and that facilitate theTown's action or functions; 
F. 	A certificate, plaque or other ceremonial award costing less than $200; 
G. 	A rebate, discount or promotional item available to the general public; 
H. 	Printed or recorded informational material germane to Town action or functions; 
I. 	Items of nominal value containing or displaying promotional material; 
J. 	An honorary degree bestowed upon a Town official or employee by a public or private university or college; 
K. 	A meal provided at an event at which the Town official or employeeparticipates in his official capacity, and a waiver of the registration and entrance fees to attend such an event; 
L. 	A meal provided in the home by an individual who resides in the municipality; 
M. 	Items of nominal value tendered on gift-giving occasions generallyrecognized by the public, including Christmas, Hanukkah, birthdays,the birth or adoption of a child, weddings, confirmations or bar/bat mitzvah, provided the total value of such gifts in any calendar year doesnot exceed $50; and 
N. 	Other items of nominal value, provided the total value of such gifts in any calendar year does not exceed $50. 
IMMEDIATE FAMILY — Any parent, spouse, child or dependent relative. 
INDEPENDENT CONTRACTOR — A person who supplies goods or services to the Town of Griswold under a purchase order, contract, or agreement, butwho would not be defined or deemed to be a "municipal employee" withinthe meaning of Chapter 113 of the Connecticut General Statutes. 
INDIVIDUAL — A natural person. 
NOMINAL VALUE — A value of $25 or less. 
OFFICIAL — See "Town official." 
OFFICIAL RESPONSIBILITY — The direct administrative or operatingauthority, whether intermediate or final and whether exercisable personally or through subordinates, to approve, disapprove, or otherwise direct government action. 
PERSON — An individual, sole proprietorship, trust, corporation, union,association, firm, partnership, committee, club or other organization or group of persons. 
TOWN CONSULTANT — A person who is hired to provide specificinformation and/or advice to the Town on an independent contractual basis, but who is not an employee of the Town. 
21:28 

TOWN EMPLOYEE — An individual, other than an independent contractor,who is employed by the Town of Griswold in any capacity, whether as a classified or unclassified employee or on a contractual, permanent, temporary, full-time or part-time basis. 
TOWN OFFICIAL — An elected or appointed official, whether paid or unpaid or full- or part-time, of the Town of Griswold. 
§ 35-5. Ethics Commission members; appointment; qualifications;vacancies. 
A. There shall be an Ethics Commission consisting of five regular membersand one alternate member who shall be appointed by the Board ofSelectmen, provided that the appointment of each such member must be by a unanimous vote of the Selectmen. The members of the Commissionshall each serve for a term of three years, except that, of the initiallyappointed members, one shall serve for one year, two shall serve for two years, and two shall serve for three years. No more than three shall bemembers of the same political party. Each member must be an electorof the Town of Griswold. No member shall be a member of the Board of Selectmen, Board of Education, Board of Finance, Planning and ZoningCommission, Zoning Board of Appeals, Inland Wetlands Commission,or any other commission, board or agency of the Town of Griswold. Members cannot hold or campaign for public municipal office, or beemployed by the Town or Borough of Jewett City for a two-year periodprior to appointment. Members must be free of any violations of any state, municipal or professional code of ethics. The alternate membershall be included in all Commission meetings and discussions, but thealternate shall not vote unless a regular member steps aside or is not present at the time of the vote.
B. In the event that the Board of Selectmen cannot 	or does not fill a vacancy on the Ethics Commission by unanimous appointment within 60 days of the occurrence of the vacancy, the Board may, by majorityvote, recommend an appointment to the Town Meeting, subject to thequalifications set forth in Subsection A. The Town Meeting may approve or reject such recommendation by majority vote. In the event, and onlyafter, the Town Meeting rejects such an appointment, the Town Meetingmay move to appoint any other person meeting the qualifications set forth in Subsection A to fill the vacancy. Any such appointment by TownMeeting shall require a majority vote of those present and qualified tovote at the Town Meeting. 
§ 35-6. Officers; meetings; quorum; absences.
A. The Commission shall elect a Chairperson, who shall preside at meetingsof the Commission; a Vice-Chairperson to preside in the absence of the Chairperson; and a Secretary to receive correspondence, prepareagendas and prepare official minutes of Commission meetings.
B. A meeting may be called at any time by the Chairperson or by a written request for a meeting signed by at least three members of the Commission. A meeting shall also be called within 30 days after the 
21:29 

receipt of any complaint regarding any alleged violation of the Code ofEthics. 
C. 	Four members shall constitute a quorum. An affirmative vote of at leastfour concurring members of the Commission shall be required for theCommission to make an official finding that any person has violated the Code of Ethics or an official finding that there is probable cause tobelieve that any person has done so. 
D. 	The Commission shall have the power, by a unanimous vote of the other members, to dismiss any member who has been absent from threeCommission meetings without good cause. Good cause shall includevacations, health, and unexpected family-related commitments. Any vacancy in the Commission caused by the removal of any member forgood cause shall be filled for the balance of the relevant term in accordance with the guidelines set forth above. 
E. All meetings of the Commission are open to the public. The Commissionmay close certain portions of its meetings (Executive Session) by avote of 2/3 of the members present and voting in accordance with the provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.5 
F. 	Any official, council or board member shall withdraw himself or herselffrom any involvement from any matter which may constitute a conflict of interest. Recusal shall be done in accordance with the provisions setforth in the Town of Griswold ordinance on meetings (§ 56-6). [Added10-24-2017 STM] 
§ 35-7. Duties of Commission.
A. The Commission shall compile and maintain minutes of meetings. It shallalso provide a written report to the Board of Selectmen annually on or before February 1 summarizing the activities of the Commission.
B. The Commission may employ necessary staff or outside counsel withinavailable appropriations. 
C. 	The Commission shall have the power to render advisory opinions withrespect to the requirements of this code upon the request of a Townofficial, employee, or consultant via use of Form A.6 A request for an advisory opinion shall be filed with the Town Clerk who, within twobusiness days of receipt, shall notify the Commission Chairperson of therequest and send such Chairperson a copy of the completed Form A and all attachments. The Commission shall issue an advisory opinion within30 days of the Town Clerk's receipt of the request for such opinion. Suchopinions, until amended or revoked, whether by subsequent request of a Town official, employee or consultant or on the Commission's owninitiative, shall be binding on the Commission, and good faith relianceon such opinions shall be an absolute defense to any complaint filed pursuant to § 35-8. 
D. Upon the complaint of any person on prescribed Form B7 and signedunder penalty of false statement, the Commission shall investigate any alleged violation of this code in accordance with the provisions of § 35-8. 
5. 
Editor's Note: See C.G.S. § 1-200 et seq. 

6. 
Editor's Note: Form A is included at the end of this chapter. 


21:30 
E. In compliance with C.G.S. § 1-82a and the Freedom of Information Act(FOIA), the Griswold Ethics Commission will utilize a tiered approach to all investigations:
(1) 
Conduct an inquiry and make a determination as to whether thereexists probable cause that a violation of the Ethics Code has occurred. This first tier inquiry and its procedures should be separately and completely set forth and, unless the respondent requests otherwise, are confidential while on-going. If the Commission finds no probable cause, the matter is effectively overand, per C.G.S. § 1-82a(d), the investigation remains confidential.

(2) 
If the Commission finds that there exists probable 	cause that a code violation has occurred, then its entire inquiry is public, andsubsequent proceedings, records, hearing and meetings are publicunder FOIA. In the conduct of its investigation of an alleged violation of this chapter, the Commission shall have the power to hold hearings, administer oaths, examine witnesses, receive oral anddocumentary evidence, subpoena witnesses under procedural rules adopted by the Commission to compel attendance before the Commission, and to require the production for examination by theCommission of any books, papers and/or statement of financial interests which the Commission deems relevant in any matter underinvestigation or in question. The Commission shall make a recordof all proceedings pursuant to this § 35.8. If, during the course of any investigation or hearing, the Commission finds probable causeto believe that a false statement has been made under oath, the Commission shall refer such finding to the Office of the State's Attorney for further investigation. 


§ 35-8. Investigation procedures.
A. 	No complaint shall be made under this code unless it is filed with the Commission within three years after the violation alleged in thecomplaint has been committed. If multiple violations are alleged, thethree-year limitation shall be applied separately to each alleged violation. 
B. 	As required by C.G.S. § 7-148h(a), the provisions of § 1-82a(a) through(e), as amended, including but not only its confidentiality provisions, shall apply to all investigations and hearings before the Commissionunder this § 35-8. To the extent that a court of competent jurisdictiondetermines that any provision of this Code of Ethics conflicts with any applicable provision of state law, the provision of state law shall bedeemed to control as though fully set forth herein.
C. 	Upon its own complaint or upon the complaint of any person, the Commission shall investigate any alleged violation of this code to determine whether or not there is probable cause to believe that aviolation has occurred. 
D. 	Any person filing a complaint must do so on prescribed Form B8 that, with all accompanying documents, shall be submitted to the Town Clerk 
7. Editor's Note: Form B is included at the end of this chapter. 
21:31 
in a sealed envelope labeled "Ethics Commission Complaint," whichthe Town Clerk shall, within two business days of receipt, send to the Commission Chairperson. The complaint shall be signed under penaltyof false statement and shall state the name of the person who allegedlyviolated the code (the respondent) and the specific acts alleged to constitute the claimed violation(s). All information presented should befactual, objective and free from bias. Any complaint consisting of secondhand information, hearsay or bias may cause this Commission to dismiss such complaint. [Amended 10-24-2017 STM] 
E. 	Not later than 15 days after the Town Clerk's receipt of the complaint the Commission shall: (1) send the complainant written acknowledgement of receipt of the complaint; and (2) notify, byregistered or certified mail, any respondent against whom such complaint is filed. Upon receipt, the respondent may either request ameeting or may submit a written statement as to whether the complaintstates a violation, The Commission shall set the time for the respondents response, which time shall be not less than seven, nor more than 30days from the date of the respondent's receipt. During the investigation,the respondent shall have the right to appear and be heard, to offer any information that may be relevant to the investigation, and to berepresented by legal counsel. The Commission shall not make anyfinding that there is probable cause to believe that any person has violated this code unless at least four concurring Commission membersvote affirmatively to make such finding.
F. 	Not later than three business days after terminating its investigation, the Commission shall inform the complainant and respondent, byregistered or certified mail, of its determination and provide them asummary of its reasons for that determination. The Commission shall publish its findings upon the respondent's request any may also publisha summary of its reasons for making such finding.
G. 	If, after investigation, the Commission determines that there is not probable cause that the respondent has violated the code, the Commission shall dismiss the complaint. The Commission shall not beobligated to consider a similar complaint if it determines that such complaint is based upon substantially the same allegations and therehas been no material change in circumstances.
H. If the Commission determines that there is probable cause that the respondent has violated this code, the Commission shall fix a date forthe commencement of a hearing on the complaint, which shall notbe more than 60 days from a determination of probable cause. The Commission shall make public such determination of probable causeand the entire record of its investigation. The Commission shall givenotice of the date fixed for the hearing at least 14 days before the date of the hearing. The hearing shall be open to the public and may, at theCommission's discretion, be continued from time to time. 
8. Editor's Note: Form B is included at the end of this chapter. 
21:32 
I. 	Not later than 10 days prior to the commencement of the hearing,the Commission shall provide the respondent with a list of all of its witnesses. 
J. 	At such hearing, which the Commission shall record, oral evidence shallbe taken under oath. The complainant and the respondent shall have the right to:
(1) 
Be represented by legal counsel;

(2) 
Present evidence; and 

(3) 
Examine and cross-examine witnesses. 

K. 	
The Commission shall not make any finding that a person has violatedany provision of this code unless at least four concurring Commission members vote affirmatively to make such finding.

L. 	
The Commission shall render its findings and memorandum of decisionin writing within 15 days of the close of the public hearing on the complaint, which findings and memorandum shall be public. The Commission shall also send the complainant and respondent a copyof the findings and memorandum of decision. Such findings and memorandum of decision shall constitute the Commission's final decision and shall be subject to appeal to the Superior Court inaccordance with the provisions of C.G.S. § 4-183 as amended. 

M. 
Nothing in this § 35-8 shall prevent the Commission from reporting thepossible commission of a crime to the Chief State's Attorney or otherprosecutorial authority. 


§ 35-9. Enforcement and penalties.
A. Violation of any provision of this chapter shall be subject to a fine of $100per violation, payable to the Town of Griswold general fund. 
B. No person shall be entitled to enforce the provisions of any contract,agreement or business arrangement with the Town of Griswold or anyofficial, agency, commission or board of the Town, if such person knowingly entered into such contract, agreement or business arrangement either in violation of this Code of Ethics or with a Townofficial or employee whom such person knew was violating this Code of Ethics with respect to such contract, agreement or business arrangement.
C. 	Upon finding of a violation of this chapter, the Commission, at its discretion, may seek legal counsel to impose any or all of the followingsanctions: 
(1) 
Censure. 

(2) 
Reprimand.

(3) 
A civil fine of not more than the maximum allowed under state lawper violation, paid to the Town of Griswold general fund. 

(4) 
Restitution for any financial loss to the Town of Griswold.

(5) 
Referral of information obtained or generated by the Commissionto the appropriate authorities for further civil action or criminal prosecution.

D. 	
A finding of a willful violation shall be referred to the Town of GriswoldBoard of Selectman for disciplinary review and action. Actions may include: 

21:33 


(1) 
Suspension or termination from employment.

(2) 
Removal or suspension from appointed office. 

(3) 
Restitution of any benefits received by the respondent.

(4) 
Termination or revocation of any contract with the Town of Griswold.

(5) 
Debarment from entering into any future contract with the Town of Griswold. 


§ 35-10. Standards of conduct for current Town officials andemployees.
A. No Town official or employee shall solicit or accept any gift from anyperson who, to his or her knowledge, is interested in any pendingmatter within such official's or employee's official responsibilities. If a prohibited gift is offered or given, the Town official or employee mustrefuse it, return it, or pay the donor the full value of the gift.
B. No Town official or employee shall take any official action upon any matter in which he or she has an interest that is in substantial conflict with the proper discharge of his or her duties or employment in thepublic interest or of his or her responsibilities as prescribed by the laws of this state. A Town official or employee shall be deemed to have suchan interest if he or she has reason to believe or expect that he or she,his or her spouse, a dependent child, or a business with which he or she is associated, as defined in § 35-4 of this chapter, will derive a directmonetary gain or suffer a direct monetary loss, as the case may be, byreason of his or her official activity. 
C. 	Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection B, a Town official or employee shall not be deemed to have an interest that is in substantialconflict with the proper discharge of his or her duties in the public interest or of his or her responsibilities as prescribed by the laws ofthis state if any benefit or detriment accrues to him or her, his or herspouse, a dependent child, or a business with which he or she, his or her spouse, or such dependent child is associated as a member of aprofession, occupation or group to no greater extent than that whichaccrues to any other member of such profession, occupation or group. 
D. 	Nothing contained in this chapter shall prohibit or restrict a Town official or employee from appearing before any board or commission ofthe municipality on his or her own behalf, or from being a party in any action, proceeding or litigation brought by or against the Town officialor employee or public official if the Town is also a party to such action.
E. Except as otherwise required by law, no Town of Griswold official or employee shall disclose, without proper authorization, confidential information concerning the Town's affairs. 
F. 	No Town official or employee shall request or permit the use of Town-owned vehicles, equipment, facilities, materials or property for personalconvenience or profit, except when such items are available to the publicgenerally or are provided as a matter of Town policy for the use of such Town official or employee in the conduct of official Town business. 
G. 	No Town official or employee, a member of his or her immediate family,or any business with which he or she is associated shall enter into a contract (other than a contract of employment) with the Town unless the 
21:34 

contract is awarded through a process of public notice and competitivebidding. 
H. All Town officials or employees are expected to practice in a manner thatis free from unethical conduct, including perjury, fraud or falsification ofofficial Town records. 
§ 35-11. Standards of conduct for Town consultants.
A. No 	paid consultant of the Town or any of its agencies, boards,commissions, officials, or employees shall represent a private interest in any action or proceeding against the interest of the Town if suchrepresentation does or is reasonably likely to conflict with the performance of his or her duties as a consultant. 
B. No 	paid consultant of the Town or any of its agencies, boards,commissions, officials, or employees may represent anyone other thanthe Town concerning any matter in which he or she participated personally and substantially as a consultant to the Town. 
C. 	No paid consultant of the Town or any of its agencies, boards, commissions, officials, or employees shall disclose confidential information learned while performing his or her duties for the Town,except to the extent required by law, nor shall be or she use suchinformation to advance his or her own financial interests or those of other persons.
D. 	All Town consultants are expected to practice in a manner that is freefrom unethical conduct, including perjury, fraud or falsification of official Town records. 
§ 35-12. Standards of conduct for former Town officials andemployees.
A. No former Town official or employee shall disclose or use confidentialinformation acquired in the course of and by reason of his or her officialduties to advance his or her own financial interests or those of other persons, except to the extent required by law.
B. No former Town official or employee who participated substantially inthe negotiation or award of a Town contract obliging the Town to pay an amount of $100,000 or more, or who supervised the negotiation oraward of such a contract, shall accept employment with a party to thecontract other than the Town for a period of one year after such contract is signed. 
§ 35-13. Education and training; distribution of Code of Ethics.
A. The Town Clerk shall cause a copy of this Code of Ethics, and of any amendments or revisions thereto, to be distributed to every Townofficial, employee and consultants within 60 days after enactment. EachTown official, employee, and consultant shall be furnished an up-to-date copy of this Code of Ethics before entering upon the duties of his or heroffice, employment, or consultanting engagement.
B. Every two years, the Commission will provide training and/or written updates on this code to Town officials, employees and consultants.Training shall include updates of new state laws on ethics and any 
21:35 

amendments to this code. An updated signed copy of Form C, Agreementto Comply with the Griswold Code of Ethics,9 will be signed and returned to the Town Clerk within 30 business days after said training andretained on file. 
Chapter 40 
FINANCE, BOARD OF 
GENERAL REFERENCES 
Budget and appropriations — See Ch. 10. Meetings — See Ch. 56. 
Contracts — See Ch. 24. 
§ 40-1. Establishment; powers and duties. 
The Town of Griswold, pursuant to authority granted and in the mannerprovided by Chapter 28 of the Cumulative Supplement to the GeneralStatutes of the State of Connecticut, January Sessions 1931-1933,10 establishes a Town Board of Finance, said Board of Finance to have all the powers and duties conferred and imposed upon Town Boards of Financeby said Chapter 28 of said Cumulative Supplement to the General Statutes of the State of Connecticut and all powers and duties which now are orhereafter may be conferred and imposed upon such Town Board of Financeby any other statute or law of the State of Connecticut. 
Chapter 43 
FUNDS, SPECIAL 
9. Editor's Note: Form C is included at the end of this chapter. 10.Editor's Note: See Connecticut General Statutes Section 7-340 et seq. 
40:36 
ARTICLE I 
Daniel S. Anthony Fund[Adopted 1-13-2009] 
§ 43-1. Repeal of prior provisions. 
All ordinances and resolutions previously adopted by the Town of Griswold regarding the Daniel S. Anthony Fund and the Community Assistance Fundare repealed. 
§ 43-2. Establishment; purpose; disposition of funds. 
The Daniel S. Anthony Fund, referred to herein as the "Anthony Fund," ishereby reestablished as a fund to be held in trust by the Town for the benefitand support of the poor, in accordance with the wishes of Daniel S. Anthony, and all monies presently held by the Town in the Anthony Fund as previouslyestablished shall be deemed to be monies held by the Town in the AnthonyFund as reestablished by this article. 
§ 43-3. Termination and transfer of Community Assistance Fund. 
All monies held in all accounts for the Community Assistance Fund shall betransferred to the Anthony Fund, and the Community Assistance Fund shall be deemed terminated upon completion of such transfer or transfers. 
§ 43-4. Principal. 
The principal amount of the Anthony Fund shall be deemed to be increased to the sum of $18,000. 
§ 43-5. Use of fund. 
The income from the principal amount of the Anthony Fund shall be available for use on an annual basis, and shall be used solely, in support ofthe poor of the Town of Griswold. 
§ 43-6. Committee. 
The uses of the income from the Anthony Fund shall be determined annuallyby a committee of three individuals, who shall be known as the "Daniel
S. Anthony Fund Committee" and who are referred to herein as the "Committee." The Committee shall consist of the Town Treasurer, the Senior Agent for the Elderly, and a representative of the Social Services Department of the Griswold Public Schools, such representative to be appointed by the Board of Education. In the event of any vacancy in thethree aforesaid positions, the Board of Selectmen may appoint any electorof the Town of Griswold to serve as a member of the Committee until such vacancy is properly filled. 
40:37 

§ 43-7. Committee meetings; designation of use of funds. 
The Committee shall meet each year on the first Monday of March or on such other date as may be agreed upon by all members. The Town Treasurershall establish a reasonable time for such meeting. The Committee mayhold subsequent meetings as it may deem necessary or appropriate. The Committee shall, at such meeting or meetings, designate one or more uses for the annual income that will have accrued on the principal of theFund as of June 30 of the fiscal year in which the Committee's annual meeting occurred, or should have occurred pursuant to this article. Suchincome may be expended only in a subsequent fiscal year. In the event theCommittee fails, prior to June 30 of any fiscal year, to agree on a use or uses for the income that accrued on the Anthony Fund during such fiscal year,the Board of Selectmen may designate a use or uses for such income, to beexpended during any subsequent fiscal year. 
40:38 

Chapter 48 
HOUSING AUTHORITY 
§ 48-1. Ratification. 
The actions of the Board of Selectmen on February 16, 1966, establishingthe Town of Griswold Housing Authority are hereby ratified and confirmed. 
§ 48-2. Terms.
A. Commissioners' terms shall commence as of February 1 of any given yearand shall run in accordance with Connecticut General Statutes, Section 8-41. 
B. The individuals hereinafter named who have previously been appointed bythe Board of Selectmen as Commissioners for the terms that expire as indicated below are hereby confirmed as Commissioners of the Authority: 
Leona Minski for the term expiring January 31, 2015 
Leo Bordeleau for the term expiring January 31, 2016 
Gary Rondina for the term expiring January 31, 2017 
Donald Walsh for the term expiring January 31, 2018 
Joan Hoar for the term expiring January 31, 2019 

C. 	Commencing with the Commissioner's term that expires on January 31,2015, the Board of Selectmen shall appoint a Commissioner for five-year terms in accordance with Connecticut General Statutes, Section 8-41. In the event a Commissioner's term expires and the Board of Selectmen fail toappoint a successor, the Commissioner in office shall serve until a successor is appointed and qualified. 
§ 48-3. Powers. 
The Authority shall have all powers as provided for housing authorities by statutes. 
§ 48-4. Vacancies. 
In the event of a vacancy in the office of any Commissioner, the Board of Selectmen shall appoint an individual to fill the vacancy pursuant toConnecticut General Statutes, Section 8-41. 
§ 48-5. Title. 
Upon the adoption of this chapter, the Authority shall be known as the"Griswold Housing Authority." 
40:39 

Chapter 56 
MEETINGS 

GENERAL REFERENCES 
Conservation Commission — See Ch. 18.  Recreation Commission — See Ch. 74.  
Development and Commission — See Ch. 29.  Industrial  School Building Committee — See Ch. 92.  
Board of Selectmen — See Ch. 96.  
Board of Finance — See Ch. 40.  
Planning and Zoning Commission — See Ch.68.  Water Pollution Control Authority — See Ch. 111.  
Zoning Board of Appeals — See Ch. 115.  

§ 56-1. Applicability. 
This chapter shall apply to all boards, committees, authorities, agencies orcommissions of the Town of Griswold. 
§ 56-2. Quorum. 
A simple majority of the membership of any board, committee, authority, agency or commission shall constitute a quorum for the purpose of conducting its business. 
§ 56-3. Votes and minutes to be available for public inspection. 
The votes of each member of a board, committee, authority, agency orcommission upon any issue shall be reduced to writing and made available for public inspection within 48 hours, excluding Saturday, Sunday or alegal holiday, and said votes shall also be duly recorded in the minutesof the session at which taken, which minutes shall be available for public inspection within seven days of the session to which they refer. 
§ 56-4. Failure to file minutes. 
The failure of any board, committee, authority, agency or commission to file its minutes of any meeting within the required time shall cause any actionvoted and/or taken thereat to be deemed void ab initio unless declaredotherwise by the Connecticut Freedom of Information Commission or a court of competent jurisdiction. 
§ 56-5. Tape recordings. 
It shall be the duty of all boards, authorities, agencies or commissions to tape record their meetings, whether regular or special. Further, all taperecordings of meetings shall be filed with the Town Clerk at the time offiling the permanent meeting minutes with the Town Clerk, who thereafter 
40:40 

shall retain such tape recordings for a minimum period of two years fromthe date of receipt. At the expiration of said two-year period, the Town Clerk may destroy said tape recordings. 
§ 56-6. Recusal. [Added 8-12-2014] 
Any official, council or board member shall withdraw himself or herself from any involvement from any matter described in the Code of Ethicsas a conflict of interest. Such withdrawal includes, but is not limited to, discussions, either formal or informal, on the matter, as well as appearances at meetings, or portions of meetings, concerning the matter, and voting onthe matter (except in a public referendum). In the event of a conflict ofinterest, the official, council or board member will excuse himself or herself from the meeting room after stating on the record the reason for the recusaland shall remain outside the room until the discussion and/or vote on thematter discussed is completed (except when voting in a public referendum on the matter). 
Chapter 60 
OPEN SPACE LAND ACQUISITION 
GENERAL REFERENCES 
Conservation Commission — See Ch. 18. Recreation — See Ch. 74. 

Planning and Zoning Commission — See Ch.
68. 
§ 60-1. Open Space Land Acquisition Fund. 
Pursuant to the authority of C.G.S. § 7-131r, there is hereby establishedthe Griswold Open Space Land Acquisition Fund to be used solely for thepurposes of the preservation of open space, the acquisition of land (or any interest in land, including but not limited to easements and developmentrights, associated surveying and legal fees) to be used for open space,parks, playgrounds, natural resource protection, recreational or agricultural purposes. This fund is continuous and shall not lapse at theclose of the municipal fiscal year, and the fund shall not be accessed byany Griswold public official and/or employee for any purpose other than the herein stated purpose. 
§ 60-2. Deposits and transfers to fund. 
There shall be deposited into the Open Space Land Acquisition Fund such sums as the Town may from time to time appropriate for that purpose. Thereshall also be deposited into the fund all payments received as fees in lieu ofthe provision of open space pursuant to subdivision regulations adopted by the Planning and Zoning Commission under the authority of C.G.S. §§ 8-25a 
60:41 

and 8-25b, and any other funds acquired by the Town, whether by gift,bequest, grant or otherwise, for the purposes to be served by the fund. By separate action annually, the Board of Selectmen may also transfer tothe Open Space Land Acquisition Fund any unexpended funds from anyPlanning and Zoning budgeted funds remaining at the end of the fiscal year, and any Inland Wetlands and Watercourses and Conservation Commissionbudgeted funds remaining at the end of the fiscal year. 
§ 60-3. Open Space Land Acquisition Committee. 
The Board of Selectmen shall appoint an Open Space Land AcquisitionCommittee to consist of the following seven members: two members ofthe Planning and Zoning Commission as selected by the Planning and Zoning Commission, two members of the Inland Wetlands Watercourses andConservation Commission as selected by the Inland Wetlands Watercoursesand Conservation Commission, all four members to have initial terms of two years each and then subsequent terms shall be three years each; andone member each from the Economic Development Commission, Board ofRecreation, and Board of Selectmen, as selected by the Board of Selectmen, and these three members shall have terms of three years each. The OpenSpace Land Acquisition Committee shall elect its Chairperson and a Secretary and shall meet periodically, but not less frequently than biannually. Its charge shall be to identify and/or review potentialacquisitions of land or interests in land for open space, natural resourceprotection, recreational or agricultural purposes, to make recommendations to the Board of Selectmen regarding acquisition of such land and otherproper uses of the Open Space Land Acquisition Fund and to perform suchother tasks relating to the use and administration of the fund as the Board of Selectmen may direct. 
§ 60-4. Appropriations from fund. 
Appropriations from the fund for the purposes for which it is created shall be made upon the recommendation of all of the following commissions or committees: the Inland Wetlands Watercourses and Conservation Commission, the Planning and Zoning Commission, the Open Space Land Acquisition Committee, and the Board of Selectmen; and, where theproposed appropriation is for the purpose of acquiring land (or any interestin land, including but not limited to easements and development rights), upon review by the Planning and Zoning Commission pursuant to C.G.S.§ 8-24, by any Annual or Special Town Meeting after due warning. 
§ 60-5. Application for grants or matching funds. 
The Open Space Land Acquisition Committee is also authorized to directthe Griswold Planning and Development Department and Town Planner,upon the approval of the Board of Selectmen, to research and/or apply for any state or federal grants and/or matching funds which may be available,for the purpose of acquiring land for the preservation of open space, theacquisition of land (or any interest in land, including but not limited to 
60:42 

easements and development rights) to be used for open space, parks,playgrounds, natural resource protection, recreational or agricultural purposes. 
Chapter 61 
ORDINANCES, PUBLICATION OF 
§ 61-1. Summary publication; procedure.
A. A summary of a proposed ordinance or ordinances shall be published inlieu of such proposed ordinance or ordinances, provided that in any case in which said summary is published, the Clerk of the Town of Griswold shallmake a copy of such proposed ordinance available for public inspection andshall, upon request, mail a copy of such proposed ordinance to any person requesting said copy at no charge to such person.
B. The summary of any ordinance shall include the following language: 
"This document is prepared for the benefit of the public solely forinformation, summarization and explanation. This document does not represent the intent of the legislative body of the Town of Griswold for anypurpose." 
§ 61-2. Exception. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any proposed ordinance or ordinances which makes or requires an appropriation. 
Chapter 64 
PENSIONS 
61:43 

ARTICLE I 
Elected Officials and Employees[Adopted 3-26-1969 STM] 
§ 64-1. Acceptance of state act. 
The provisions of Fund A of the Connecticut Municipal Employees' Retirement Fund Act11 are accepted as regards the elected officials andemployees of the Town of Griswold, and the effective date of participationshall be July 1, 1969.12 

11.Editor's Note: See Connecticut General Statutes Section 7-425 et seq. 
12.Editor's Note: Former Art. II, Individual Retirement Pensions, adopted 5-17-1978 STM,and which immediately followed this article, was repealed 10-24-2017 STM. 
61:45 
Chapter 68 
PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION 

GENERAL REFERENCES 
Meetings — See Ch. 56. Subdivision of land — See Ch. 223. Regional Council of Governments — See Ch.Zoning — See Ch. 224. 
78. 
Planning and Zoning Commission Zoning Board of Appeals — See Ch. 115. Bylaws — See Ch. 232. 
68:46 

ARTICLE I 
Planning Commission[Adopted 3-26-1969 STM] 
§ 68-1. Adoption of statutory provisions. 
The provisions of Chapter 126 (Planning) of the General Statutes of the State of Connecticut (Revision of 1958), as amended, are hereby adopted bythe Town of Griswold.13 
§ 68-2. Membership; qualifications. 
There shall be a Planning Commission of the Town of Griswold to consist offive members who shall be electors of the Town of Griswold. 
§ 68-3. Appointment; terms of office. 
The initial membership of the Commission shall be appointed by theSelectmen of the Town of Griswold so that the terms of office of two of its members shall expire on the date of the biennial election for the Town of Griswold in November 1969, and the terms of office of two of its members shall expire on the date of the biennial election for the Town of Griswoldin November 1971, and the term of office for the remaining member shall expire on the date of the biennial election for the Town of Griswold inNovember 1973. Thereafter, as the term of each member of the PlanningCommission expires, the successor or successors shall be elected at the biennial election of the Town of Griswold to serve for a term of six years. 
§ 68-4. Alternate members. [Added 3-26-1973 STM]
A. There shall be three alternate members in addition to the five regular members of the Planning Commission of the Town of Griswold. All members shall be electors of the Town of Griswold. 
B. Initially, 	alternate membership on the Commission shall be by appointment by the Selectmen of the Town of Griswold. Originalmembership for alternates shall expire on the date of the biennial election for the Town of Griswold in November 1973. At that time and at subsequent biennial elections, alternates shall be elected by the votersof the Town of Griswold to serve for terms of two years. 
C. 	Such alternate members shall have all of the powers of regular Commission members when properly seated. 
§ 68-5. Residency requirements. 
In the event that any member of the Planning Commission shall cease to be a resident of the Town of Griswold, his office shall be deemed vacant. 

13.Editor's Note: See Connecticut General Statutes Section 8-18 et seq. 
68:47 
ARTICLE II 
Designation as Planning and Zoning Commission[Adopted 5-21-1973 STM] 
§ 68-6. Adoption of statutory provisions. 
The provisions of Chapter 124 (Zoning) of the General Statutes of the State of Connecticut (Revision of 1958), as amended, are hereby adopted by theTown of Griswold.14 
§ 68-7. Designation. 
In accordance with Section 8-4A of the Connecticut General Statutes, the five-member Planning Commission and its three alternate members shallbe designated as the "Planning and Zoning Commission of the Town of Griswold." The terms of office shall be in accordance with Article I of this chapter. 

14.Editor's Note: See Connecticut General Statutes Section 8-1 et seq. 
68:49 
Chapter 72 
PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY COMMITTEE 
§ 72-1. Continuation of Committee. 
The Town of Griswold shall continue to have a Public Health and SafetyCommittee. 
§ 72-2. Appointment; membership; terms.
A. The Public Health and Safety Committee shall consist of seven members,each of whom shall be appointed by the Board of Selectmen for a term of six years, with terms to commence on July 1. Appointments and termsshall be staggered as follows:
(1) 
Group A members. There shall be two Group A members. Group A members shall be members whose terms are scheduled to expire onJune 30, 2012. Upon the expiration of the current terms of GroupA members, successive appointments shall be made for terms beginning on July 1, 2012, and every six years thereafter. The currentGroup A term that is unfilled shall not be filled and that membershipposition is hereby canceled. 

(2) 
Group B members. There shall be two Group B members. Group Bmembers shall be members whose terms are scheduled to expire onJune 30, 2014. Upon the expiration of the current terms of Group B members, successive appointments shall be made for terms beginning on July 1, 2014, and every six years thereafter. The currentGroup B term that is unfilled shall not be filled and that membership position is hereby canceled.

(3) 
Group C members. There shall be three Group C members. GroupC members shall be members whose terms are scheduled to expire on June 30, 2016. Upon the expiration of the current terms of GroupC members, successive appointments shall be made for terms beginning on July 1, 2016, and every six years thereafter. 


B. Vacancies in any position may be filled by appointment by the Boardof Selectmen only for the balance of the term for which the memberwas or may have been appointed. The Board of Selectmen may, for good cause, terminate the membership of any person on the Committee andreplace that person with another for the balance of the relevant term.Good cause shall include, but shall not be limited to, frequent absences from Committee meetings. 
§ 72-3. Meetings. 
The Committee shall meet monthly with the exception of July and August, but the Committee may otherwise meet as often as it deems necessary. 
§ 72-4. Officers.
A. Chairperson 	and Vice Chairperson. The Committee shall elect a Chairperson and Vice Chairperson for subsequent one-year terms (each 
68:50 

to commence on July 1 and expire on June 30 of the following year)at the last regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee prior to the expiration of the terms of the current Chairperson and Vice Chairperson.If the position of Chairperson or Vice Chairperson should become vacantfor any reason, the Committee shall elect a replacement for the balance of the relevant term as soon as possible after the vacancy occurs. TheVice Chairperson shall act in place of the Chairperson whenever theChairperson is absent or the Chairperson's position is vacant. If the Committee should fail to elect a Chairperson or Vice Chairperson inaccordance with this section, the Board of Selectmen may appoint suchofficer for the relevant term. 
B. Secretary.
(1) 
The Committee shall elect a Secretary for subsequent one-year terms(each to commence on July 1 and expire on June 30 of the following year) at the last regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee priorto the expiration of the term of the current Secretary. If the positionof Secretary should become vacant for any reason, the Committee shall elect a replacement for the balance of the relevant term as soonas possible after the vacancy occurs.

(2) 
The duties of the Secretary shall include but not be limited to the taking of minutes of all meetings and the filing of same with the TownClerk. The Secretary shall also file the agenda for all meetings withthe Town Clerk. 


§ 72-5. Powers and duties. 
The duties of the Public Health and Safety Committee shall be as follows:
A. To 	receive complaints regarding potential and/or existing unsafe or hazardous conditions at places or facilities open to the public in theTown as well as Town-owned properties. The Committee may look intoeach complaint and, if appropriate, forward the complaint along with any Committee findings to the agency having jurisdiction in the particularmatter. The Committee may request that the receiving agency advise theCommittee of any action that it takes. 
B. To 	recommend educational programs for the specific purpose of promoting public safety and accident prevention.
C. 	To work with other Town agencies and/or commissions and with private, civic, business and other organizations and groups to accomplish thisinitiative. 
D. 	To execute projects and to study problems of public safety and accident prevention as may be specifically assigned to it by the Board of Selectmen. 
§ 72-6. Liaison representatives. 
The Board of Selectmen, the Superintendent of Schools, State Police, FireMarshal, Planning and Zoning Commission, the Borough of Jewett City andthe Chiefs of local fire departments may assign liaison representatives to interact with the Committee and, if requested by the Chairperson of theCommittee, attend Committee meetings. 
68:51 

§ 72-7. Compensation and expenditures. 
The members of the Committee shall serve without compensation. The Committee may expend such funds as are appropriated to it by the Town. 
Chapter 74 
RECREATION 

GENERAL REFERENCES 
Meetings — See Ch. 56. 
68:52 

ARTICLE I 
Recreation Commission [Adopted 9-9-1996 STM] 
§ 74-1.A. Establishment; membership; appointment; terms of office;officers. 
A. There is hereby established a Recreation Commission consisting of sevenmembers to be appointed by the Board of Selectmen for the followingterms of office: 
(1) 
Three for two years.

(2) 
Two for four years.

(3) 
Two for six years. 

B. 
Replacements shall be appointed by the Board of Selectmen as theirterms expire.

C. 	
One of said Commission members shall be named Chairman by vote of the majority of the Commission members. 


§ 74-1.B. Alternate members. [Added 3-26-2013 STM15]
A. There shall be three alternate members in addition to the seven regular members of the Recreation Commission of the Town of Griswold. The Board of Selectmen must appoint all members for the following terms ofoffice. 
B. Such 	alternate members shall have all of the powers of regularCommission members when properly seated. 
§ 74-2. Powers and duties. 
Said Commission shall be empowered to establish, maintain and regulateparks, playgrounds, baths, swimming pools, recreation areas or places andpublic gardens, the location of which shall be approved by the freemen of the Town of Griswold at a Special Town Meeting called by the Board ofSelectmen for that purpose. 
§ 74-3. Budget. 
Said Commission shall prepare and submit an annual budget to the Boardof Selectmen, which budget shall become a part of the Selectmen's annualbudget. 

15.Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former § 74-1 as § 74-1.A. 
68:53 
ARTICLE II 
Parks and Recreation Areas 
[Adopted 5-22-2003 STM, effective 6-10-2003] 

§ 74-4. Scope. 
The rules and regulations set forth herein shall apply to and be in effect in all parks and areas under the control, supervision and jurisdiction of theTown of Griswold. 
§ 74-5. Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, terms used herein are defined as follows: 
PARK — Any parkland or open space (including buildings and propertytherein) owned by the Town of Griswold. 
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation or association ofpersons, and the singular number shall include the plural. 
RECREATION DEPARTMENT — The governing Town department for parks and recreation and individuals appointed by the Department as its authorized agents. 
VEHICLE — Every device in, upon or by which a person or property is or may be transported. 
§ 74-6. Hours of closing. 
No person shall be permitted to remain, stop or park within the confines of any park between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., except in an emergency or with special written permission from the RecreationDepartment. In emergency situations or when the public interest demands it, any portion of a park may be closed to the public or to designated personsuntil it is deemed prudent to allow readmission. Nonobservance of thissection shall constitute a violation. 
§ 74-7. Permits.
A. A permit must be obtained from the Recreation Department for thefollowing: 
(1) 
The use of park lodges or pavilions.

(2) 
The vending of food and drink.

B. 
Permits shall be issued by the Recreation Department. 

C. 	
Permit applicants must be at least 18 years of age. All applications forpermits must be received by the Recreation Department at least oneweek prior to the date of the intended use. The signer of a permit shall be responsible for all damages to park facilities, grounds or contentsthereof and shall agree to indemnify the Town of Griswold for suchdamage. 

D. 	
All permits issued shall be in writing by the Recreation Director andshall be subject to park rules and regulations. A permit to do any actshall authorize the same only insofar as it may be performed in strict 


68:55 

accordance with the written terms and conditions thereof and not in violation of any law, ordinance, rule or regulation governing parks. Any violation of any term or condition thereof or any law, ordinance, ruleor regulation governing parks shall constitute grounds for revocation ofsaid permit by the Recreation Department, whose action therein shall be final. 
E. No person shall fail to produce and exhibit any permit which he claims tohave upon request of the Recreation Department or its authorized agent, who shall inspect the same for the purpose of enforcing compliance withany ordinance or regulation. Failure to produce any permit upon requestwill nullify existence of said permit. 
F. 	The applicant shall pay any associated fees at the time the permit isobtained. Such fees may vary according to the activity permitted and thefacilities used. 
§ 74-8. Park regulations.
A. 	Preservation of property and natural features. No person shall injure,deface, disturb or befoul any part of a park nor any building, signs, equipment or other property found therein; nor shall any tree, flower,shrub, rock or other natural element be removed, injured or destroyed.
B. 	Horses. Horses are not allowed in any park except by express written permission of the Recreation Department.
C. 	Hunting, trapping and molesting wildlife. No person within the confinesof any park shall hunt, trap or otherwise molest any animal or bird; nor shall any person remove, collect or have in its possession the young ofany wild animal or the eggs or nest of any bird unless express writtenpermission is given by an authorized agent of the Town of Griswold. 
D. 	Firearms. No person shall use, carry or possess firearms of any kindor have air-or gas-powered guns, crossbow or bow, or other missile-throwing devices or weapons of any kind within the confines of any Townpark. 
E. 	Soliciting; unlawful sales. No person shall beg, hawk, peddle or solicitwithin any park without written permission from an authorized agent of the Town of Griswold. 
F. 	Special events. No individual or organization shall conduct, sponsor orpromote any special event or other public activity in a park without prior authorization of the Recreation Director. Events or activities which, in the opinion of the Director, constitute hazards and dangers to thepersonal safety of the participants or other park visitors; endanger peace and good order in the parks; interfere with the regular andnormal use of the facilities and activities by park visitors; or are inconsistent with the use of the park for park purposes will not be permitted.
G. 	Noise. No person or persons shall disturb other park users by causingexcessive levels of noise. 
H. Littering, rubbish, garbage, sewage and noxious material. Refuse isnot to be dropped, thrown or scattered on park property. All personsshall use restrooms as provided in the park and shall cooperate in maintaining the restrooms in a neat and sanitary condition. No person 
68:56 

shall throw, discharge into, cast, drop or leave in any river, brook,stream, pond, lake, public pool, or drain any substance, matter or thing, either liquid or solid, which may or shall result in the pollution of saidriver, brook, stream, pond, lake or public pool. No person, shall bringinto, leave behind or dump any material of any kind into the park except the refuse, ashes, garbage and other material of a picnic or otherpermitted activity, and such material shall be deposited in receptaclesprovided for such purposes. 
I. 	Alcoholic beverages. The consumption or possession of alcoholic liquorsor beverages in a park is by special permit from the Board of Selectman. 
J. 	Dogs, cats and other household pets. No person shall bring into, permit, have or keep in the park any dog, cat, household pet or other animaldestructive to birds and other wildlife, except that dogs or cats arepermitted if held in control by a leash. All persons bringing pets into the park are responsible for cleaning up after them. No pets are permittedin any beach, swimming area, playing field or playground.
K. 	Swimming, swimming areas and beaches. No person shall bathe, wade or swim within any park or swimming area, except at such times and insuch areas as designated by the Recreation Department and as set forthby any rules adopted by the Recreation Department. 
L. 	Bicycles, snow vehicles, motorbikes and all-terrain vehicles.
(1) 
No person shall ride a bicycle or any other vehicle upon the lawn,ballfields, playing courts or picnic areas of any park. 

(2) 
No motorized snow vehicles or all-terrain vehicles shall be permittedin any areas of a park.

(3) 
No unlicenced motorbikes 	or other unlicenced vehicles shall be permitted in any area of a park.

(4) 
Riders of bicycles shall comply with the rules for the regulation ofother vehicles. 

(5) 
Bicycles should be parked in places provided for such purpose.

M. 
Traffic. 

(1) 
No person shall drive any automobile, motorcycle, motorized bike or other vehicle in any area of any park except on the proper drivesand parking areas or permit the same to stand upon the drives orany part thereof so as to congest traffic or obstruct the drive. Paths established as foot or bicycle paths shall not be used for vehiculartraffic. 

(2) 
No vehicle shall be operated on any road or drive in any park at a speed exceeding 15 miles per hour unless otherwise posted.

(3) 
All stop signs and other traffic control devices must be obeyed.

(4) 
No person shall fail to obey all traffic officers or Townemployees authorized and instructed to direct traffic in the park.

(5) 
No person shall park any vehicle or permit any vehicle to remainstanding on any roadway within the boundaries of a park or parkway in excess of the length of time and between the hours as hereinafterspecified. No parking shall be allowed on any of the park roadsbetween the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 ant Parking areas in the parks are established for the convenience of patrons while usingthe facilities of the parks. It shall be unlawful for any person to 


68:57 

park, stop or leave standing any vehicle in any parking area inany park except during the time he/she remains in the park. The term "parking" shall mean the standing of any vehicle, whetheroccupied or not, upon any park road otherwise than temporarily orwhile actively engaged in loading or unloading or while standing in obedience to traffic signals or regulators. This does not apply toTown of Griswold vehicles. 
(6) 
No person shall operate a vehicle along or over any road or drive within a park in a reckless manner or without due regard for thesafety and the rights of pedestrians and drivers and occupants of allother vehicles, so as to endanger the life, limb or property of any person while in the lawful use of said park drive or roads.

(7) 
It shall be the duty of every person operating 	an automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle of traffic or burden within the parks or parkways to comply with the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State ofConnecticut and with all orders, directions and regulations issuedby traffic officers or officially displayed on any post, standard, sign or device installed for the regulation of traffic.

(8) 
No person shall leave any motor vehicle, trailer or other vehiclewithin any park after closing hours except in an emergency and only after obtaining permission from the Director of Recreation orhis authorized agent. Any vehicle left within any park after closinghours without permission shall be removed from the park at the owner's expense.

(9) 
Repairing or servicing of vehicles is prohibited within a park exceptin an emergency and upon notification of the Recreation Department.


N. 	Advertising and signs. No person shall post or display any sign, banner,advertisement, circular, notice or statement within any park. 
O. 	Picnicking; cooking fires.
(1) 
No person shall picnic or cook in any area not designated for thatpurpose by the Recreation Department nor make or kindle any fire except in places provided therefor. Each person must be sure thatany fire he/she started is completely out before leaving the park.

(2) 
No person shall move or carry tables or equipment found within a park for park use to a different area of the park.


P. 	Disorderly conduct.
(1) 
No person shall disturb the peace and good order in any park by fighting or disorderly conduct, use threatening, abusive, indecent orobscene language or threaten violence to the person or property ofothers. 

(2) 
No person shall congregate with others in a public place and refuseto comply with a lawful order of the police or authorized personnelto disperse and leave the park. 

(3) 
No person shall loiter in or near toilet buildings or parking areas.

(4) 
No person shall write, paint, carve or otherwise mark or defacepublic property. 

(5) 
No person shall be in the park under the influence of drugs oralcohol. 


68:58 

§ 74-8.1. Tobacco-free community recreation. [Added 8-11-2015STM]
A. Findings and purpose.
(1) 
The Griswold Board of Selectmen endorses the following:

(a) 
The mission of the Town's Park and Recreation Department is to provide recreational and leisure opportunities that enhancethe quality of life for the citizens of the Town of Griswold andto provide safe environments. The Town's Park and Recreation Department has an obligation to prohibit those activities whichit deems contrary to this mission.

(b) 
The Town cares deeply about promoting the good health and quality of life for its citizens and visitors.

(c) 
Tobacco use is the single most preventable cause of death anddisease in the United States. 

(d) 
Secondhand 	smoke contains many harmful chemicals and cancer-causing agents and is a serious health risk to humans,especially to infants, children and pregnant women, and increases a nonsmoker's risk for asthma, heart disease and lung cancer. 

(e) 
Chewing tobacco contains many harmful chemicals and cancer-causing agents, and its use is associated with cancers of themouth, gums, tongue, and throat.

(f) 	
The use of chewing tobacco is associated with saliva or spit being cast upon the ground, seating areas, and other surfacesin recreational areas, resulting in increased risk of nonusersbeing exposed to bacteria and viruses of a variety of respiratory illnesses. 

(g) 
Tobacco use in and around these recreational facilities createsthe contradictory message of young people being encouraged and coached by adults to engage in healthy activities, while atthe same time being exposed to adults and older youth usingtobacco products which cause adverse health effects as the result of exposure to secondhand smoke and/or spit or saliva.

(h) 
Tobacco use, exposure to secondhand smoke, and exposure totobacco saliva are clearly contrary to enhancing the quality of life and providing safe environments.



(2) 
Based on the endorsements listed in Subsection A(1) above, thepurpose of this section is to provide for the health of and protect the safety of the inhabitants of the Town by regulating, pursuantto Section 7-148(c)(7)(H)(xvi) of the Connecticut General Statutes,activities deemed to be deleterious to public health on property owned by the Town and which are used for recreational purposes.This section will enhance the enjoyment of all persons using said property. 

B. 
Definitions. As used in this section, the following words and phrasesshall have the meanings indicated. 


RECREATIONAL PROPERTY — Any public park property owned by the Town and which is under the supervision and control of the Town's Park 
68:59 

and Recreation Department. The term "recreational property" shall notinclude school grounds. 
SCHOOL GROUNDS — A parcel of land or portion thereof used forschool purposes and operated by the Town of Griswold Board of Education. 
SMOKE or SMOKING — The lighting or carrying of a lighted cigarette,cigar, pipe or similar device. 
C. 	Violations. It shall be a violation of this section for: 
(1) 
Any person to use tobacco in any form on or within any recreationalproperty, including without limitation, smoking, chewing or spittingtobacco or tobacco products. 

(2) 
Any person to use smoke on or within any recreational property. 


D. 	Penalties for offenses. Any person who violates any provision of thissection shall be guilty of an infraction subject to a fine of $50 for each separate offense or violation. Any and all remedies which the Town hasin enforcing this section, at law or in equity, shall be cumulative and twoor more or all of such remedies may be exercised at the same time. 
E. Posting by Town Park and Recreation Department. The Town Park andRecreation Department shall, subject to the Town Recreation Commission's approval of scope and location, post a sign or signs on a recreational property stating such recreational property is a "tobacco­free zone" to indicate that said recreational property is subject to thissection, and there shall be distinctly marked designated smoking areas. 
F. 	Savings clause. If any subsection, clause, provision or portion of thissection, or if any regulation established pursuant to the terms of thissection, shall be held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not affect or impair any othersection, clause, provision or portion of this section or of any regulationestablished pursuant to the terms of this section. 
G. 	Activities otherwise prohibited. No provision of this section shall serveto validate any activity otherwise prohibited by state or local law orlawfully enacted zoning regulations. 
H. When effective. This section shall become effective 30 days from thedate of its adoption. 
§ 74-9. Parental responsibility. 
No parent, guardian or custodian of any minor shall permit or allow him orher, as the case may be, to do any act which would constitute a violation ofthis article. Nonobservance of this section shall be a violation. 
§ 74-10. Compliance required; liability of Townofficials.
A. No person shall fail or refuse to comply with any reasonable orderrelating to the regulation, direction or control of traffic or to any other order lawfully given by any police officer or Townofficial in the executionof his or her office or willfully resist, obstruct or abuse any policeofficer or Townofficial in the execution of his or her office or duties. Nonobservance of this section shall be a violation. 
68:60 

B. No official or employee of the Town 	of Griswold shall, while actingpursuant to the provisions of this article, be personally liable for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as the result of anyact required or permitted in the discharge of his or her official duties,provided that such acts are performed in good faith and without gross negligence. 
§ 74-11. Penalties for offenses.
A. Any person convicted of a violation of this article shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $90. 
B. Any person damaging park property shall be liable for any and all relateddamages. 
68:61 

Chapter 78 
REGIONAL COUNCIL OF GOVERNMENTS 
§ 78-1. Election to join. 
The Town of Griswold hereby adopt Sections 4-124i through 4-124p ofthe Connecticut General Statutes, providing for the formation of the Southeastern Connecticut Regional Council of Governments, and doeshereby join such Regional Council of Governments when and as such Council is duly established in accordance with said statutes, upon the adoption of said statutes by not less than 60% of the eligible municipalitieswithin the Southeastern Connecticut Planning Region, as defined by theSecretary of the Office of Policy and Management or his designee, and upon certification by the Secretary of the Office of Policy and Management or hisdesignee that a Regional Council of Governments has been duly established. 
§ 78-2. Repeal of participation in Regional Planning Agency. 
When the Regional Council of Governments is duly established and thetransition period called for in Section 4-124l(b) of the Connecticut GeneralStatutes, as amended, has been completed, the Town of Griswold does hereby rescind the ordinance of May 31, 1967 and any amendments theretothat created the Town's participation in the Southeastern ConnecticutRegional Planning Agency. 
§ 78-3. Filing with state office. 
The Town Clerk is directed immediately to prepare and file with theSecretary of the Office of Policy and Management a certified copy of this chapter to establish a Southeastern Connecticut Regional Council of Governments. 
Chapter 80 


REGISTRARS OF VOTERS 
§ 80-1. Authority. 
This chapter is adopted pursuant to Sections 9-190 and 9-191 of the Connecticut General Statutes. 
§ 80-2. Number of elected Registrars. 
Commencing with the first regular election of Town Registrars of Voters to occur after the effective date of this chapter, and in all subsequentelections of Town Registrars of Voters, only two registrars of voters shall beelected for the entire Town of Griswold, except as state law may otherwise specifically require. 
78:62 

§ 80-3. Vacancies. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prohibit any vacancy in the position of any Registrar of Voters holding office on the effective date of thischapter from being filled for the balance of the term of that position. 
Chapter 92 SCHOOL BUILDING COMMITTEE 
GENERAL REFERENCES 
Meetings — See Ch. 56. 
§ 92-1. Membership; appointment. [Amended 5-24-2006 STM] 
The permanent School Building Committee shall be composed of 11 members chosen in the following manner:
A. One member chosen by the Board of Selectmen.
B. One member chosen by the Board of Finance. 
C. 	One member chosen by the Griswold Planning and Zoning Commission.
D. 	Two members chosen by the Board of Education.
E. Six members at large to be appointment by the Board of Selectmen. 
§ 92-2. Terms of office.
A. Members 	chosen by boards and commissions from among their membership shall serve at the discretion of the appointing body. 
B. Members 	at large shall have terms concurrent with the Board of Selectmen which made the appointment. 
§ 92-3. Function. 
The permanent School Building Committee shall function only when charged by the Board of Education. 
§ 92-4. Expenditures. 
The Committee shall expend only those funds authorized by the freemen fora specific charge and shall not exceed the amount appropriated. 
§ 92-5. Unexpended funds. 
Unexpended funds shall be returned to the general fund immediately afterall bills incurred have been paid. 
§ 92-6. Salaries and compensation.
A. No member of the Committee shall be authorized a salary.
B. No nonmember shall be allowed a salary for services as Secretary. 
92:63 

§ 92-7. Engaging of architect. 
The Building Committee shall have the authority to engage an architect for the preparation of preliminary plans and schematics upon approval by aTown Meeting. 
§ 92-8. Hearings. 
The Building Committee shall hold at least two public hearings on thepreliminary plans and specifications prior to submission of the same to aTown Meeting. 
§ 92-9. Grants from state and federal agencies.
A. The Board of Education shall be empowered to make application fora construction grant with the State Department of Education or any federal agency empowered to grant funds for education.
B. The Board of Education shall be authorized to accept or reject suchgrants, state or federal, in the name of the Town. 
§ 92-10. Clerk. 
The Committee shall employ a clerk of the works qualified to supervise theconstruction of the facility or facilities and protect the Town. 
§ 92-11. Powers and duties.
A. The responsibility of building the necessary facility to suit the intent ofthe charge given by the Board of Education lies solely with the Building Committee. 
B. Before the submission of the final proposal to a Town Meeting, theproject shall have the approval of the State Department of Education, the Griswold Board of Education and the Building Committee as per Section10-291 of the Revised General Statutes of the State of Connecticut. 
Chapter 96 


SELECTMEN, BOARD OF 
GENERAL REFERENCES 
Meetings — See Ch. 56. 
§ 96-1. Authority to serve as Flood and Erosion Control Board. 
The Board of Selectmen are hereby empowered and authorized to serve as the Flood and Erosion Control Board pursuant to and in accordance withthe authority granted by Sections 25-84 through 25-98 of the ConnecticutGeneral Statutes. 
Chapter 101 
96:64 
§ 96-1  TOURISM DISTRICT  § 111-1  
TAX COLLECTOR  
GENERAL REFERENCES  
Taxation — See Ch. 207.  

§ 101-1. Term of office. 
In accordance with Section 9-189 of the General Statutes of Connecticut, revised to January 1, 1985, the Tax Collector for the Town of Griswold shall,at the next succeeding regular election for such office and thereafter, be elected for a term of four years. 
Chapter 105 
TOURISM DISTRICT 
§ 105-1. Adoption of statutory provisions; election to join. 
The Town of Griswold hereby adopts Section 7-330 of the ConnecticutGeneral Statutes for the purposes of implementing Public Act No. 81-41716 and joins the Southeastern Connecticut Tourism District. 
§ 105-2. Representatives; appointment; terms of office. 
The Town of Griswold, having a population of 9,200 according to the federal census of 1980, shall have three representatives on the District, who shallbe appointed by the Board of Selectmen. Appointments shall be for one, twoand three years initially and thereafter for three-year terms. 
Chapter 111 
WATER POLLUTION CONTROL AUTHORITY 
GENERAL REFERENCES 
Meetings — See Ch. 56. Sewers — See Ch. 222. 
16.Editor's Note: Public Act No. 81-417, Sections 7-136a and 7-136b of the ConnecticutGeneral Statutes, was repealed by Public Act No. 92-184, Section 18. See now Section32-302 of the Connecticut General Statutes. 
105:65 
§ 111-1. Provisions of statute adopted. 
The provisions of Chapter 103, Municipal Sewerage Systems, of the General Statutes of Connecticut (1997),17 as amended, are hereby adopted by the Town of Griswold. 
§ 111-2. Griswold Authority established; powers and duties. 
There shall be a Water Pollution Control Authority of the Town of Griswold(hereinafter referred to as the "Griswold WPCA") to consist of five votingmembers and one nonvoting member, all of whom shall be electors of the Town of Griswold. The Griswold WPCA shall have all of the powers,purposes and objectives set forth in Chapter 103, Municipal SewerageSystems, of the General Statutes of the State of Connecticut (1997), as amended.18 Such powers, purposes and objectives shall be exercised bythe Griswold WPCA throughout the geographical limits of the Town of Griswold with the exception of the Borough of Jewett City and the Village of Glasgo; provided, however, that if the Borough of Jewett City or the GlasgoWater Pollution Control Authority, as established in § 111-3, or both, shouldofficially request that the Griswold WPCA assume jurisdiction of municipal sewerage matters within the Borough of Jewett City or Village of Glasgo,respectively, pursuant to Chapter 103 of the General Statutes, the GriswoldWPCA shall be authorized to assume such jurisdiction upon a majority vote of the electors of the Town of Griswold at Town Meeting. 
§ 111-3. Glasgo Authority established; powers and duties. 
The water pollution control authority previously established pursuant to the Ordinance Establishing a Sewer Authority for the Town of Griswold, whichordinance was adopted at Special Town Meeting on May 27, 1975, shallcontinue in existence and shall hereafter be known as the "Water Pollution Control Authority of the Village of Glasgo" (hereinafter referred to as the"Glasgo WPCA"). The Glasgo WPCA shall have all of the powers, purposesand objectives set forth in Chapter 103, Municipal Sewerage Systems, of the General Statutes of the State of Connecticut (1997), as amended; provided,however, that the exercise of such powers, purposes and objectives bythe Glasgo WPCA shall be limited to that geographical area known as the "Village of Glasgo" in the Town of Griswold, which area is more particularlydescribed in Order No. 799 of the Water Resources Commission, dated May19, 1969. 
§ 111-4. Griswold WPCA membership; terms. 
The Griswold WPCA shall consist of six electors of the Town of Griswold. One member shall be appointed by the official water pollution control authority of the Borough of Jewett City for such term as that authority maychoose and shall be a nonvoting member. The other five members shall be 
17.Editor's Note: See Connecticut General Statutes Section 7-245 et seq.. 18.Editor's Note: See Connecticut General Statutes Section 7-245 et seq.. 
111:66 appointed by the Board of Selectmen. The initial terms of office of two of themembers appointed by the Board of Selectmen shall expire on December 31, 1999. The initial terms of office of two other members appointed bythe Board of Selectmen shall expire on December 31, 2001. The initialterm of office of the remaining member shall expire on December 31, 2003. Thereafter, as the term of each member of the Griswold WPCA appointedby the Board of Selectmen expires, his or her successor or successors shallbe appointed to serve a term of six years by the Board of Selectmen. Any vacancies in the positions of members appointed by the Board of Selectmenshall be filled for the unexpired portions of the respective terms by theBoard of Selectmen. Any vacancy in the membership position appointed by the official water pollution control authority of the Borough of Jewett Citymay be filled by that authority; provided, however, that the failure of theauthority to appoint such member or to fill such vacancy shall not prevent the Griswold WPCA from exercising its powers hereunder. 
§ 111-5. Glasgo WPCA membership; terms. 
The members of the water pollution control authority previously established pursuant to the ordinance adopted at Special Town Meeting on May 27,1975, shall be deemed to be members of the Glasgo WPCA upon theeffective date of this chapter and shall serve for the balance of their unexpired terms. Thereafter, as the term of each member of the GlasgoWPCA expires, his or her successor or successors shall each be appointed toserve a term of six years. All appointments shall be made and all vacancies shall be filled by the Board of Selectmen. 
§ 111-6. Residency requirements. 
In the event that any member of the Griswold WPCA or the Glasgo WPCA shall cease to be a resident of the Town of Griswold, his or her office shall be deemed vacant. 
§ 111-7. Election of officers; hiring of personnel. 
The Griswold WPCA and the Glasgo WPCA shall each elect from theirrespective memberships a Chairman and Secretary. Each WPCA shall havethe authority to hire necessary personnel, provided that any funds necessary for such hiring have been properly appropriated through theTown's budget process. 
§ 111-8. Compensation; conduct of business. 
The members of the Griswold WPCA and the Glasgo WPCA shall servewithout compensation. No action of either WPCA shall be valid unlessauthorized by a vote of the majority of its respective voting members. The presence of three voting members shall constitute a quorum to conductbusiness. Each WPCA shall maintain accurate accounting and financialrecords and shall make an annual report to the Board of Selectmen. 
111:67 

§ 111-9. Removal of members. 
A member of the Griswold WPCA or the Glasgo WPCA may be removed for misconduct in office by the Board of Selectmen after a hearing. A record ofthe proceedings shall be maintained. A copy of the charges shall be servedupon the member at least 10 days prior to the hearing. 
Chapter 115 
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS 
GENERAL REFERENCES 
Meetings — See Ch. 56 Zoning — See Ch. 224. 
Planning and Zoning Commission — See Ch. 
68. 
§ 115-1. Establishment; membership. 
In accordance with Section 8-5 of the Connecticut General Statutes, there shall be a Zoning Board of Appeals consisting of five regular members andthree alternate members, to be known as the "Panel of Alternates." 
§ 115-2. Appointment; terms of office. 
The initial membership of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be appointedby the Board of Selectmen of the Town of Griswold so that the terms ofoffice of two of its members shall expire on the date of the town biennial election in November 1973, and the terms of office of two other members shall expire on the date of the town biennial election in November 1975,and the term of office for the remaining member shall expire on the date of the town biennial election in November 1977. Thereafter, as the term of each member expires, the successor or successors shall be elected at thebiennial election of the Town of Griswold to serve for a term of four years. 
§ 115-3. Panel of Alternates. 
The initial membership of the Panel of Alternates shall be by appointmentof the Board of Selectmen of the Town of Griswold. Original membership for alternates shall expire on the date of the biennial election for the Townof Griswold in November 1973. At that time and at subsequent biennialelections, alternates shall be elected by the voters of the Town of Griswold to serve for a term of two years. 
Part II, General Legislation 

Chapter 117 
115:68 



ADULT-ORIENTED ESTABLISHMENTS 
GENERAL REFERENCES Building construction — See Ch. 127. Zoning — See Ch. 224. 
§ 117-1. Findings and purpose. 
The Board of Selectmen of the Town of Griswold, Connecticut finds: 
A. There are, or may in the future be, adult-oriented establishments locatedin the Town of Griswold which require special supervision from the Town's public safety agencies in order to protect and preserve thehealth, safety and welfare of the patrons of such establishments, as wellas the health, safety and welfare of the Town's citizens. 
B. Statistics and studies performed by a substantial number of cities andTowns in the United States indicate that: 
(1) 
Large numbers of persons, primarily male, frequent such adult-oriented establishments, especially those which provide closed booths, cubicles, studies and rooms for the private viewing of so-called "adult" motion pictures and/or video tapes and/or live entertainment. 

(2) 
Persons under the age of 18 may be attracted to adult-orientedestablishments and seek to enter or loiter about them without the knowledge or permission of their parents or guardians.

(3) 
Such closed booths, cubicles, studios and rooms have been used bypatrons, clients or customers of such adult-oriented establishments for the purpose of engaging in certain sexual acts.

(4) 
Male and female prostitutes have been known to frequent suchestablishments in order to provide sex for hire to the patrons, clients or customers of such establishments within such booths, cubicles and rooms. 

(5) 
Doors, curtains, blinds and/or other closures installed in or on the entrances and/or exits of such booths, cubicles, studios and roomswhich are closed while such booths, cubicles, studios and rooms are in use encourage patrons using such booths, cubicles, studios and rooms to engage in sexual acts therein with prostitutes or others,thereby promoting and encouraging prostitution and the commissionof sexual acts which cause blood, semen and urine to be deposited on the floors and/or walls of such booths, cubicles, studios and rooms,which deposits could prove detrimental to the health and safety ofother persons who may come into contact with such deposits. 

(6) 
The reasonable regulation and supervision of such adult-orientedestablishments tends to discourage such sexual acts and prostitutionand thereby promotes the health, safety and welfare of the patrons, clients and customers of such establishments. 

(7) 
The nature of adult-oriented establishments and the traffic whichthey generate and the potential and the propensity for such establishments to attract persons interested in explicit sexual 


117:69 

activities or erotic art forms and the potential for outdoor assemblyof such persons around the premises of such establishments are such as to make them incompatible with nearby uses of land whereconcentrations of children or youth tend to congregate.
C. 	The continued unregulated operation of adult-oriented establishments, including, without limitations, those specifically cited in § 117-2 hereof,is and would be detrimental to the general welfare, health and safety ofthe citizens of Griswold. 
D. 	The Constitution and laws of the State of Connecticut grant to theTown Powers, especially police power, to enact reasonable legislationand measures to regulate and supervise adult-otiented establishments as hereinafter defined in order to protect the public health, safety andwelfare. 
E. It is not the intent of the Board of Selectmen, in enacting this chapter, to deny to any person rights to speech protected by the United Statesand/or State Constitutions, nor is it the intent of the Board of Selectmento impose any additional limitations or restrictions on the contents or any communicative materials, including sexually oriented films, videotapes, books and/or other materials. Further, by enacting this chapter,the Board of Selectmen does not intend to deny or restrict the rights of any adult to obtain and/or view any sexually oriented materials protectedby the United States and/or State Constitutions, nor does it intend torestrict or deny any constitutionally protected rights that distributors or exhibitors of such sexually oriented materials may have to sell, distributeor exhibit such materials. 
§ 117-2. Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the words and phrases used herein shallhave the following meanings, unless otherwise clearly indicated by the context: 
ADULT AMUSEMENT MACHINE — Includes any amusement machine thatis regularly used for presenting material distinguished or characterized byan emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities and specified anatomical areas, as defined below, for observationby patrons therein. 
ADULT BOOKSTORE — An establishment having any portion of its stock and trade in books, films, video cassettes or magazines and other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis onmatter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, as defined below, provided that this definitionshall not apply to any establishment in which such materials constitute lessthan 10% of the value of the inventory of said establishment and in which the display of such materials does not permit the viewing of specified sexualactivities or specified anatomical areas within the establishment. 
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT — Any exhibition of any adult-oriented motion pictures, live performance, display or dance of any type, removal of articlesof clothing or appearing unclothed, pantomime, modeling or any other 
117:70 

personal services offered customers which has as a significant or substantial portion of such performance, or any actual or simulated performance of, specified sexual activities or exhibition and viewing of specified anatomical areas 
ADULT MINI-MOTION PICTURE THEATER — An enclosed building with a capacity of less than 50 persons regularly used for presenting materialdistinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting,describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, as defined below, for observation by patrons therein. 
ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER — An enclosed building with a capacity of 50 or more persons regularly used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting,describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomicalareas, as defined below, for observation by patrons therein. 
ADULT-ORIENTED ESTABLISHMENT — Includes, without limitation, adult bookstores, adult motion picture theaters, adult mini-motion picturetheaters and commercial establishments containing one or more adult amusement machines. Adult-oriented establishment further means anypremises to which the public, patrons or members are invited or admittedand which are so physically arranged as to provide booths, cubicles, rooms, studios, compartments or stalls separate from the common areas of thepremises for the purpose of viewing adult-oriented motion pictures, or anypremises wherein an entertainer provides adult entertainment to a member of the public, a patron or a member, when such adult entertainment isheld, conducted, operated or maintained for a profit, direct or indirect.An adult-oriented establishment further includes, without limitation, any adult entertainment studio or any premises that are physically arranged andused as such, whether advertised or represented as an adult entertainmentstudio, rap studio, exotic dance studio, encounter studio, sensitivity studio, modeling studio or any other term of like import. 
AMUSEMENT MACHINE — Includes any machine which, upon the paymentof a charge or upon insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate or disk, may be operated by the public for use as a game, entertainment or amusement,whether or not registering a score and whether or not electronicallyoperated. 
BOARD OF SELECTMEN — The Board of Selectmen of the Town of Griswold, Connecticut. 
EMPLOYEE — Any and all persons, including independent contractors, who work in or at or render any services directly related to the operation of anadult-oriented establishment. 
ENTERTAINER — Any person who provides entertainment within an adult-oriented establishment as defined in this section, whether or not a fee is charged or accepted for entertainment and whether or not entertainment isprovided as an employee or an independent contractor. 
INSPECTOR — One or more employees of the Town of Griswold designatedby the Selectmen who shall hereby be authorized to inspect premises 
117:71 

regulated under this chapter and to take the required actions authorizedby this chapter in case of violations being found on such premises and to require corrections of unsatisfactory conditions found on said premises. 
MINOR — Refers to a person under the age of 18 years. 
OPERATOR — Any person, or any proprietor, shareholder, general partner or limited partner who holds any of share or partnership interest of anybusiness which is operating, conducting, owning or maintaining an adult-oriented establishment. 
SEXUAL ACTIVITIES — Not intended to include any medical publicationsor films or bona fide educational publication or films, nor does it include any art or photography publications which denote at least 25% of the lineage of each issue to articles and advertisements dealing with subjectsor art or photographs. Nor does this definition apply to any news periodicalwhich reports or describes current events and which, from time to time, publishes photographs of nude or seminude persons in connection with thedissemination of the news. Nor does this definition apply to publicationsor films which describe and report different cultures and which, from time to time, publish or show photographs or depictions of nude or seminude persons when describing cultures in which nudity or seminudity is indigenous to the population. 
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS — 
A. 	Less than completely and opaquely covered: 
(1) 	
Human genitals, pubic region. 

(2) 	
Buttocks. 

(3) 	
Female breasts below a point immediately above the top of theareola. 


B. 	Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state even if completelycovered. 
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES — 
A. 	Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal. 
B. 	Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy. 
C. 	Fondling or erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock or female breasts. 
SUPERVISOR — The police, building, zoning, officials. 
§ 117-3. Requirements.
A. No operator or employee of an adult-oriented establishment shall allowor permit any minor or intoxicated person to loiter in any part of suchestablishment, including parking lots immediately adjacent to such establishment used by patrons of such adult-oriented establishment. 
117:72 

B. Every adult-oriented establishment shall display a sign outside eachentrance bearing the words, "Adult-oriented establishment -persons under 18 not admitted" in letters three inches high.
C. 	No adult-oriented establishment shall be conducted in such a manner that permits the observation of any material depicting specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas from the outside of the buildingthat houses the adult-oriented establishment. 
D. 	Every adult-oriented establishment doing business in the Town on or after September 20, 1999, shall be well lighted at all times and bephysically arranged in such a manner that the entire interior portionof the booths, cubicles, rooms or stalls, wherein adult entertainment is provided, shall be clearly visible from the common areas of the premises.Visibility into such booths, cubicles, rooms or stalls shall not be blocked or obscured by doors, curtains, partitions, drapes or any other obstruction whatsoever. It shall be unlawful to install enclosed booths, cubicles, rooms or stalls within adult-oriented establishments for whatever purpose, but especially for the purpose of providing for the secluded viewing of adult-oriented motion pictures or other types ofadult-oriented entertainment. 
E. On or after September 20, 1999, the operator of each adult-oriented establishment shall be responsible for and shall provide that any roomor other area used for the purpose of viewing adult-oriented motionpictures or other types of live adult entertainment shall be well lighted and readily accessible at all times and shall be continuously open to viewin its entirety. The premises shall be equipped with overhead lightingfixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access at an illumination of not less than 1.0 foot candleas measured at the floor level. It shall be the duty of the operator and itsagents to ensure that the illumination described above is maintained at all times that any patron is present in the premises.
F. 	Every act or omission by an employee constituting a violation of theprovisions of this chapter shall be deemed the act or omission of the operator if such act or omission occurs either with the authorization,knowledge or approval of the operator or as a result of the operator'snegligent failure to supervise the employee's conduct, and the operator shall be punishable for such act or omission in the same manner as if theoperator committed the act or caused the omission.
G. 	An operator shall be responsible for the conduct of all employees while on the licensed premises, and any act or omission of any employeeconstituting a violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemedthe act or omission of the operator for purposes of determining whether the operator shall be subject to the penalties imposed by this chapter.
H. All adult-oriented establishments shall be open to inspection at allreasonable times by the Inspector, or such other person(s) as the Board of Selectmen may designate. Information regarding employees,including name, date of birth and social security number, must be maintained as part of the record and must be available for inspection by Town officials. 
117:73 

§ 117-4. Minimum distances from youth facilities. 
Adult-oriented establishments or any signage, advertising or notice for the adult-oriented establishment shall be located not less than 1,000 feet from any of the following uses, if existing at the time when the adult-oriented establishment is established: any public or private school serving grade 12 or lower; any day care center, nursery school or similar use; anypublic park or playground; any playground associated with a church orother community building; any residential zone. Measurements of distances shall be from any portion of the building housing such adult-orientedestablishment to any portion of a parcel of land containing such land uses or being residentially zoned. The separating distance required by this section shall be determined as of the date that any adult-orientedestablishment commences to operate in accordance with this chapter andany applicable provision(s) of the Town of Griswold Zoning Regulations,19 Building Code,20 Health Code and other applicable state and local laws,and such adult-oriented establishment shall not be deemed to violate this section if, thereafter, one of the enumerated uses is established within the distance set forth herein. 
§ 117-5. Minimum distances from other adult-orientedestablishments. 
No adult-oriented establishments or any signage, advertising or notice forthe adult-oriented establishment shall be permitted in any portion of abuilding that is less than 1,000 feet from that portion of a building occupied by an existing adult-oriented establishment. The 1,000 feet shall be thestraight horizontal distance from any part of a building housing an adult-oriented establishment to any part of the other building housing such use or any public entrance or exit into or out of that building housing an adult-oriented establishment or, if only a portion of the building is so used, anypublic entrance or exit into or out of any portion of the building housing such adult-oriented establishment to any such public entrance or exit forany existing adult-oriented establishment. 
§ 117-6. Exemptions for preexisting uses. 
The provisions of the preceding §§ 117-4 and 117-5 shall not be deemed toprohibit any use preexisting the enactment of this chapter. Any preexistinguse which shall be discontinued for a period of 30 days shall thereafter conform to §§ 117-4 and 117-5. 
§ 117-7. Penalties for offenses.
A. Any person, partnership or corporation who is found to have violated this chapter shall be fined a definite sum not exceeding $100 for each suchviolation. 
19.Editor's Note: See Ch. 224, Zoning. 
20.Editor's Note: See Ch. 127, Building Construction. 

117:74 
B. Each violation of this chapter shall be considered a separate offense, andany violation continuing more than one hour of time shall be considered a separate offense for each hour of violation. 
Chapter 119 
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES 

119:75 

ARTICLE I 
Sale on Sunday
[Adopted 8-3-1935 STM] 

§ 119-1. Sale permitted during certain hours. 
The sale of alcoholic liquors shall be allowed between the hours of 12:00 noon and 9:00 p.m.21 in hotels, restaurants and clubs, with meals. 
21.Editor's Note: Connecticut General Statutes Section 30-91a, adopted by Public Act No.71-89, provides that the effect of all prior municipal legislation shall be to permit saleuntil the time specified in Section 30-91, unless an earlier hour is established after April30, 1971. 
119:77 
ARTICLE II 
Possession and Consumption[Adopted 8-30-1984 STM] 
§ 119-2. Public areas; open containers.
A. The drinking of any alcoholic beverage or the possession of any opened container holding an alcoholic beverage is prohibited on any street, road,alley, parking lot or sidewalk in the Town and on any grounds owned byor under the control of the Town except when a permit has been issued for the same by the proper authority.
B. An open container shall be construed to mean an uncapped container. Allcontainers shall be considered empty if they contain less than an ounce of any alcoholic beverage. [Added 10-4-1984 STM] 
§ 119-3. Motor vehicles. [Amended 10-4-1984 STM] 
It shall be unlawful for all occupants of a parked motor vehicle to consumeany alcoholic beverage within the confines of the automobile or have in anuncapped container any alcoholic beverage on any highway, street or road within the Town of Griswold. 
§ 119-4. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 10-4-1984 STM] 
Any violation of this article shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $25. 
119:79 

§ 119-4 	GRISWOLD CODE § 124-3 
Chapter 124 
BLIGHT 

GENERAL REFERENCES 
Building construction — See Ch. 127. Inland wetlands and watercourses — See Ch. 
221. 
Enforcement of Zoning Regulations — See Ch.139, Art. I. 
§ 124-1. Purpose. 
It being found by the Town Meeting that the existence of blightedproperties, buildings and structures adversely affects the economic well­being of the Town of Griswold and the Borough of Jewett City and is inimical to the health, safety, and general welfare of its residents, thepurpose of this chapter, adopted pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes§ 7-148(c)(7)(H)(xv), therefore to define, prohibit and provide for the abatement of blight on properties so as to preserve and protect propertyvalues in the Town of Griswold and the Borough of Jewett City and the well­being of its residents and property owners. 
§ 124-2. Scope. 
This chapter applies to all parcels of land within the Town of Griswold andthe Borough of Jewett City upon which blight exists with the exception of: 
A. Agricultural lands as defined in Connecticut General Statutes § 22-3(b),as amended; 
B. Land dedicated as public or semipublic open space or preserved in its natural state through conservation easements; or
C. Areas designated as inland wetlands and watercourses. 
§ 124-3. Definitions. 
The following definitions apply in the interpretation and enforcement of thischapter: 
BLIGHTED PROPERTY — To be a property, structure, building at or on which a blighted condition exists. 
A. 	It has been determined by the Blight Enforcement Officer that a condition exists on property that poses a serious or immediate threat to the health, safety or general welfare of the community. 
B. 	A property is in a state of neglect or a house, building, structure, or anypart thereof, on the property is dilapidated and/or one or more of the following condition(s) exist(s) thereon: 
(1) 
Missing, broken or inadequately secured windows or doors; 

119:80 


(2) 	
Collapsing or missing exterior walls or roofs; 

(3) 	
Structurally deficient conditions; 

(4) 	
Unrepaired fire or water damage; 

(5) 	
Substantially damaged or missing siding; 

(6) 	
The persistent existence of garbage or trash on the property not completely contained within trash or refuse containers securelysealed by covers. Covering yard debris with tarp is not permitted; 

(7) 	
The persistent existence of more than two vehicles on the property that are inoperable or in a state of disrepair or major disassemblyor in the process of being stripped or dismantled including, cars,trucks, campers, motorcycles, boats, mowers, farming and construction equipment any one of which may also have missingdoors or windows, holes, rust, or obvious physical decay, or usedfor storage purposes; 

(8) 	
Accumulated debris not properly stored or used for its intended purposes including plastics, glass, papers, junk, furniture, appliances, scrap metal, tires, batteries, containers, garbage and building materials; 

(9) 	
Tarpaulins used for weather protection (roof coverings) for periodsexceeding 180 days in lieu of permanent approved roofing materials; 


(10)Overgrown vegetation and herbaceous materials including grassexceeding 12 inches in height, including overgrown trees and shrubbery impeding pedestrian traffic and/or vehicular traffic onsidewalks and streets; 
(11)The Fire Marshal has notified the Blight Enforcement Officer that a building or structure is a fire hazard and is a factor creating asubstantial problem with public safety for the use and enjoyment ofneighboring properties. 
(12)The Health Officer has determined that a building or structure is aHealth Hazard due to insect and/or rodent infestation. The storageof debris on the property that serves as a haven for insect or rodent infestation is not permitted. The Blight Enforcement Officer shallindependently inspect and verify if a blight condition exists. 
DEBRIS — Anything that for a period of 30 days or longer remains in public view on premises and that is incapable of immediately performingthe function for which it was designed. Debris includes, but is not limited to: 
A. 	Abandoned, discarded, or unused objects; 
B. 	Furniture, equipment or appliances that are missing parts, not complete in appearance, and in an obvious state of disrepair; and 
119:81 

C. 	Cans, boxes, scrap metal, tires, batteries, containers, garbage, parts offurniture or equipment and similar objects. 
DECAY or DECAYED — A wasting or wearing away; a gradual declinein strength, soundness or quality; decomposed or rotten, except as to acontained compost pile. 
DILAPIDATED — Any building, structure or parcel of land, or part thereofin a state of disrepair or ruin as a result of age or neglect, and/or whichis deemed unsafe pursuant to the Connecticut State Building Code, or the Connecticut Public Health Code, as they may be amended from time to time,or any dwelling or dwelling unit which is designated as unfit for humanhabitation as defined by the Connecticut Public Health Code including but not limited to a building, structure, or parcel of land that evidencesdisrepair that presents a safety concern or evidences conditions that arelikely to cause sickness, disease, or injury to the general welfare of any of the persons living therein or of the general public. 
MECHANICAL EQUIPMENT — Any apparatus other than motor vehicles,including but not limited to electric and pneumatic equipment, that is designed to be operated by an engine or to be towed by any apparatuspropelled by an engine. 
OWNER — Any natural or legal entity having an ownership interest in a premises or buildings that are subject to this chapter. "Owner" or "occupant" includes a "registrant" as defined in Connecticut General Statutes § 7-148hh(1). 
PREMISES — Any parcel of land or structure or building including residential, commercial and industrial. 
PUBLIC VIEW — Visible at ground level from any public right-of-way or adjacent premises. 
STRUCTURE — Any dwelling, shed or similar construction that is enclosedin whole or in part. 
§ 124-4. Creation or maintenance of blight prohibited. 
Each owner or occupant of a premises or structures subject to this chaptershall comply with its provisions and shall not cause or allow such premises or structures to become blighted or to remain in a blighted condition. Theseobligations exist jointly and severally on affected owners or occupants. 
§ 124-5. Minimum standards.
A. This chapter shall not be construed to prevent the enforcement of otherstatutes, codes, ordinances or regulations that prescribe standards otherthan are provided herein, and the Blight Enforcement Officer is expressly authorized to seek any and all remedies at law or equity tocompel compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
B. In any case where a provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict with a provision of any zoning, building, fire, safety or health ordinance,regulation or other code of the Town or the state, the provision that 
119:82 

establishes the higher standard for the protection, preservation andpromotion of public health, safety and welfare and the preservation and protection of property values shall prevail. 
§ 124-6. Designation and authority of Blight Enforcement Officer. 
The Blight Enforcement Officer shall be a Town official and/or employee designated by the First Selectman. The Blight Enforcement Officer shall beresponsible for enforcing, and is hereby granted the authority to enforcethis chapter and to issue citations and/or take other actions as he or she deems necessary to compel compliance with this chapter. 
§ 124-7. Complaints; notice of violation.
A. Signed, written complaints 	on forms provided by the Town may be submitted to the Blight Enforcement Officer. The Blight EnforcementOfficer may enforce the provisions of this chapter without havingreceived a signed, written complaint. 
B. If the Blight Enforcement Officer determines that there has been aviolation of this chapter, the officer shall cause notice of the violationto be given to the owner or owners or occupants of the premises upon which the violation exists, as provided below. Such notice shall be sentto the owner's last known address as listed in the Tax Collector's office or, as applicable, to the registration address provided under Connecticut General Statutes § 7-148ii. Such notice shall:
(1) 
Set forth the provision(s) of this chapter that have been violated andthe facts establishing such violation(s); 

(2) 
Specify a final date for the correction of any violation;

(3) 
Be served upon the owner by a State Marshal authorized to serveprocess in New London County. 

(4) 
State that the fines and enforcement provisions of this chapter willbecome effective on the final date for correction of any violation,including any extension(s) thereof. 

C. 	
The Blight Enforcement Officer is required to issue only one notice ofviolation, even though there are multiple violations and even though thesame violation may exist for multiple days. 


§ 124-8. Extension of correction period. 
Prior to the expiration of the correction period specified in the notice ofviolation, the owner of the premises receiving a notice may apply, in writing, to the Blight Enforcement Officer for an extension of the correction period.The Blight Enforcement Officer may, in writing, grant one extension of thecorrection period of no more than 30 days if the officer determines that the owner is diligently working to remedy the blighted condition and thatunder the facts and circumstances an extension is reasonable. The BlightEnforcement Officer may provide one or more subsequent extensions only upon the approval of the First Selectman. 
119:83 

§ 124-9. Appointment of citation hearing officers. 
The First Selectman of the Town of Griswold shall appoint three citation hearing officers and a minimum of one alternate to conduct the hearingprovided by § 124-10C of this chapter. Neither the Blight EnforcementOfficer nor any Town of Griswold employee or Law Enforcement Officer shall be appointed as a citation hearing officer under this chapter. Threehearing officers shall sit on each appeal. 
§ 124-10. Citation; fine; hearing procedure.
A. If on or after the original or any extended correction date the BlightEnforcement Officer determines that the cited blight condition(s) has/have not been fully abated, the Blight Enforcement Officer may issue a citation, which shall include the fines set forth in this chapter. The BlightEnforcement Officer need not issue more than one citation, even thoughthere may be multiple violations that exist for multiple days. 
B. Each violation of this chapter shall be subject to a fine of $50 perday, payable to the Town of Griswold. No fine shall commence until 30days have elapsed, after the Hearing Officers have rendered a decision and notified the owner, agent, tenant or responsible party or in thecase the owner cannot be located, the date of publication of noticein the newspaper. Each day that the violation of this chapter exists shall constitute a separate offense. The Hearing Officers shall followthe procedure adopted pursuant to the Connecticut General Statutes§ 7-152c. 
C. 	Any entity issued a citation may contest their liability before the CitationHearing Officers by delivering in person or by certified mail returnreceipt requested written notice within 10 days of the date thereof; to the First Selectman of the Town of Griswold that he does contest said citation. Any entity that does not deliver or mail a written demand for ahearing within 10 days of the date of the first notice shall be deemed to have admitted liability. 
D. 	Any entity who requests a hearing shall be given written notice bycertified mail return receipt requested of the date, time and place for the hearing. Such hearing shall be held not less than 15 days nor more than30 days from the date of mailing of the notice.
E. The Town of Griswold hereby adopts the hearing procedures set forth in Connecticut General Statutes § 7-152c, as amended, as its hearingprocedure for citations issued under this chapter. 
F. 	A copy of The Town of Griswold Blight Ordinance and the Borough of Jewett City shall be issued with each citation issued. 
§ 124-11. Recording liens. 
In addition to having a lien for abatement expenses, all unpaid fines or costs shall constitute a lien upon the real estate in accordance with ConnecticutGeneral Statutes § 7-148aa, and each such lien shall be continued, recordedand released as provided therein. 
Chapter 127 

127:84 



BUILDING CONSTRUCTION 
GENERAL REFERENCES 
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 131. Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 151. Fees — See Ch. 143. 
§ 127-1. Adoption of State Building Code. 
The Town of Griswold, pursuant to Chapter 354 of the General Statutesof Connecticut, Revision of 1958, as amended, hereby adopts the State Building Code.22 
§ 127-2. Board of Appeals. 
The Board of Selectmen shall appoint the members of the Board of Appeals and shall fill any vacancies on such Board as they arise. 
Chapter 131 
BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF (IN THE TOWN OF GRISWOLDAND BOROUGH OF JEWETT CITY) 
GENERAL REFERENCES 
Building construction — See Ch. 127. Subdivision of land — See Ch. 223. 
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 202. 
§ 131-1. Assignment of street numbers. [Amended 5-22-2017 STM] 
The Assessor shall assign street numbers to all buildings, parts of buildingsand building lots fronting on Town streets, and a record of these number assignments shall be kept in the Griswold Town Hall. The Assessor shallgive notification of the street number assignment to all owners and/or occupants. 
§ 131-2. Placement of numbers. [Amended 5-22-2017 STM]
A. Each owner or occupant shall affix in a conspicuous place, either on abuilding on an object or on a mailbox, the correctly assigned number that will identify the address as assigned by the street numbering systemof the Town of Griswold. The numbers must be visible and readable from the street or highway, shall be contrasting and reflective from both directions of travel, shall be no smaller than three inches in height andshall be placed within 10 feet of the curbline of the street. 

22.Editor's Note: See now Connecticut General Statutes Section 29-251 et seq. 
127:85 
B. Private roads, shared driveways 	to include any break in the road/driveway and dwellings containing more than one residence must be identified individually and must conform with this section. 
§ 131-3. Failure to affix number; penalties for offenses. [Amended5-22-2017 STM] 
Each owner or occupant shall be required to affix the assigned numberwithin 90 days of the receipt of notice of the assignment of the number.Failure to do so shall be considered a violation of this chapter and punishable by a citation of not less than $1 per day and not more than $25for each offense. Each notice by the Town of Griswold shall constitute aseparate offense. 
§ 131-4. Adoption of street numbering system; officially recognized street names. 
A. For the purpose of creating order in the streets of the Town of Griswold, to ensure that the Town of Griswold has proper and useful planning, topromote public safety and convenience and to ease and speed essentialemergency services, the street numbering system, as shown on a set of maps on file in the office of the Assessor and Town Clerk, is herebyadopted, as specified in Section 7-148(c)(6)(C)(i) of the General Statutesof the State of Connecticut, as the street numbering system of the Town of Griswold. 
B. Furthermore, to ensure that the street numbering system of the Townof Griswold is correct and understandable and there is no confusion in street names, the following streets and roads shall be officially recognized by the names indicated herein: [Amended 5-22-2017 STM]
(1) 
Connecticut Route 201, from its intersection with Connecticut Route12 in Jewett City easterly to an intersection with Norman Road, shallbe known as "East Main Street." 

(2) 
Connecticut Route 201, from its intersection with Norman Roadeasterly and southerly to its intersection with Connecticut Route138, shall be known as "Hopeville Road." 

(3) 
Connecticut Route 201, from its intersection with Connecticut Route138 southerly to the North Stonington Town line, shall be known as"Glasgo Road." 

(4) 
Connecticut Route 138, from its intersection with Connecticut Route12 in Jewett City easterly to its intersection with Interstate Route164, shall be known as "Slater Avenue." 

(5) 
Connecticut Route 138, from its intersection with Route 164 easterlyto the Voluntown Town line, shall be known as "Voluntown Road." 


§ 131-5. Roads not accepted by Town. [Amended 5-22-2017 STM] 
Certain streets and roads within the Town of Griswold that have been numbered and are not Town-accepted roads must meet all of the requirements of this chapter. This has been done for consistency and convenience and shall not be interpreted as acceptance of the street or roadby the Town. 
127:86 

§ 131-6. Duplicate street names. [Amended 5-22-2017 STM] 
Duplicate street names are not allowed in the Town of Griswold or Borough of Jewett City. The Assessor shall assign a name to streets with no name,preexisting duplicate street names and streets with more than one name.Said street name must meet the approval of the Board of Selectmen. 
§ 131-7. Initial numbering; new developments. [Amended 5-22-2017STM] 
The Assessor shall allocate numbers on any new developments, which plans must be submitted by the Planning and Zoning Commission before its finalapproval is given. 
§ 131-8. Use of new numbers on permits. 
The Building Official will use all the new numbers, as established, on all newbuilding and repair permits. 
Chapter 137 
EMINENT DOMAIN 
§ 137-1. Eminent domain powers limited. 
Within the territorial limits of the Town of Griswold, no real property may be acquired by eminent domain for economic development purposespursuant to C.G.S. §§ 8-128 to 8-133, inclusive, if the resulting project willbe privately owned or controlled. If residential, vacant land, industrial and/ or commercial property is acquired through eminent domain for publicpurposes, the owner of the property shall be compensated at 125% of thecurrently appraised value; the Town or the entity exercising the eminent domain powers shall be responsible for the costs of the certified appraisaland/or survey, if needed. Nothing contained herein shall be construed tolimit the use of eminent domain powers for public purposes, including but not limited to the construction of sewers, highways, sidewalks, rights­of-way, flood and erosion control purposes or for any other transactionwhere the property rights acquired will be held or controlled by the Town of Griswold. This chapter shall not be inconsistent with any subsequentlyenacted state law; however, the Town of Griswold does recognize that it canlimit the Town's own eminent domain powers further than the State laws limit. 
137:87 

Chapter 139 
ENFORCEMENT OF REGULATIONS 
GENERAL REFERENCES 

Planning and Zoning Commission — See Ch. Zoning — See Ch. 224. 
68. 
Planning and Zoning Commission Zoning Board of Appeals — See Ch. 115. Bylaws — See Ch. 232. 
139:88 

ARTICLE I 
Zoning Regulations[Adopted 1-9-1997] 
§ 139-1. Authority; serving of notice; copies. 
The Zoning Enforcement Officer is authorized to issue citations for violations of the Town of Griswold Zoning Regulations to the extent and inthe manner provided by this article. Any such citation may be served eitherby hand delivery or by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the person named in such citation. If the person named in a citation sent by certifiedmail refuses to accept such mail, the citation may be sent by regular UnitedStates mail. The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall file and retain an original or certified copy of the citation. 
§ 139-2. Applicability. 
A citation may be issued for any violation of the Town of Griswold Zoning Regulations. 
§ 139-3. Fines.
A. The fine structure for each such citation shall be as follows and shall be payable to the Treasurer of the Town of Griswold:
(1) 
Violations relating to residential uses and structures: $75.

(2) 
Violations relating to nonresidential uses and structures: $100. 

B. 
For 	the purposes of this section, the term "violations relating to residential uses and structures" means violations made in connection with the violator's own dwelling; violations made in connection with structures accessory to the violator's own dwelling; and violations attributable to residential uses conducted in connection with the violator's own dwelling or accessory structures to the violator's dwelling. All other types of zoning violations shall be deemed to be violationsrelating to nonresidential uses and structures under this section. 


§ 139-4. Payment of fine. 
Any person receiving such a citation shall be allowed a period of 30 daysfrom his or her receipt of the citation to make an uncontested payment tothe Treasurer of the fine specified in the citation. If the citation has been sent by regular mail pursuant to the provisions of § 139-1 of this article, theday of receipt of the citation shall be deemed to be three business days afterthe day of mailing of the citation. 
§ 139-5. Nonpayment of fine; notice. 
If a person who has been issued a citation does not make an uncontestedpayment to the Treasurer of the fine specified in the citation within the time allowed under § 139-4 of this article, the Zoning Enforcement Officer shallsend a notice to the person cited, informing such person:
A. Of the allegations against him or her and the amount of the fines. 
139:89 

B. That the person cited may contest liability before a Hearing Officerappointed by the First Selectman of the Town of Griswold, as provided in § 139-9 of this article, by delivering, in person or by mail, within 10 daysof the date of the notice, a written demand for a hearing.
C. 	That if the person cited does not demand such a hearing, an assessment and judgment shall be entered against him or her. 
D. 	That such judgment shall be issued without further notice. 
§ 139-6. Admission of liability. 
If the person who is sent notice pursuant to § 139-5 of this article wishes toadmit liability for any alleged violation, he or she may, without requestinga hearing, pay the full amount of the fine, either in person or by mail, to the Zoning Enforcement Officer. All fines shall be made payable to theTreasurer of the Town of Griswold. Such payment shall be inadmissible inany proceeding, civil or criminal, to establish the conduct of such person or other person making the payment. Any person who does not deliveror mail written demand for a hearing within 10 days of the date of thenotice described in § 139-5 of this article shall be deemed to have admitted liability, and the Zoning Enforcement Officer shall certify to the HearingOfficer that such person has failed to respond. The Hearing Officer shallthereupon enter and assess the fines provided for by this article and shall follow the procedures set forth in § 139-8 of this article. 
§ 139-7. Hearing; determination of liability. 
Any person who requests a hearing shall be given written notice of the date, time and place for the hearing. Such hearing shall be held not lessthan 15 days nor more than 30 days from the date of the mailing ofnotice, provided that the Hearing Officer shall grant upon good cause shown any reasonable request by any interested party for postponementor continuance. The presence of the Zoning Enforcement Officer shall berequired at the hearing if requested by the person who was issued the citation. A person wishing to contest liability shall appear at the hearingand may present evidence in his or her behalf. The Zoning EnforcementOfficer may present evidence on behalf of the municipality. If the person who received the citation fails to appear, the Hearing Officer may enteran assessment by default against him or her upon a finding of propernotice and liability under the applicable provisions of the Griswold Zoning Regulations. The Hearing Officer may accept written information by mailfrom the person who received the citation and may determine therebythat the appearance of such person is unnecessary. The Hearing Officer shall conduct the hearing in the order and form and with such methodsof proof as he or she deems fair and appropriate. The rules regarding theadmissibility of evidence shall not be strictly applied, but all testimony shall be given under oath or affirmation. The Hearing Officer shall announce hisor her decision at the end of the hearing. If the Hearing Officer determinesthat the person who received the citation is not liable, the Hearing Officer shall dismiss the matter and enter that determination in writing accordingly.If the Hearing Officer determines that the person who received the citation 
139:90 

is liable for the violation, the Hearing Officer shall forthwith enter andassess the fines against such person as provided by this article. 
§ 139-8. Notice of assessment; fee. 
If such assessment is not paid on the date of its entry, the Hearing Officershall send, by first-class mail, a notice of the assessment to the person found liable and shall file, not less than 30 days nor more than 12 months aftersuch mailing, a certified copy of the notice of assessment with the Clerk ofthe Superior Court, together with an entry fee of $8. Further proceedings may then be held pursuant to the applicable provisions of the ConnecticutGeneral Statutes. 
§ 139-9. Appointment of Hearing Officer. 
The First Selectman of the Town of Griswold shall appoint one or morecitation Hearing Officers to conduct the hearings provided by this article.Neither the Zoning Enforcement Officer, the Building Inspector nor any employee of the Town of Griswold Planning and Zoning Commission may beappointed as a Hearing Officer pursuant to this article. 
§ 139-10. Effective date. 
The effective date of this article shall be January 30, 1997. 
139:91 

Chapter 143 FEES 
GENERAL REFERENCES 
Building construction — See Ch. 127. Sewers — See Ch. 222. Mobile homes and trailers — See Ch. 176. 
139:92 

ARTICLE I 
Building Department
[Adopted 10-26-1989; amended in its entirety 5-22-2017 STM] 

§ 143-1. Fees established.
A. Building fees. 
(1) 	Residential permit fees: 
EXAMPLE: A twelve-foot-by-twenty-foot shed is 240 square feet; 240 squarefeet x $25 per square foot = $6,000 (which is the estimated cost), then fees arecalculated by the estimated cost. 
$6,000 x $16.26 = $97.56 + $20 zoning fee + $5 certificate of compliance =TOTAL FEE DUE: $122.56. 
All calculations are done by the Building Department. 
**NOTE: This is only an example to understand the fee structure. 
Estimated Cost Calculated bythe Following 
Item 	(per square foot) 
Basement unfinished Included with new house/addition Basement finished $37 Living space $80 Garage unfinished $45 Garage finished $50 Shed $25 Deck $20 Covered porch $35 Storage (unfinished areas convertible to$40 
living space) 
(2) 	
Commercial, Industrial, Residential 1,2,3 Use Group: per "Marshall and Swift" or"Means" cost estimate manual. 

(3) 	
Building permit fee: $16.26 per $1,000 of estimated cost or any portion thereof, plus an additional certificate of occupancy/compliance fee of $5 will be chargedto every building permit. (The Board of Selectmen may waive fees for Town-andBorough-owned buildings.) 

(4) 	
Zoning fee: $20 will be charged on new structure construction.

(5) 	
Mechanical permits: $16.26 per $1,000 of estimated cost or any portion thereof(electric, plumbing, heating, air conditioning, ventilation). 

(6) 	
Mobile home/trailer permits: $8.26 per $1,000 of estimated cost/value or anyportion thereof (placement/replacement of trailers/mobile homes).

(7) 	
Demolition permits: $16 per $1,000 of assessed value or any portion thereof, and a minimum of $40. 

139:93 


(8) 	
Requested inspections other than permits: $25. Requests must be submittedto the Building Department in writing and must be paid prior to inspection (woodstoves, fireplaces, chimneys, energy ratings, swimming pools, etc.).

(9) 	
Land use letters for mortgage approvals: $25 (payable at time of request).

(10) 
Miscellaneous fees (these fees are in addition to regular permit fees): 

(a) 
For work previously completed without a building permit: $200.

(b) 
For 	any building/structure where construction is in progress without a building permit: $100 minimum. 

(c) 
For any building or structure where electrical, plumbing or heating is inprogress without a permit: $100 each trade.

(d) 
Rejected drawings to be resubmitted with a plan review fee of $25. 

(e) 
Reinspection fee for inspections incomplete after second inspection 	or scheduled appointment not ready for inspection and not cancelled prior toinspector leaving the office: $50 per occurrence. 


B. No building application shall be approved by the Building Department of theTown of Griswold until the applicant provides the Building Department with astatement in writing from the office of the Tax Collector of the Town of Griswold that there are no delinquent taxes due for the property for which an applicationis made, or provides a statement in writing from the office of the Tax Collectorthat the owner of the property for which an application is made has entered into a payment program approved by the Tax Collector to pay off any delinquent taxeswhich may be due. 
139:94 

ARTICLE II 
Exemption for Senior Property Owners[Adopted 11-10-2009] 
§ 143-2. Permit fee exemption; conditions. [Amended 5-22-2017STM23] 
No Town fee shall be required for a permit to replace or upgrade theroofing, siding, windows, or electrical or heating system of an owner-occupied, single-family home if at least one of the record owners is aged 62 or over. Such owner shall be required to provide proof of age in order toobtain this exemption. The Connecticut State Educational Fee must still bepaid. 
23.Editor's Note: This enactment also provided for the redesignation of former § 143-4,Permit fee exemption; conditions, as § 143-2. 
139:95 
Chapter 144 

FEES FOR LAND USE APPLICATION PROCESSING AND 
REVIEW 

GENERAL REFERENCES 
Other fees — See Ch. 143. Subdivision of land — See Ch. 223. Inland wetlands and watercourses — See Ch. Zoning — See Ch. 224. 
221. 
§ 144-1. Fees established. 
Pursuant to Section 8-1c of the Connecticut General Statutes there is established a schedule of fees for the processing of land use applications received by the Planning and Zoning Commission, Zoning Board of Appealsand Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Conservation Commission. The schedule of fees established shall supersede those fees presently charged by the land use commissions and boards as previously established inChapter 143 and pursuant to any provision of the General Statutes orany Special Act. These fees are intended to cover a portion of the Town's costs for processing and administrative handling of land use applications,including, but not limited to, legal advertisements regarding public hearings, decisions of a commission, and other matters requiring publication in a newspaper; other notifications or referrals required orauthorized by applicable law; recording and transcribing, where necessary,of public hearings and meetings, the preparation of minutes and other documentation applicable to the application, and other clerical expenses;staff salaries and overhead expenses for staff to the commission, includingofficials of the Town for whom land use application review is only a part of his/her duties, such as the sanitarian, fire chief, etc.; Town Attorney fees indirect connection with legal advice, review of documents, and attendanceat meeting, where deemed desirable, in connection with the application; inspection of construction and other work to insure compliance withapproved permits and applicable regulations; keeping and updating of filesand other documentation relative to the application; such other expenses as may be incidental to the processing of land use applications or subsequentresearch or review relating to land status requested by outside parties butinvolving documents or procedures within the Town of Griswold. 
§ 144-2. Definitions.
A. For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply: 
ADDITIONAL EXPENSES — Those reimbursements set forth in § 144-3, Subsection C, of this chapter. 
COMMISSION(S) — One or all of the land use regulatory agencies ofthe Town of Griswold known as the Planning and Zoning Commission, 
139:96 

Zoning Board of Appeals and Inland Wetlands and Watercourses 
Conservation Commission. 

FIXED APPLICATION FEES — Those set forth in § 144-3, Subsection A,
of this chapter. 

IMPROVED LAND AREA — Any portion(s) of a development site not 
covered by buildings, but covered by parking, driveways, outdoor 
storage or loading areas, lawns, formal landscaped areas, or any other
area not in its natural state. 

PROCESSING OF LAND USE APPLICATION(S) — The actions of a 
commission, supported by staff employed by the Town of Griswold, 
independent contractors, or consultants, in receiving, reviewing and 
acting upon an application to conduct an activity regulated by said
commission and including both pre-action reviews and post-approval
supervision of work and inspection of activities permitted. 

B. Any other term not defined in this chapter shall have the meaning setforth in the definitions section of any applicable regulations (e.g., thezoning regulations for zoning applications, the subdivision regulations for subdivision or resubdivision applications, etc.). 
§ 144-3. Fee Schedule.
A. Fixed application fees. Commissions shall charge fixed application fees for the processing of land use applications in accordance with the following schedule:[Amended 2-15-2014]
(1) Planning and Zoning Commission. Completed application forms along with the required fee are to be submitted to the Planning and Community DevelopmentDepartment no later than 10 business days prior to the meeting. Meetings areheld on the second Monday of each month. 
ApplicationZone Changes Fee State Fee Total 
Text Amendment Flat $375 + $60 = $435 Fee 
Map Amendment Flat$400 1 to 14 + $60 = Variable Fee acres 
Map Amendment* 	$600 15 acres + $60 = Variable or more 
*PZC Commission may reduce the map amendment fee to the plat fee if therequested zone change is for a less intensive zone usage. 
Zoning Permits 
Residential 	$150/unit + $60 = Variable 
Basic Review of Site $250 + $60 = $310 Plan 
139:97 

ApplicationZone Changes Fee State Fee Total 
Minor Change in Use$300 + $60 = $360 
or Site Plan for 
Existing Commercial/ 
Industrial 

New Commercial/$400 + $25/+ $60 = Variable Industrial or Site Plan 1,000 squareAmendment of feet** Existing Commercial/Industrial 
Home Occupation 	$250 + $60 = $310 
Food Vending Permits 
Weekend -$25 N/A = $25 Maximum of 3 days 
Seasonal -$75 N/A = $75 Maximum of 6 weeks 
Annual $250 	N/A = $250 
Seasonal Tent Zoning $200 $200 
Permit 

Special Exceptions 
Residential $200/unit + $60 = Variable (multifamily) 
New Commercial or $600 + $25/+ $60 = Variable Industrial 1,000 square feet** 
Existing Buildings/ $350 + $25/ + $60 = Variable Modifications 1,000 squarefeet** 
**Charge per 1,000 square feet of buildings and outside active area proposed 
CGS Section 8-30 $500 + $50/+ $60 = Variable Zoning Appeals unit 
Subdivisions 	$300/lot+ $60 = Variable Minimum $350 
Resubdivisions 	$350/lot+ $60 = Variable Minimum $400 
(2) Zoning Board of Appeals. Completed application forms along with the requiredfee are to be submitted to the Planning and Community DevelopmentDepartment no later than three Thursdays prior to the meeting. Meetings are held on the first Wednesday of each month. 
139:98 

ApplicationFee State Fee Total 
Variance 	$150 + $60 = $210 
Appeal of Zoning$150 + $60 = $210 Enforcement Officer Order 
Automotive Location $150 + $60 = $210 
(3) Inland 	Wetlands and Watercourses Conservation Commission. Completed application forms along with the required fee shall be submitted to the Planningand Community Development Department no later than 15 days prior to themeeting. Meetings are held on the third Thursday of each month. 
Basic Fee Application Fee 	State Fee Total 
One-family and two-$100 + $60 = $160 family residences oradministrative approval 
Commercial $50 + Basic Fee and = Variable multifamily residenceState Fee per dwelling unit 
If applicable add: 
Public Hearing $175 + 	Basic Fee and = Variable State Fee 
Wetlands Jurisdiction $75 + Basic Fee and = Variable Review State Fee 
Regulation$175 + Basic Fee and = Variable Amendment State Fee 
Subdivision: For each $50/lot + Basic Fee and = Variable lot with wetlands or State Fee watercourses and/orin which activity is proposed in awetland/regulated area 
Commercial Activity $300 + 	Basic Fee and = Variable State Fee 
Total 	Variable 
B. Maximum fee; calculation of fee. Except as provided in Subsection C below, no application fee calculated in accordance with the preceding formulae shallexceed $20,000. Each applicant for any permit shall provide, at the time ofapplication, the necessary data to permit the calculation of the application fee (such as square footage of buildings or outside storage or active display arearequested, the proposed number of lots, or acreage involved in a zone change),and such information shall, where appropriate, be certified by a licensed land 
139:99 

surveyor, professional engineer, or registered architect. Failure to file anyapplication fee set forth in this chapter shall be grounds for denial, without prejudice, of such application.
C. 	Additional reimbursable costs. 
(1) 
In addition to the fixed fees set forth in Subsection A of this section, the commissions may collect payment for direct costs of materials and reviewservices performed by other than town employees, including but not limited to: 

(a) 
Specialized inspections.

(b) 
Third party reviews with professional certifications.

(c) 
Reviews by consultant Town attorneys. 

(d) 
Reviews by consultant Town professional engineers.

(e) 
Reviews by licensed landscape architects.

(f) 
Reviews by licensed architects. 

(g) 
Reviews by archeologist/cultural resource consultants.

(h) 
Reviews by certified soil scientists, wildlife biologists, or ecologists.

(i) 
Reviews by licensed environmental professionals. 

(j) 
Reviews by certified professional in stormwater quality.

(k) 
Legal, stenographic and transcription services associated with any typeof land use application. 

(2) 
The 	Commission may require an applicant to provide certifications,inspections or professional consultant reports at the applicant's expense.It is intended that the fixed fees set forth in Subsection A do not cover such costs for additional expenses resulting from non-Town staff reviewsnecessitated by land use applications. These additional expenses will berequired where applicable for any permit application before any land use Board or Commission, regardless of whether a public hearing is required.This section is also applicable to all expenses incurred after an approval isissued in the event that action is needed to enforce compliance with specific conditions of approval or violation of regulations.


D. 	Fees not in lieu of bonds. The payment of fees shall not prohibit commissionsfrom requiring performance or forfeiture bonds to ensure the successful completion of all work as may be prescribed in the respective land use regulations. 
§ 144-4. Exemptions. 
All boards and agencies of the Town of Griswold, including the use of firecompany properties for fire protection purposes, shall be exempt from thepayment of fees established pursuant to this chapter. Each board may in whole or in part exempt an application from the payment of any or all feesif said application is for low-and moderate-income housing or special-needshousing. In addition, each commission shall be authorized, by majority vote, to reduce or waive application fees where (1) the application doesnot appear, upon initial examination, to require intensive staff review and
(2) the applicant is a nonprofit entity which qualifies for tax deductible charitable contributions under regulations of the United States InternalRevenue Service. The commission may also credit all or a portion of application fees from previous application(s) which were denied or withdrawn, where the review work performed on the previous application(s) 
139:100 

may be of benefit in reviewing the new application. Any commissionexempting an application from payment of a fee, in whole or in part, shall state in the minutes of the meeting at which the plan was received thefee type exempted, the percentage exempt and reasons for granting theexemption. This exemption shall not prohibit a commission from requiring consultant reports, professional certification or conducting inspection toensure conformance with land-use regulations. 
§ 144-5. Payment of fees.
A. Other fees. The payment of a fee established in accordance with theprovision of this chapter shall not relieve the applicant, owner or theiragent from the payment of other fees that may be prescribed for a different type of land use application, or by another ordinance of theTown of Griswold. 
B. Fees nonrefundable. All fees received by a commission as part of a land use application submission shall be nonrefundable.
C. 	Method and timing of payment; failure to pay. All fixed application feesshall be paid by cash, check or money order made payable to the Town of Griswold. Fees shall be paid at the time of application submission.The applicant shall be provided with invoices or other evidence of anyadditional expense(s), and reimbursement to the Town shall be made within 30 days after presentation of such invoices or other evidence.Failure to comply with this subsection shall be grounds for denial ofany application without prejudice, or revocation of any permit previously issued. Reimbursement of the Town under this subsection shall be a condition for the endorsement of any plan, the issuance of any finalpermit, or the issuance of any certificate of zoning compliance for an approved application, or the renewal of any periodic or temporaryapproval, as the case may be.
D. 	Post-approval notices and fees. The Town is authorized to place a notice of nonpayment of review fees on the land records if any fees from pre­approval or post-approval non-staff reviews are not paid for a period of90 days. 
§ 144-6. Periodic updates of Fee Schedule. 
The foregoing fees schedules are based upon an analysis of the expensesincurred, on average, in the processing of land use applications as of the date of passage of this chapter. The First Selectman shall periodicallyexamine the expenses incurred by the Town in the processing of land useapplications, and shall make recommendations based on input from land use boards and commissions to the Board of Selectmen for adjustmentsto the foregoing fee schedules based upon current staffing, regulatoryrequirements, and other relevant factors. 
Chapter 147 
FIREARMS 
147:101 

ARTICLE I 
BB Guns 
[Adopted 5-19-1959 STM] 

§ 147-1. Registration required. 
On or before July 20, 1959, every resident of the Town of Griswold owning a BB gun must register the same with the Town Clerk at his office on SouleStreet, Jewett City.24 
§ 147-2. Fees. 
The original registration fee shall be $2, then $1 yearly thereafter. 
§ 147-3. Penalties for offenses.
A. Anyone failing to register a BB gun shall be fined $10 plus confiscation of the gun.
B. Anyone using a BB gun contrary to state laws will be fined $10 plus lossof registration for one year. 
§ 147-4. Parental responsibility. 
Parents or guardians of minors doing damage to private property throughthe use of BB guns will be responsible for said damage as outlined in the state statute. 

24.Editor's Note: The Town offices are now located on School Street. 
147:103 
§ 147-4 GRISWOLD CODE § 151-3 
Chapter 151 
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION 

GENERAL REFERENCES 

Building construction — See Ch. 127. Subdivision of land — See Ch. 223. 
§ 151-1. Review of building permit applications. 
The Building Official shall review all building permit applications for newconstruction or substantial improvements to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. If a proposed buildingsite is in a location that has a flood hazard, any proposed new constructionor substantial improvement, including prefabricated and mobile homes, must be designed (or modified) and anchored to prevent flotation, collapseor lateral movement of the structure; use construction materials and utilityequipment that are resistant to flood damage; and use construction methods and practices that will minimize flood damage. 
§ 151-2. Review of subdivision proposals and other proposed newdevelopments. 
The Building Official shall review subdivision proposals and other proposednew developments to assure that all such proposals are consistent withthe need to minimize flood damage; that all public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, are located, elevatedand constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; and that adequatedrainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood hazard. 
§ 151-3. Water supply, sanitary sewage and waste disposal systems. 
The Building Official shall require new or replacement water supply systemsand/or sanitary sewage systems to be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systemsinto floodwaters and shall require on-site waste disposal systems to belocated so as to avoid impairment of them or contamination from them during flooding. 
Chapter 155 
FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS 
[Former Ch. 155, Food Service Establishments, adopted 3-14-1985STM, was repealed 5-22-2017 STM. As of 6-17-2010, food serviceestablishments have been governed by Uncas Health District.]
Chapter 158 
151:104 



GUN RANGES 
§ 158-1. Gun ranges prohibited. 
All gun ranges are hereby prohibited within the territorial boundaries of theTown of Griswold, Connecticut unless exempt pursuant to § 158-2 of thischapter. 
§ 158-2. Exemption.
A. The following gun ranges shall be exempt am the prohibition set forth in§ 158-1 of this chapter: 
(1) 
Any 	gun range, indoor or outdoor, legally established and in existence within the territorial limits of the Town prior to the effective date of this chapter; and/or 

(2) 
Any gun range which is completely indoors, regardless of whetherestablished before, on or after the effective date of this chapter,within any industrial or commercial zoning district of the Town if otherwise legally established and authorized within such zoningdistrict(s).

B. 
Notwithstanding the exemptions set forth in § 158-2 of this chapter, nothing in this chapter shall in any way limit or modify ordinances and/orregulations (including but not limited to zoning regulations) previouslyadopted or to be adopted by, and/or the authority or ability of, the Town and/or any of its boards, commissions, agencies, officials, officersor employees from, regulating gun ranges exempt from this chapterwithin the Town including but not limited to regulation of the operation, location or expansion thereof and/or noise emitted therefrom. 


§ 158-3. Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
GUN RANGE — An area, indoors or outdoors, owned, designated, designed,utilized, operated or held out by any person for the use or discharge of any silhouettes, skeet, trap, black powder, rifle, shotgun, pistol, revolver,machine gun or any other firearm (collectively "firearm") for the purpose oftarget, competitive shooting, practice, instruction or training in the use or testing of a firearm by law enforcement or for any other law enforcement,professional or commercial training, practice or instruction purposes;provided, however, the term "gun range" shall not include incidental and/ or recreational target practice with a firearm, if otherwise authorized byapplicable law, on private residential property unrelated to law enforcement, professional or commercial training, practice or instruction purposes. 
EFFECTIVE DATE — Shall mean 15 days after publication of this enactedordinance in a newspaper having a circulation in the Town. 
PERSON — An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, limitedliability company, association, legal entity, club, government unit, including 
151:105 

but not limited to the State of Connecticut and/or any department, agencyor political subdivision thereof and/or any law enforcement department or agency. 
§ 158-4. Injunctive relief; fines. 
Any violation of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $250 per violation, and each day's failure to comply with the provisionshereof shall constitute a separate and distinct violation. The remedies setforth in this chapter shall be cumulative of and not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law. It shallbe unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply withany of the requirements of this chapter. If a person has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this chapter, the Town shall be entitled to preliminary and permanent injunctive relief and the recovery of its attorneys' fees and costs. 
§ 158-5. State law. 
Nothing in this chapter is intended to preempt or supersede the provisionsof C.G.S. § 22a-74a, as amended, to the extent applicable. 
Chapter 163 
INSURANCE 
163:106 

ARTICLE I 
School Bus Operators[Adopted 9-26-1985 STM] 
§ 163-1. Purpose. 
The purpose of this Article is to set minimum public liability insurance requirements for all school bus operators doing business for or in the Townof Griswold. 
§ 163-2. Definitions. 
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
SCHOOL BUS OPERATOR — Any person, firm, partnership, corporation or entity of any nature in the business of supplying transportation by schoolbus, whether gratuitously or for monetary payment, of pupils to and fromschool or school activities. 
§ 163-3. Policy required. 
All school bus operators doing business for or in the Town of Griswold shallmaintain a motor vehicle liability policy reflecting property damage liability insurance coverage in an amount not less than $1,000,000 per individualand not less than $5,000,000 in the aggregate for any one accident andmedical insurance in an amount not less than $5,000 per individual. 
§ 163-4. Filing of certificate. 
A certificate of insurance complying with the requirements of this Articleshall be filed with the office of the Town Clerk of Griswold and the office of the Superintendent of Schools on or before July 1 of each year. The certificate must be issued by an insurance company or companies licensedto do business in the State of Connecticut. The certificate of insurance shall indicate that the Townshall receive 30 days' notice prior to any materialchange or cancellation of the insurance coverage. 
§ 163-5. Liability; indemnification of Townand Board of Education. 
Notwithstanding the provisions hereof, the Town of Griswold shall not beliable in any matter or to any person whatsoever for the failure of anyschool bus operator to be in compliance with the provisions hereof. Further, any school bus operator(s) doing business for or in the Town of Griswoldshall agree to indemnify and save harmless the Town of Griswold and theGriswold Board of Education, its officers, agents, employees and servants from and against all liability claims of action, loss, damage or expense ofany kind and description whatsoever due to bodily injury, including deathat any time resulting therefrom, sustained by any person or persons or on account of damage to property, including loss of use thereof, arising fromsaid school bus operator. 
163:107 

Chapter 176 
MOBILE HOMES AND TRAILERS 

GENERAL REFERENCES 
Building construction — See Ch. 127. Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 151. Fees — See Ch. 143. Zoning — See Ch. 224. 
163:108 

ARTICLE I 
Individual Units 
[Adopted 1-23-1962 STM] 

§ 176-1. Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to ensure the protection of the health, peace and welfare of the residents of the Town of Griswold by establishing certainminimum requirements for any trailer or mobile home used for dwellingpurposes in said Town of Griswold. 
§ 176-2. Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
MOBILE HOME — Any unit similar to a trailer, as defined in this section,but which is also equipped with running water, bath facilities, flush toiletand appropriate sanitary connections. 
PERSON — Includes individuals, corporations, owners, lessees, licenseesand agents of each of them. 
TRAILER — A trailer coach used as sleeping or living quarters but which is not equipped with running water, bath facilities, flush toilet or othersanitary connections. 
§ 176-3. Permit required; fee. 
No person shall maintain or locate any single trailer or mobile home withinthe Town of Griswold without first obtaining a permit from the Boardof Selectmen. The cost of said permit shall not exceed the sum of $10. Application for said permit shall be in writing. 
§ 176-4. Conditions. 
The Board of Selectmen may issue a permit for a trailer or mobile home upon the following conditions:
A. The Board of Selectmen may issue a trailer or mobile home permit onlyupon receiving written notice from the Town Health Officer that the location and use of said trailer or mobile home meets the requirementsconcerning lot sizes as hereinafter described.
B. A trailer shall not be parked within 50 feet of the traveled portion of the public highway nor less than 35 feet from the interior boundary of thetract of land nor within 20 feet of the side boundary of the tract of landon which said trailer is located. 
C. 	Each trailer or mobile home shall be maintained, established or parkedon a lot or area which shall contain no less than 1/2 acre.
D. 	Adequate water supply, drainage and sewage disposal systems must meet the specifications and be satisfactory to the local Health Officerand shall also be in accordance with the State Sanitary Code. 
163:109 

§ 176-5. Investigations; approval. 
Upon written application for a trailer or mobile home permit as specified above, the Board of Selectmen shall examine and investigate the proposedlocation. Upon completion of said investigation, a vote of the majority of theBoard of Selectmen shall be required approving said location. 
§ 176-6. Inspection costs. 
The costs of all inspections applicable to this article shall be determined bythe Board of Selectmen and paid for by the applicant.25 
§ 176-7. Revocation of permit. 
The Board of Selectmen may revoke the permit upon 30 days' written noticeto the permittee for any violation of this article or state regulations. 
§ 176-8. Issuance of permit. 
The Board of Selectmen may issue a permit for a mobile home or trailerupon the applicant meeting all of the requirements of this article, including the approval of a majority vote of the Board of Selectmen. 
§ 176-9. Penalties for offenses. 
Any person found guilty of violating any provisions of this article shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $10 for each and every day that suchviolation shall exist. 
§ 176-10. Existing permits. 
The installation of any trailer under any trailer permit issued prior to theeffective date of this article shall have to be completed within 30 days of theeffective date or such permit shall be subject to cancellation. 
25.Editor's Note: Former Section 7 of this article, pertaining to the posting of cash with theTax Collector, which immediately followed this section, was repealed by the Special TownMeeting 10-28-1963. 
163:110 ARTICLE II 
Parks 
[Adopted 3-18-1964 STM] 

§ 176-11. Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
COLLECTOR — The Tax Collector of the Town of Griswold. 
HEALTH OFFICER — The duly appointed Health Officer of the Town of Griswold or his deputy. 
LICENSEE — Any person licensed hereunder to operate and maintain amobile home park. 
LICENSING AUTHORITY — The Town of Griswold, acting by its Board of Selectmen. 
MOBILE HOME — A unit similar to a trailer coach but which is equipped with running water, bath facilities, flush toilet and appropriate sanitaryconnections. 
MOBILE HOME PARK — Privately owned land upon which two or more mobile homes are or are intended to be parked and occupied as dwellings. 
PERSON — Includes individuals, partnerships, corporations, owners, lessees, licensees and the agents of each of them. 
TRAILER — A trailer coach not equipped with running water, bath facilities,flush toilet and appropriate sanitary connections. 
TRAILER PARK — Privately owned land upon which more than one trailer is intended to be parked and occupied as a dwelling. 
§ 176-12. Trailer parks prohibited. 
No person shall maintain or operate a trailer park in the Town of Griswold. No occupied trailer shall be permitted in a mobile home park. 
§ 176-13. Applicability. 
These regulations shall apply forthwith to all existing mobile home parks and extensions thereof, unless in the opinion of the Board of Selectmen suchregulations shall create undue hardship to the owner of any present mobilehome park. 
§ 176-14. License required for mobile home parks. 
No person shall maintain or operate a mobile home park without having firstobtained a license from the licensing authority. 
§ 176-15. Extensions of existing mobile home parks; waiver ofrequirements. 
163:111 

A. No person shall maintain or operate a mobile home park or extend anexisting mobile home park in the Town of Griswold without having first obtained a license therefor from the licensing authority pursuant hereto.
B. These regulations shall apply forthwith to all existing mobile homeparks; provided, however, that the licensing authority may, upon application, grant such extensions of time or waive such requirements,other than the sanitary requirements as set forth in § 176-19, as may inits judgment be required by the specific circumstances. 
§ 176-16. Application for permit; fee.
A. Application. Application for a permit hereunder shall be made to theBoard of Selectmen in writing on a blank form furnished for that purpose. Each application shall contain the following information:
(1) 
Interest party. The name and address of the applicant and the nameand address of the real party in interest if other than the applicant. 

(2) 
Plot plan. A plot plan may be made by a licensed surveyor under sealshowing the site of the mobile home park, roads, location, size, shapeand identification, number of mobile home lots or spaces, location of sanitary provisions and the name of abutting property ownersaccording to the records of the Assessor for the Town of Griswold.All final plans or maps shall be of overall size not larger than twenty-five by thirty-seven (25 x 37) inches long, including border. It shallbe drawn or traced on a transparent linen tracing cloth at a scaleof not more than 100 feet to the inch. The tracings or drawings shall be made with waterproof black India ink. Three blueprints orother type of copies must accompany the linen drawings. Said linendrawing shall be filed with the Town Clerk and shall not be accepted for recording until and unless marked as approved by the Board ofSelectmen. 

(3) 
Certification. Certificate of approval of the Town Health Officer as to the compliance with the sanitary requirements set forth in § 176-19hereof. 

(4) 
Proof. Proof of ownership, option or valid lease of the premises to be used as a mobile home park.


B. Fee. The initial fee for a permit for a mobile home park shall be $50. Allmobile home park permits must be renewed on the first of October of each and every year, and the permit shall be based on a rate of $10 permobile home lot located within the mobile home park as of October 1of each and every year. In no event shall the renewal permit fee be less than $100. [Amended 9-22-1983 STM] 
§ 176-17. Town Meeting. 
The Board of Selectmen shall call a Town Meeting regarding any applicationfor a mobile home park. 
§ 176-18. General requirements. 
Each mobile home park and extension thereof shall conform to the followingrequirements: 
163:112 

A. The park shall be located on a site graded to ensure drainage of surfaceand subsurface water. 
B. A minimum of 10,000 square feet shall be provided for each mobilehome. 
C. 	Each mobile home lot shall be defined by permanent corner stakes and shall be provided with a permanent marker displaying the lot numbercorresponding with the approved plot plan on file with the Town Clerk. 
D. 	There shall be a minimum of 40 feet of clearance between each mobile home. 
E. All mobile home lots shall abut on a roadway of not less than 40 feet inwidth. 
F. 	All roads within the park shall be well drained, provided with gravel orhard surface and maintained in good condition and shall be continuousso that there shall be no dead-end streets. 
G. 	No mobile home shall be located closer than 25 feet to an adjoiningproperty line.
H. No mobile home shall be located closer than 35 feet to the traveled portion of the public highway. 
I. 	A suburban electric light shall be installed in said park every 200 feet asrecommended by the Connecticut Light and Power Company. 
§ 176-19. Sanitation.
A. All sanitary requirements concerning drinking water, sewage system anddisposal and piping shall be approved by the Health Officer. All of said sanitary requirements must conform to state and local requirements.
B. Licensees shall require that each mobile home owner furnish at leastone fifteen-gallon refuse can with tight-fitting cover. Refuse shall be collected and removed regularly and in such manner that no nuisanceis maintained. It shall be the responsibility of each licensee to maintainproper sanitary conditions with respect to waste and refuse disposal, in accordance with the Connecticut state health and sanitation laws. 
§ 176-20. Registration of mobile homes. [Amended 5-22-2017 STM] 
Each licensee shall keep a register in which the following information shall be recorded forthwith upon the letting of each mobile home. Suchinformation shall be furnished to the Assessor by November 1 annually witheach payment of the license fee provided by § 176-21. 
A. Full name of mobile home owner. 
B. Make, model, size and year of mobile home.
C. 	State in which registered and registration number, if any. 
D. 	Date lot number was rented. 
E. Date mobile home was removed from lot number. 
§ 176-21. Fees for mobile homes. 
On or before the 10th day of each month, each licensee shall collect a fee of$4 from the owner of each mobile home then located in his park and depositthe same with the Collector, together with a list of owners from whom collected, showing the lot number and number of occupants. A copy of such 
163:113 

list shall be kept by the licensee, which shall be available for inspection bythe Health Officer. 
§ 176-22. Disposition of fees.
A. The Collector shall: 
(1) 
Maintain a register showing all fees deposited under § 176-21 and the mobile home owners from whom collected. 

(2) 
Hold such fees in a separate escrow bank account (where taxespayable exceed license fees collected) and credit the amount of such fee shown by such register to have been collected from each mobilehome owner to the total amount of taxes payable by him on July 1 ineach year. 

(3) 
Where fees collected exceed taxes payable as to each mobile homeor trailer owner who shall make written application prior to August1 each year, refund the amount of fees shown by such register to have been collected from him in excess of the amount of taxes then assessed against him.

(4) 
Make no refunds to any mobile home owner who located in a mobile home between assessment dates. 

(5) 
In August of each year, pay the amount remaining unclaimed anduncredited in said escrow account into the general funds. 


B. The terms and conditions as listed in §§ 176-21 and 176-22A shall notapply to any person or persons who are lawfully exempt from taxationaccording to local, state and national laws. 
§ 176-23. Appeals. 
Any person aggrieved hereby or aggrieved in the granting or refusal togrant any license hereunder may appeal to the Court of Common Pleas for New London County in the same manner as is provided for appeals in civil cases. 
§ 176-24. Penalties for offenses. 
Any person who shall violate or assist in the violation of any of therequirements of these regulations, including willful failure of a mobile homeowner to pay the license fee prescribed in § 176-21, shall, upon conviction, be fined not more than $100 for each such offense, and, in the case of licensees, the license prescribed hereunder may be suspended or revoked. 
163:114 

ARTICLE III 
Standards of Operation[Adopted 5-17-1966 STM] 
§ 176-25. Purpose. 
In order to ensure the protection of the health, safety, peace, economy and welfare of the residents and taxpayers of the Town of Griswold, thefollowing rules and regulations shall govern all trailers, mobile homes orother vehicles with or without wheels from the effective date of this article. 
§ 176-26. Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
HEALTH OFFICER — The duly appointed Health Officer of the Town of Griswold or his deputy. 
MOBILE HOME — A unit similar to a trailer coach but which is equipped with running water, bath facilities, flush toilet and appropriate sanitaryconnections. 
MOBILE PARK — Privately owned land upon which two or more dwellings are or are intended to be parked and occupied as dwellings. 
PERSON — Includes individuals, partnerships, corporations, owners, lessees, licensees and the agents of each of them. 
SUBSTANTIAL COMPLIANCE — As referred to in § 176-28, shall meancompletion in excess of 50% of the requirements as set forth in Article II,Parks, of this chapter and includes the granting of the permit and approval of the Health Officer as required by said Article. 
SUMMER RECREATIONAL CAMP SITES — Areas open for vacationersduring the period from Memorial Day to Labor Day. 
TRAILER — A trailer coach not equipped with running water, bath facilities,flush toilet and appropriate sanitary connections. 
TRAILER PARK — Privately owned land upon which more than one trailer is intended to be parked and occupied as a dwelling. 
§ 176-27. Existing mobile home parks and trailers. 
The rules and regulations of this article are not to affect legally qualified mobile home parks and/or trailers existing within the geographical limitsof said Town of Griswold upon the effective date of this article, except asherein specifically provided. 
§ 176-28. Applicability. 
The rules and regulations of this article shall apply to any expansion,extension or alteration of present mobile home parks located within 
163:115 

geographical limits of the Town of Griswold. In the event that presentmobile home parks are in the process of expansion, extension or alteration under the terms of Article II, Parks, of this chapter, said expansion,extension or alteration must be substantially complied with,26 includingapproval of the Town Health Officer and/or the State Health Department, within 15 days after the acceptance of this article by the freemen of theTown of Griswold. In the event that such expansion, extension or alterationis not complied with within said 15 days, then the expansion, extension or alteration of the existing trailer parks shall come under the rules andregulations of this article. 
§ 176-29. Occupancy permit required. 
No automobile, automobile trailer, mobile home, truck, truck trailer, trolleycar, railroad car or other vehicle, with or without wheels, designed, altered or used for human occupancy as a home or camp, all of which terms shall hereinafter be designated by the word "vehicle," shall be parked andoccupied for residence purposes off the public highways in the Town for aperiod exceeding five days without an occupancy permit issued by the Town Clerk. 
§ 176-30. Certification of Health Officer. 
No such permit shall be issued by the Town Clerk until written approval of the Town Health Officer, certifying compliance with state sanitaryregulations and that the presence of such vehicle will not imperil the publichealth, has been filed with the Town Clerk in respect to the proposed site to be occupied by such vehicle and in respect to the sanitary facilities of suchvehicle. 
§ 176-31. Term and contents of permit. 
No such occupancy permit shall be issued for an initial period exceeding30 days, and such permit shall be renewable for a period not exceeding anadditional 30 days. The permit shall state the location of the vehicle and the maximum number of persons occupying such vehicle. 
§ 176-32. Location of vehicles. 
No such vehicle shall be parked and occupied within 50 feet of a public highway unless concealed from view from such highway. 
§ 176-33. Issuance of permit. 
The Town Clerk shall issue such permit if the provisions of this article are complied with. 
26.Editor's Note: See the definition of "substantial compliance" in § 176-26. 
163:116 
§ 176-34. Existing uses. 
This Article shall not apply to any vehicle parked and occupied for residence purposes off the public highway in the Town on the effective date of thisarticle nor to the replacement of such vehicle on the same lot. 
§ 176-35. Summer recreational camp sites. 
This Article shall not apply to the establishment of summer recreationalcamp sites within the geographical boundaries of the Town of Griswold.Summer recreational camp sites shall be areas designated by the Board of Selectmen to be used solely for that purpose. 
§ 176-36. Penalties for offenses. 
Any person who violates the provisions of this article shall be fined not more than $100. Each day that such vehicle is parked in violation of this articleshall constitute a separate offense. 
§ 176-37. Civil actions. 
The Selectmen of the Town of Griswold are hereby authorized to bring anycivil action in the appropriate court of the State of Connecticut to enforcethis article. 
§ 176-38. Appeals. 
Any person aggrieved hereby or aggrieved in the granting or refusal togrant any permit hereunder may appeal to the Court of Common Pleas for New London County in the same manner as is provided for appeals in civil cases. 
163:117 

ARTICLE IV 
Replacement of Units[Adopted 5-28-1966 STM] 
§ 176-39. Replacement authorized. 
On any privately owned land now legally occupied by a mobile home, such mobile home may be replaced regardless of ownership of the mobile homeor land, with no time limit. 
163:119 

Chapter 180 
OIL AND GAS EXPLORATION 

163:120 

ARTICLE I 
Storage, Disposal or Use of Waste[Adopted 10-24-2017 STM] 
§ 180-1. Prohibitions.
A. The application of natural gas waste or oil waste, whether or not such waste has received beneficial use determination or other approval foruse by DEEP (Department of Energy & Environmental Protection) or anyother regulatory body, on any road or real property located within the Town for any purpose is prohibited.
B. The introduction of natural gas waste or oil waste into any solid wastefacility within or operated by the Town is prohibited. 
C. 	The introduction of natural gas waste or oil waste into any wastewatertreatment facility within or operated by the Town is prohibited. 
D. 	The storage, disposal, sale, acquisition, handling, treatment and/or processing of waste from natural gas or oil extraction activities is prohibited within the Town. 
§ 180-2. Provision to be included in certain bids and contracts.
A. All bids and contracts related to the purchase or acquisition of materials to be used to construct or maintain any publicly owned and/or maintained road or real property within the Town shall include a provision stating that the materials shall not contain natural gas wasteor oil waste. 
B. All bids and contracts related to the solicitation of services to construct or maintain any publicly owned and/or maintained road or real propertywithin the Town shall include a provision stating that no materials containing natural gas waste or oil waste shall be utilized in providing such services to the Town. 
C. 	The following statement, which shall be a sworn statement under penaltyof false statement, shall be included in all bids related to the purchase or acquisition of materials to be used to construct or maintain any publiclyowned and/or maintained road or real property within the Town andall bids related to the solicitation of services to construct or maintain any publicly owned and/or maintained road or real property within theTown: "We _____ hereby submit a bid for materials, equipment and/or labor to the Town of Griswold. The bid is for bid documents titled _____. We hereby certify under penalty of false statement that, if thisbid is selected, no natural gas waste or oil waste will be used by theundersigned bidder in the performance of the contract. We further certify that no subcontractor, agent or vendor will be allowed or permitted to use materials containing natural gas waste or oil waste." 
§ 180-3. Violations and penalties.
A. In addition to any other remedy the Town has in law or equity, theFirst Selectman or his/her designee is authorized to issue written ordersordering any person in violation of this article to cease activities which do or may violate this article and to desist from the same. Where suchactivities cause damage or injury to property within the Town, whether 
163:121 

such property be land, a road, a building, an aquifer, a well, watercourseor other asset, public or private, the First Selectman or his/her designee may order such person to remedy the damage or injury and to restore,at such person's sole cost and expense, the property to the condition inwhich it was prior to such damage or injury. A violation of this article may be punished by a fine not exceeding $250 per violation, with eachday any violation of this article shall continue constituting a separateoffense. 
B. Any person receiving a cease-and-desist or remedial order or fine fromthe First Selectman or his/her designee may appeal in accordance withthe citation hearing process set forth in §§ 124-9C and 124-10 of the Town's Code of Ordinances. 
§ 180-4. Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
APPLICATION — The physical act of placing or spreading natural gaswaste or oil waste on any road or real property located within the Town of Griswold. 
HYDRAULIC FRACTURING — The fracturing of underground rock formations, including shale and nonshale formations, by man-made fluid-driven techniques for the purpose of stimulating oil, natural gas, or othersubsurface hydrocarbon production. 
NATURAL GAS EXTRACTION ACTIVITIES — All geologic or geophysical activities related to the exploration for or extraction of natural gas, including, but not limited to, core and rotary drilling and hydraulicfracturing. 
NATURAL GAS WASTE — 
A. 	Any liquid or solid waste or its constituents, that is generated as a resultof natural gas extraction activities, which may consist of water, brine, chemicals, naturally occurring radioactive materials, heavy metals, orother contaminants; 
B. 	Leachate from solid wastes associated with natural gas extraction activities; 
C. 	Any waste that is generated as a result of or in association with theunderground storage of natural gas; 
D. 	Any waste that is generated as a result of or in association with liquefied petroleum gas well storage operations; and 
E. 	Any products or byproducts resulting from the treatment, processing, or modification of any of the above wastes. 
OIL EXTRACTION ACTIVITIES — All geologic or geophysical activitiesrelated to the exploration for or extraction of oil, including, but not limited to, core and rotary drilling and hydraulic fracturing. 
163:122 

OIL WASTE — 
A. 	Any liquid or solid waste or its constituents that is generated as a result of oil extraction activities, which may consist of water, brine,chemicals, naturally occurring radioactive materials, heavy metals, orother contaminants; 
B. 	Leachate from solid wastes associated with oil extraction activities; and 
C. 	Any products or byproducts resulting from the treatment, processing,or modification of any of the above wastes. 
TOWN — The Town of Griswold. 
§ 180-5. Transportation. 
Nothing in this article shall be interpreted to ban the transportation of any product or byproduct described herein on any roadway through the Town. 
§ 180-6. Severability. 
If any provision of this article shall be determined by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid and unenforceable to any extent, the remainder ofthis article shall not be affected thereby, and each provision hereof shall bevalid and shall be enforced to the fullest extent permitted by law. 
163:123 

Chapter 190 
RACETRACKS 
§ 190-1. Racetracks for vehicles prohibited. 
No racetrack of any size or description for the running of stock cars, racingcars, motorcycles or any other mechanical vehicle shall be permitted in the Town of Griswold. 
§ 190-2. Vehicle racing prohibited. 
No exhibitions, meets, rodeos or other form of racing involving gas-or battery-driven vehicles shall be permitted in the Town of Griswold. 
§ 190-3. Penalties for offenses. 
Any person or corporation violating this chapter shall be fined not less than $100. Each race or any exhibition, meet, rodeo or contest shall constitute aseparate offense. 
§ 190-4. Enforcement by civil action. 
The Selectmen of the Town of Griswold are hereby authorized to bring anycivil action in the appropriate court of the State of Connecticut to enforcethis chapter. 
Chapter 193 
SMOKING 
§ 193-1. No smoking policy; Town buildings. 
No person shall smoke in any building used or owned by the Town ofGriswold, including the Education Department. 
§ 193-2. Town vehicles. [Amended 7-14-2005 STM] 
There shall be no smoking in any Town-of-Griswold-owned or -leased vehicle. 
§ 193-3. Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
SMOKING — The lighting or carrying of a lighted cigarette, cigar, pipe, similar device or substance which contains tobacco. 
190:124 

§ 193-4. Signage. 
No smoking signs shall be posted in a conspicuous place, and such signs shall indicate that smoking is prohibited by state law. Such signs, exceptin elevators, shall have letters at least four inches high with the principalstroke of letters not less than one-half-inch wide. Such signs shall be posted by the person in control of such premises. Signs shall not be required to beposted in vehicles, but the person in control of such vehicles may, in theirdiscretion, post signs in Town vehicles. 
§ 193-5. Penalties for offenses.
A. Any person found guilty of smoking in violation of this chapter, failureto post signs as required by this chapter or the unauthorized removal of such signs shall have committed an infraction.
B. Violation of this chapter will be taken seriously and 	can result in disciplinary measures, including possible fines ($35 to $99 per Connecticut Clean Indoor Act, C.G.S. § 1-21b), formal warning and/or dismissal. 
§ 193-6. Smoking areas not required. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to require any smoking area inany building. 
Chapter 195 
SNOW EMERGENCIES 
GENERAL REFERENCES 

Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 202. 
§ 195-1. Purpose. 
In the interest of public safety, convenience and welfare of the residents of the Borough of Jewett City and the Town of Griswold, it is hereby deemednecessary to regulate and restrict the parking of vehicles on public roads,streets and highways within the control and limits of the aforementioned municipalities during a period of snow emergencies so that transportation,medical care, fire, health and police protection are not adversely affected. 
§ 195-2. Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
SNOW EMERGENCY — A period of time as forecast by the United States Weather Bureau or the Connecticut Office of Emergency Management (Area4) during which time vehicular and/or pedestrian traffic is expected to 
193:125 

be hazardous due to the elements, and during which time the parking ofvehicles could hinder, delay or obstruct the safe flow of such traffic and/or the proper cleaning, clearing and making safe the public roads, streets andhighways within the Borough of Jewett City and the Town of Griswold. 
§ 195-3. Declaration of snow emergency; announcement.
A. A 	snow emergency shall be declared by the First Selectman or his designee, either before, during or after a fall of snow, sleet or freezingrain, when, in his sound judgment and discretion, the circumstances warrant determination of such an emergency in the interest of safetyupon the public roads, streets and highways of the Borough of JewettCity and the Town of Griswold. 
B. The 	First Selectman shall cause public announcements of such determination of snow emergency prior to the time of becomingeffective, after which time a snow emergency shall be in effect. The First Selectman or his designee shall determine when such emergencyno longer exists and shall make public announcements of the same.Announcement is to be made over radio station WICH (1310 AM) and WCTY (97.7 FM), Norwich, Connecticut. 
§ 195-4. Parking restricted.
A. It shall be unlawful at any time during the period of any snow emergency under the provisions of this regulation for the owner of a vehicle orperson in whose name it is registered to allow or permit said vehicle toremain parked on the odd-numbered side of any public road, street or highway of the Borough of Jewett City and the Town of Griswold or inany area where signs prohibit such parking during winter storms.
B. It shall be unlawful at any time during the period of any snow emergency under the provisions of this regulation for the owner of a vehicle orperson in whose name it is registered or the lessee of any such vehicleto allow or permit it to remain parked on either side of the following streets: Carley Avenue, Dey Street, Dwyer Street, High Street, LincolnSquare, Pulaski Street, Rhea Street, Ruszenas Street and TracyAvenue.27 
§ 195-5. (Reserved) 
§ 195-6. (Reserved) 
§ 195-7. Adoption of standards; liability. 
The provisions of Connecticut General Statutes § 7-163a removing liabilityof the Borough of Jewett City and the Town of Griswold to any personinjured by the presence of ice and/or snow on a public sidewalk are hereby adopted pursuant to the terms of said statute. 
27.Editor's Note: Foromer Subsection C, regarding removal of snow and sleet by owners andoccupants, § 195-5, Violation of regulations, and § 195-6, Penalties for offenses; removalby Town, all of which immediately followed, were repealed 3-22-2011. 
193:126 
Chapter 198 
SOLID WASTE 
§ 198-1. Declaration of policy. 
The accumulation, collection, removal, and disposal of solid wastes must becontrolled by the Town for the protection of the public health, safety, and welfare. It is consequently found and declared that:
A. The Town is authorized by law to regulate the disposition of solid wastesgenerated within its boundaries, to collect a charge therefor, and to license solid waste collectors; 
B. The Town is also authorized by Connecticut General Statutes § 22a-220ato designate the area where solid wastes generated within its boundaries shall be disposed;
C. 	The Town has executed a municipal solid waste management services contract with the Southeastern Connecticut Regional Resources Recovery Authority (SCRRRA);
D. 	The Town seeks to encourage the recycling of appropriate solid wastesand other methods to reduce the volume of solid waste generated within its boundaries; and 
E. The enactment of this chapter is in furtherance of the Town's Solid WasteManagement Plan. 
§ 198-2. Applicability. 
Except as otherwise provided by any applicable state laws or regulations,this chapter shall apply to all solid wastes accumulated, collected, removed, and disposed of within the territorial limits of the Town of Griswold. Inaddition, no person may bring into the Town for storage or disposal anysolid wastes generated outside the territorial limits of the Town. 
§ 198-3. Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
BULKY WASTE — Land-clearing debris and waste resulting directly fromdemolition activities, other than clean fill. 
COMMERCIAL FOOD SOLID WASTE — Wastes from the preparation, cooking and consumption of food; condemned food products; and all solidwaste that is produced by the handling, storage, preparation and saleof produce and that originates primarily in commercial kitchens, stores, restaurants, food markets and factories. 
CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION WASTE — The waste buildingmaterials or packaging resulting from construction, remodeling, repair or demolition operations on houses, commercial buildings, and other structures, excluding asbestos, clean fill as defined in regulations adoptedunder § 22a-209 of the Connecticut General Statutes, or solid waste greater 
198:127 

than de minimis quantities, as determined by the Commissioner of Environmental Protection, of radioactive material regulated pursuant to § 22a-148 of the Connecticut General Statutes, hazardous waste as definedin § 22a-115 of the Connecticut General Statutes, and liquid and semiliquidmaterials, including but not limited to adhesives, paints, coatings, sealants, preservatives, strippers, cleaning agents, oils and tars. 
HAZARDOUS WASTE — Any wastes defined as hazardous wastes in § 22a-115 of the Connecticut General Statutes, including but not limited to explosives; pathogenic or pathological wastes; radioactive wastes; cleaningfluids, acids, poisons, medicines or other chemical wastes which eithercreate an immediate safety hazard to persons disposing of the waste or which by virtue of their chemistry and/or the method of disposal present athreat to the quality of ground/surface waters; and hospital operating room wastes. 
LAND-CLEARING DEBRIS — Trees, stumps, branches, or other wood generated from clearing land for commercial or residential development,road construction, routine landscaping, agricultural land clearing, storms, or natural disasters. 
PERSON — An individual person, partnership, association, company,corporation, limited liability partnership, limited liability company, or other legal entity. 
PROCESSED CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION WOOD — The wood portion of construction and demolition waste that has been sorted to remove plastics, plaster, gypsum wallboard, asbestos, asphalt shingles, regulatedwood fuel, as defined in § 22a-209a of the Connecticut General Statutes, andwood which contains creosote or to which pesticides have been applied or which contains hazardous waste. 
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Materials designated for recycling by theCommissioner of Environmental Protection pursuant to § 22a-241b of the Connecticut General Statutes, and any other materials that have been sodesignated by the Superintendent, as approved by the Board of Selectmen. 
SOLID WASTE — Unwanted or discarded solid, liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous material, including, but not limited to, demolition debris,material burned or otherwise processed at a resources recovery facility orincinerator, material processed at a recycling facility and sludges or other residue from a water pollution abatement facility, water supply treatmentplant or air pollution control facility. 
SOLID WASTE COLLECTOR — Any person who or which is held out for hire to collect solid waste. 
SUPERINTENDENT — The Superintendent of Public Works of the Town. 
TOWN — The Town of Griswold, Connecticut. 
198:128 

§ 198-4. Regulations. 
The Board of Selectmen is hereby authorized to enact from time to time such regulations, consistent with this chapter, as it shall deem in the publicinterest and as may be allowed by the Connecticut General Statutes regarding the separation, recovery, collection, removal, storage, preparation, and disposition of solid waste and recyclable materials,including but not limited to any applicable fees and fines. Such regulationsshall become effective immediately upon passage, shall be published immediately after passage in a local daily newspaper, and shall be immediately posted in a conspicuous place in the Town Hall and at disposalsites, designated as such by the Superintendent, that are within the Town. 
§ 198-5. Licensing and regulation of solid waste collectors.
A. License required. No person may collect 	or dispose of solid wastes generated in the Town without a license, except that the actual producers of solid waste or the owners of premises in the Town uponwhich solid waste has accumulated may personally collect and dispose ofsuch solid wastes at such places as the Superintendent may designate. 
B. Licensing authority designated. 	The Superintendent shall be the licensing authority for solid waste collectors. The Superintendent shallgrant a license within a reasonable time following the filing of proper application and payment of the prescribed fee unless he or she finds oneor more of the following conditions to prevail:
(1) 
The applicant has been irresponsible in conduct of solid collection or hauling operations based upon previous suspensions and/orrevocations of licenses or based upon violation of any regulationsenacted by the Board of Selectmen. 

(2) 
The applicant lacks suitable equipment with which to collect solidwaste in a safe and nuisance-free manner and in compliance withthis chapter. 

(3) 
The applicant lacks adequate liability insurance.

C. 	
Revocation or suspension of license. A license to engage in solid wastecollection and to use any waste disposal or processing facilities provided by the Town is a privilege, not a right. Failure to comply with theprovisions of any license issued under the provisions of this chapter mayresult in revocation and/or suspension of the license in addition to any other penalty imposed by law. 

D. 	
Superintendent's responsibilities. The Superintendent shall administerthe licensing of any solid waste collector engaged in the collecting and transporting of solid waste in the Town. The Superintendent shall alsoregulate the solid waste collectors' responsibilities and obligations in thedisposal of any solid waste generated in the Town. The Superintendent shall regulate solid waste collectors in accordance with § 22a-220a of theConnecticut General Statutes. 

E. 
Covered vehicles required. Solid waste collectors shall use only covered vehicles for the collection and transportation of all solid wastes. Novehicle transporting solid waste to any Town facility shall be allowedentry into the facility unless it is covered. Vehicles that are designed 


198:129 

specifically for the collection and transportation of solid waste shall notbe deemed to be uncovered if they are open only at the rear. 
§ 198-6. Solid waste containers. 
The owner of each premises upon which solid waste is created or generatedshall provide, at a suitable place upon such premises, sufficient receptacles for receiving and holding such solid waste during the intervals betweencollections. Solid waste containers shall be maintained in good condition,free of holes and fissures, and shall be equipped with securely fitting covers. Recyclable material containers do not require securely fitting covers. 
§ 198-7. Storing and disposing of solid waste.
A. Placement into containers. No person shall place any solid waste in any street, alley or other public place or upon any private property, whetherowned by such person or not, within the Town unless the waste is placedin proper containers or otherwise properly prepared for collection or unless express approval is granted by the Superintendent. No personshall throw or deposit any solid waste in any stream or body of water.
B. Uncontained 	accumulations of solid waste. Any uncontained accumulation of solid waste on any premises is hereby declared to be anuisance and is prohibited. Failure to remove any such accumulation ofsolid waste within 10 days after written notice from the Superintendent by registered mail shall be deemed a violation of this chapter. 
C. 	Scattering of solid waste. No person shall cast, place, sweep, or depositanywhere within the Town any solid waste in such a manner that it may be carried or deposited by the elements upon or in any street, sidewalk,alley, sewer, parkway, or other public place, or into any occupied premises. 
D. 	Illegal dumping. No person shall dispose of solid waste in a receptaclerented or owned by another person. No person shall contaminate areceptacle designated for recycling by disposing of nonrecyclable solid waste in such a receptacle. No person shall dispose, within the Town,of any solid waste generated outside the territorial limits of the Town ofGriswold. 
E. Waste originating outside of the Town. No solid waste originating outsideof the Town of Griswold may be brought into the Town for other thantemporary storage for later disposal at a licensed public or private facility located outside of the Town of Griswold. For the purpose ofthis subsection, "temporary storage" shall be defined as storage at aparticular location for not more than four hours. 
F. 	Other nuisances. Any accumulation of solid waste that is declared to bea nuisance or health hazard by the Director of Health, whether or notsuch accumulation is contained, is prohibited. The Director of Health, upon the declaration of a health hazard or nuisance, shall issue theowner of the property on which the solid waste has accumulated a noticeof such declaration. Failure to remove any such accumulation of solid waste within 10 days after written notice from the Director of Health bycertified mail shall be deemed a violation of this chapter. Upon failure bythe property owner to remove such accumulation within the 10 days of 
198:130 

written notice, the Director of Health shall issue an order to the Town to clean up and remove said accumulation. The property owner shall be billed for the full cost of such cleanup and removal, and a lien may beplaced on the property for such costs to the extent allowed by law. 
G. 	Transportation of solid waste. All vehicles transporting solid waste to a disposal or transfer facility must be covered to prevent such wastefrom being blown or ejected from the vehicle. No vehicle that fails tocomply with this provision shall be allowed to enter any Town disposal or transfer facility. 
§ 198-8. Hazardous wastes. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to place hazardous wastes or similarly dangerous substances into any solid waste containeror to transport any such substance to any place designated for the lawfuldisposal or delivery of bulky waste or other solid wastes. 
§ 198-9. Bulky waste.
A. Except as provided in Subsection B of this § 198-9, bulky waste maynot be collected or mixed with other solid wastes and shall be delivered or disposed of at such places and times as the Superintendent maydesignate, and any applicable charge shall be paid by the persondelivering the waste. 
B. Construction or demolition wood generated at a residence, other thanwood that has been pressure-treated or that otherwise contains arsenic,furniture, mattresses and rugs, or any such waste that has been crushed, chipped, shredded, or otherwise processed, may be accepted at anyproperly permitted facility for the disposal of bulky waste, resourcesrecovery facility, or municipal solid waste landfill. 
§ 198-10. Source separation and recycling.
A. Separation 	of materials; collection. Recyclable materials shall be separated from other solid wastes, prepared for collection, and placed at the curb or other designated collection places for collection on the daysdesignated by the Superintendent in accordance with the regulationsestablished by the Board of Selectmen. 
B. Separation 	at nonresidential premises. The owners or operators of multifamily housing units, and commercial, industrial, or other nonresidential premises where solid waste is created or generated shall provide sufficient areas and receptacles on the premises for convenientseparation and storage of recyclable materials. Recycling receptaclesmust be clearly labeled as being for recyclable only and must be a different color from solid waste containers used for other solid wastes. 
§ 198-11. Enforcement. 
Except as may be provided in § 198-12 of this chapter, any violation of the terms of this chapter shall be deemed an infraction and shall be punishableby a fine of not more than $90 for each offense. The Board of Selectmenshall establish a schedule of fines for such infractions. Each infraction shall 
198:131 

be a separate and distinct offense and, in case of a continuing infraction,each day's continuance thereof shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense. In addition, the Town of Griswold, or its agent, reserves the rightto refuse or to allow disposal in a landfill or other designated locationsutilized by the Town of Griswold where the provisions of this chapter or the regulations enacted hereunder are ignored. The Board of Selectmen shallhave full discretionary authority in deciding all disputed questions arisingunder the provisions of this chapter or the regulations enacted hereunder. 
§ 198-12. Enforcement involving recycling requirements.
A. During the sixty-day period immediately following the effective date of this§ 198-12, generators of waste found to be in violation of § 198-10 of this chapter, or of any regulations or requirements for presorting recyclables developedunder this chapter, shall be notified of the violation(s):
(1) 
Verbally, by telephone or by a landfill attendant, or by the hauler; 

(2) 
In writing; or

(3) 
By personal meeting with the Board of Selectmen's designated agent. 


No fines or other penalties shall be issued for such violations during thespecified sixty-day period. 
B. Following the sixty-day period set forth in Subsection A, recyclable materials from any waste generator for whom there exists a reasonable opportunity torecycle will no longer be accepted at any disposal facility contracted by theTown. 
C. 	Solid waste collectors shall not collect waste from waste generators in violationof presorting requirements.
D. 	Fines may be assessed for the disposal of any solid waste from which recyclable materials have not been properly sorted in accordance with the followingschedule: 
(1) 
First offense: written warning. 

(2) 
Second offense: maximum fine of $25.

(3) 
Third and subsequent offenses: maximum fine of $90 per violation.


E. Contracted 	waste and materials haulers who, in accordance with these regulations, refuse to collect from a waste generator who violates presortingrequirements will notify the landfill supervisor, no later than the next workingday, for action by the Town against the violator. The party whose waste was not collected will be held in violation of this chapter and subject to the followingfines: 
(1) 
First offense: written warning. 

(2) 
Second offense: $10.

(3) 
Third and subsequent offenses: maximum fine of $90 and subject to orderthat material be properly removed. 


F. 	Individuals and private businesses delivering their own waste will placerecyclable materials in appropriate containers provided at the Town recycling area. 
198:132 

§ 198-13. Inconsistent provisions. 
All ordinances or parts of ordinances, resolutions, regulations or other documents inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter are herebyrepealed to the extent of such inconsistency. 
§ 198-14. Severability. 
This chapter and various parts, sentences, sections, and clauses thereof, arehereby declared to be severable. If any part, sentence, section or clause isadjudged invalid, it is hereby provided that the remainder of this chapter shall not be affected thereby. 
Chapter 200 
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT 
GENERAL REFERENCES 

Building construction — See Ch. 127. Inland wetlands and watercourses — See Ch. 
221. 
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 151. Sewers — See Ch. 222. 
198:133 

ARTICLE I 

Illicit Discharges and Connections to Stormwater Drainage Systems[Adopted 5-12-2009] 
§ 200-1. Title. 
This article shall be titled "Illicit Discharge and Connection to Stormwater Drainage Systems." 
§ 200-2. Statutory authority. 
Connecticut General Statutes § 7-148(c)(6)(B) specifically authorizes towns to regulate sewers, drainage and public utilities. 
§ 200-3. Purpose and intent.
A. The Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) has issued to the Town of Griswold a General Permit for the Discharge ofStormwater from Small Municipal Separate Storm Sewer Systems. As acondition of the issuance of this permit, the DEP requires that the Town of Griswold implement and enforce a regulatory mechanism to prohibitnon-stormwater discharges into storm drainage systems within the Townof Griswold. 
B. A further purpose of this article is to provide for the health, safety, andgeneral welfare of the citizens of The Town of Griswold, Connecticutthrough the regulation of non-stormwater discharges to the storm drainage system to the maximum extent practicable as required byfederal and state law. This article establishes methods for controllingthe introduction of pollutants into the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) in order to comply with requirements of the NationalPollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit process and thelaws of the State of Connecticut. The objectives of this article are: 
(1) 
To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the municipal separatestorm sewer system (MS4) by illicit stormwater discharges by any user. 

(2) 
To 	prohibit illicit connections and discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system.

(3) 
To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance and monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with thisarticle. 


§ 200-4. Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
AUTHORIZED AGENT — The authorized agent of the authorized enforcement agency is the Highway Department Supervisor. The First Selectmen or the Board of Selectmen may, in writing, designate otheremployees and designees as deputy authorized agents to act through the authorized agent. The authorized agent could include but not be limited to 
198:135 

the Town Sanitarian, the contracted Town Engineer, the Town Planner, theZoning and Wetlands Enforcement Officer, and the Town Attorney as well as appropriate boards or commissions. 
AUTHORIZED ENFORCEMENT AGENCY — The Town of Griswold Board of Selectmen. 
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs) — Schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollutionprevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutantsdirectly or indirectly to stormwater, receiving waters, or stormwater conveyance systems. BMPs also include treatment practices, operating procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge orwater disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage. 
CLEAN WATER ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto. 
CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY — Activities subject to NPDES constructionpermits/general permits. These include construction projects resulting in land disturbance of one acre or more. Such activities include but are not limited to clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition. 
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS — Any material, including any substance, waste, or combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, orphysical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantlycontribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored,transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed. 
ILLEGAL DISCHARGE — Any direct or indirect non-stormwater discharge to the storm drain system, except as exempted in § 200-9 of this article. 
ILLICIT CONNECTIONS — An illicit connection is defined as either of the following: 
A. 	Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, whichallows an illegal discharge to enter the storm drain system, includingbut not limited to any conveyances which allow any non-stormwater discharge including sewage, processed or domestic wastewater to enter the storm drain system and any connections to the storm drainsystem from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or conveyance had been previously allowed, permitted, or approved byan authorized enforcement agency; or 
B. 	Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial land use to the storm drain system which has not been documentedin plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by an authorizedenforcement agency. 
INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY — Activities subject to NPDES industrial permits asdefined in 40 CFR 122.26(b)(14). 
198:136 

NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES)STORMWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT — A permit issued by EPA [or by the State of Connecticut DEP under authority delegated pursuant to 33USC § 1342(b)] that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of theUnited States, whether the permit is applicable to an individual, group, or on a general area-wide basis. 
NON-STORMWATER DISCHARGE — Any discharge to the storm drainsystem that is not composed entirely of stormwater. 
PERSON — Any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm,corporation or other entity recognized by law and acting as either the ownerof a premises or as the owner's agent. 
POLLUTANT — Anything that causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutantsmay include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil andother automotive fluids; nonhazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandonedobjects, ordinance, and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens;dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues thatresult from constructing a building or structure; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind. 
PREMISES — Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whetherimproved or unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips. 
STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM — Publicly owned facilities by which stormwater is collected and/or conveyed, including but not limited to anyroads with drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, natural andhuman-made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures. 
STORMWATER — Any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirelyof water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from suchprecipitation. 
STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN — A document which describes the best management practices and activities to be implementedby a person or business to identify sources of pollution or contamination at a site and the actions to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges tostormwater, stormwater conveyance systems, and/or receiving waters to themaximum extent practicable. 
WASTEWATER — Any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminatedstormwater, discharged from a facility. 
WATERS OF THE UNITED STATES — Surface watercourses and water bodies as defined in Title 40, Part 122.1, of the Code of Federal Regulations(CFR), as amended, including all natural waterways and definite channelsand depressions in the earth that may carry water, even though such 
198:137 

waterways may only carry water during rains and storms and may not carrystormwater at and during all times and seasons. 
§ 200-5. Applicability. 
This article shall apply to all water entering the storm drain system generated on any developed and undeveloped lands unless explicitly exempted by an authorized enforcement agency. 
§ 200-6. Administration. 
The authorized agent shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this article as the primary agent for the Board of Selectmen, asthe authorized enforcement agency. Any powers granted or duties imposedupon the authorized agent may be delegated in writing by the First Selectman or by action of the Board of Selectmen as the authorized enforcement agency to persons or entities acting in the beneficial interestof or in the employ of the Town of Griswold as deputy authorized agents to act through and under the direction of the authorized agent. 
§ 200-7. Severability. 
The provisions of this article are hereby declared to be severable. If any provision, clause, sentence, or paragraph of this article or the applicationthereof to any person, establishment, or circumstances shall be held invalid,such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or application of this article. 
§ 200-8. Minimum standards. 
The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this article are minimum standards; therefore, this article does not intend nor imply thatcompliance by any person will ensure that there will be no contamination,pollution, nor unauthorized discharge of pollutants. 
§ 200-9. Discharge prohibitions.
A. Illegal discharges prohibited.
(1) 
No person shall discharge 	or cause to be discharged into the municipal storm drain system or watercourses any materials, including but not limited to pollutants or liquids containing anypollutants that cause or contribute to a violation of applicable water quality standards, other than stormwater.

(2) 
The commencement, conduct or continuance of any illegal dischargeto the storm drain system is prohibited except as described as follows as per Section 3(a)(2) of the General Permit for the Dischargeof Stormwater to MS4, as amended from time to time. 

(3) 
The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions established by this article, providing they contain no pollutants:

(a) 
Landscape irrigation; 

198:138 

(b) 
Uncontaminated 	groundwater discharges such as pumpedgroundwater, foundation drains, water from crawl space pumps and footing drains;

(c) 
Irrigation water;

(d) 
Lawn watering runoff; 

(e) 
Residual street wash water;

(f) 
Discharges or flows from fire-fighting activities (except training);and 

(g) 
Naturally occurring discharges such 	as rising groundwaters,uncontaminated groundwater infiltration [as defined at 40 CFR35.2005(20)], springs, diverted stream flows and flows from riparian habitats and wetlands.



(4) 
The prohibition shall not apply to any non-stormwater dischargepermitted under an NPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority ofthe Federal Environmental Protection Agency or the ConnecticutDepartment of Environmental Protection. 

B. 
Illicit connections prohibited.

(1) 
The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicitconnections to the storm drain system is prohibited. 

(2) 
This 	prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connectionwas permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. 

(3) 
A person is considered to be in violation of this article if the personconnects a line conveying sewage to the MS4, or allows such a connection to continue. 


§ 200-10. Suspension of MS4 access.
A. Suspension 	due to illicit discharges in emergency situations. The authorized agent as agent for the Board of Selectmen, the authorizedenforcement agency, may, without prior notice, suspend MS4 dischargeaccess to a person when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present imminent andsubstantial danger to the environment, or to the health or welfare ofpersons, or to the MS4 or waters of the United States. If the violator fails to comply with a suspension order issued in an emergency, theauthorized enforcement agency may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the MS4 or waters of the United States, or to minimize danger to persons.
B. Suspension 	due to the detection of illicit discharge. Any persondischarging to the MS4 in violation of this article may have its MS4 access terminated if such termination would abate or reduce an illicit discharge. The authorized enforcement agency will notify a violator ofthe proposed termination of its MS4 access. The violator may petition the authorized enforcement agency for a reconsideration and hearing.
C. 	A person commits an offense if the person reinstates MS4 access topremises terminated pursuant to this section, without the prior approval of the authorized enforcement agency. 
198:139 

§ 200-11. Industrial, commercial or construction activitydischarges. 
Any person subject to an industrial, commercial or construction activityNPDES stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions ofsuch permit. 
§ 200-12. Monitoring of discharges.
A. Applicability. This section applies to all facilities that have stormwaterdischarges associated with industrial, commercial or construction activity.
B. Access to facilities. 
(1) 
The 	authorized agent shall be permitted to enter and inspect facilities subject to regulation under this article as often as may benecessary to determine compliance with this article. If a dischargerhas security measures in force that require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the discharger shall makethe necessary arrangements to allow access to representatives of theauthorized enforcement agency. 

(2) 
Facility operators shall allow the authorized agent ready access toall parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling,and the examination and copying of records that must be kept under the conditions of an NPDES permit to discharge stormwater, and theperformance of any additional duties as defined by state and federallaw. 

(3) 
The authorized agent shall have the right to set up on any permittedfacility such devices as are necessary, in the opinion of the authorized enforcement agency, to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the facility's stormwater discharge.

(4) 
The authorized agent has the right to require the discharger toinstall monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safeand proper operating condition by the discharger at its own expense.All devices used to measure stormwater flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy.

(5) 
Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy accessto the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the operator at the written or oral request of theauthorized agent and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearingsuch access shall be borne by the operator. 

(6) 
Unreasonable delays in allowing the authorized agent access to apermitted facility is a violation of a stormwater discharge permitand of this article. A person who is the operator of a facility with a NPDES permit to discharge stormwater associated with industrial,commercial or construction activity commits an offense if the persondenies the authorized enforcement agency reasonable access to the permitted facility for the purpose of conducting any activityauthorized or required by this article.

(7) 
If the authorized agent has been refused 	access to any part of the premises from which stormwater is discharged, and he/she is 


198:140 

able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may bea violation of this article, or that there is a need to inspect and/ or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling programdesigned to verify compliance with this article or any order issuedhereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, and welfare of the community, then the authorized enforcement agency mayseek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competentjurisdiction. 
§ 200-13. Watercourse protection. 
Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, orsuch person's lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within the property free of trash, debris, and other obstacles that wouldpollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow of water through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse, so thatsuch structures will not become a hazard to the use, function, or physicalintegrity of the watercourse. 
§ 200-14. Notification of spills. 
Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any personresponsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility or operation, has information of any known or suspected release of materials which is resulting or may result in illegaldischarges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the storm drain system, or waters of the State of Connecticut, said person shall take allnecessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of suchrelease. In the event of such a release of hazardous materials, said person shall immediately notify emergency response agencies of the occurrencevia emergency dispatch services. In the event of a release of nonhazardousmaterials, said person shall notify the authorized enforcement agency in person or by phone or facsimile no later than the next business day.Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written noticeaddressed and mailed to the authorized agent within three business days of the phone notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates froma commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of suchestablishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall beretained for at least three years. The contact information for the authorizedagent is as follows: 
198:141 

Highway Department Supervisor 
Town of Griswold 
Public Works Department 
1148 Voluntown Road 
Griswold, CT 06351 
Tel. (860) 376 7080 
Cell (860) 213 1522 
§ 200-15. Enforcement; notice of violation.
A. Whenever the authorized agent finds that 	a person has violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this article, the Board of Selectmen, as the authorized enforcement agency, may order complianceby a written notice of violation to the responsible person. Such noticemay require, without limitation: 
(1) 
The performance of monitoring, sampling, analyses, and reporting;

(2) 
The elimination of illicit connections or discharges;

(3) 
That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist; 

(4) 
The 	abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property; 

(5) 
Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs;

(6) 
The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs.


B. If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property is required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such remediation or restoration must be completed. Said notice shall furtheradvise that, should the violator fail to remediate or restore within the established deadline, the work will be done by a designatedgovernmental agency or a contractor and the expense thereof shall becharged to the violator. 
§ 200-16. Appeal of notice of violation. 
Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determinationof the authorized enforcement agency to the Town of Griswold Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Conservation Commission. The notice of appealmust be received by the authorized agent and the Board of Selectmenwithin 15 days from the date of the notice of violation. Any hearing on an appeal before the Town of Griswold Inland Wetlands and WatercoursesConservation Commission shall take place within 15 days from the date ofreceipt of the notice of appeal. The decision of the Town of Griswold Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Conservation Commission shall be final where its jurisdiction has been established. 
198:142 

§ 200-17. Enforcement measures after appeal. 
If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within 15days after the decision of the Town of Griswold Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Conservation Commission upholding the decision of the authorized enforcement agency, then representatives of the authorizedenforcement agency shall enter upon the subject private property and areauthorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow thegovernmental agency or designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth above. 
§ 200-18. Cost of abatement of violation.
A. Within 15 days after abatement of the violation, the 	owner of the property will be notified of the cost of abatement, includingadministrative costs. The property owner may file a written protestobjecting to the amount of the assessment within 15 days. If the amount due is not paid within a timely manner as determined by the decision ofthe Town of Griswold Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Conservation Commission or by the expiration of the time in which to file an appeal, the charges shall become a special assessment against the property andshall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment.
B. Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable to the Town of Griswold by reason of such violation. The liabilityshall be paid in not more than 12 equal payments. Interest at the rate of18% per annum shall be assessed on the balance beginning on the first day following discovery of the violation. 
§ 200-19. Injunctive relief. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this article. If a person has violated orcontinues to violate the provisions of this article, the authorized enforcement agency may petition for a preliminary or permanent injunction restraining the person from activities which would create further violations or compelling the person to perform abatement or remediation of the violation. 
§ 200-20. Compensatory action. 
In lieu of enforcement proceedings, penalties, and remedies authorizedby this article, the authorized enforcement agency may impose upon a violator alternative compensatory actions, such as storm drain stenciling,attendance at compliance workshops, watercourse cleanup, etc. 
198:143 

§ 200-21. Fines; penalties for offenses. 
Any person who has violated or continues to violate this article shall be liable for fines in the amount of $250 per violation as authorized byConnecticut General Statutes § 7-148. Any person who has violated thisarticle may also be subject to penalties otherwise authorized by law. 
§ 200-22. Remedies not exclusive. 
The remedies listed in this article are not exclusive of any other remediesavailable under any applicable federal, state or local law and it is within the discretion of the authorized enforcement agency to seek cumulativeremedies. 
§ 200-23. When effective; repeal of conflicting ordinances. 
This article shall be in full force and effect 15 days after its final passage andadoption in a Town Meeting. All prior ordinances and parts of ordinances inconflict with this article are hereby repealed. 
198:144 

Chapter 202 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS 
GENERAL REFERENCES Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 131. Subdivision of land — See Ch. 223. 
198:145 

ARTICLE I 
Definition 
§ 202-1. Terms defined. 
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings 
indicated: 

BOARD — The Board of Selectmen of the Town of Griswold, Connecticut. 
COMMISSION — The Planning and Zoning Commission of the Town of 
Griswold, Connecticut. 

STREET — A right-of way, including a road, intended for public use and
improved in accordance with the specifications prescribed by this chapter. 

TOWN — The Town of Griswold, Connecticut. 
TRAVEL PATH OR TRAVELWAY — That portion of the roadway especially
prepared for the use of vehicular traffic, inside the curb face. 

198:147 

ARTICLE II 
Submission of Plans 
§ 202-2. Streets in proposed subdivisions. 
All plans for streets in proposed subdivisions shall be submitted to the Commission as prescribed in the Subdivision Regulations of the Town ofGriswold.28 
§ 202-3. Streets not in proposed subdivisions.
A. All plans for streets not proposed in connection with a subdivision of landshall be submitted to the Board of Selectman, which shall review the plans against the construction specifications of this chapter, and shall be submitted to the Commission in compliance with the provisions ofConnecticut General Statutes, Sections 8-24 and 13(a)-71 respectively,as last amended. 
B. Plan requirements.
(1) 
All plans required to be submitted to the Board in conformancewith this chapter shall conform in all respects to the specifications and requirements for plans as set forth in the Town of Griswold'sSubdivision Regulations29 insofar as those Subdivision Regulationspertain to streets in proposed subdivisions. 

(2) 
Plans concerning municipal improvements shall be submitted inaccordance with the requirements of State of Connecticut GeneralStatutes, Section 8-24, as last amended. 

(3) 
Plans concerning the layout of roads or streets by an individual orcorporation shall be submitted in accordance with the requirementsof the State of Connecticut General Statutes Section 13a-71, as last amended. 

C. 	
All plans required to be submitted to the Board shall comply with thefollowing minimum requirements: 

(1) 
Five copies of the plans with profiles and topography of the proposedstreet denoting the locations and invert elevations of all appurtenantutilities, including but not limited to sewers, water and gas pipes, storm drains and other stormwater structures, groundwaterinterceptors, culverts and catch basins, and electrical and telephonelines. Said plans shall also show boundary lines and owners of all property abutting and/or adjoining the proposed streets.

(2) 
All plans shall be certified by a licensed Connecticut engineer or land surveyor. 

D. 	
Whenever any street is proposed and before any construction, clearing or excavation shall be initiated, the owner, developer or their dulyappointed agent shall meet with the Board at a regularly or specially scheduled meeting. Thereafter, the Board shall approve, approve withmodifications or deletions or disapprove the plans and shall return onecopy of the plans with an itemized statement of its actions to the owner, developer or his or her agent within 30 days after submission to it of 


28.Editor's Note: See Ch. 223, Subdivision of Land. 29.Editor's Note: See Ch. 223, Subdivision of Land. 
198:149 the plan. When the plan is finally approved by the Board, one copy ofthe approved plan shall be filed by the applicant with the office of the Town Clerk. The Town Clerk shall not accept said approved plan forfiling unless it contains the signatures of a majority of the Board and theCommission. 
E. All plans for new streets to be accepted by the Town shall include adesign review and inspection fee equal to 3% (three percent) of the costof construction as calculated by the licensed engineer sealing the plan and accepted or modified by the Board of Selectmen for purposes of theperformance bond. 
198:150 

ARTICLE III 
Construction Specifications 
§ 202-4. Standards. 
Except as otherwise prescribed by this chapter or other ordinances and regulations of the Town of Griswold, all construction of streets and relatedimprovements shall be constructed in accordance with "Standard Specifications for Roads, Bridges and Incidental Construction, Form 814A, State of Connecticut, Department of Transportation, 1995, or any revisionsthereof, hereafter referred to as the "Standards." 
§ 202-5. Inspection of work; as-built plans; release of performancebond. 
A. All street improvements shall be inspected and approved by the Board, or its agent, who shall decide on all questions regarding the interpretation of plans and specifications. They may require additionalworking drawings from the applicant to facilitate inspection at any timeduring construction. As-built plans for all streets, drainage features and underground utilities shall be presented to the Board prior to theacceptance of any street or easement by the Town of Griswold and priorto the release of any applicable performance bond. The performance bond shall be released only by mutual consent of a majority of themembers of the board and the members of the Commission, and said release shall be in writing. 
B. The applicant will place easily identifiable stakes at even hundred-footstations along the center lines of proposed streets prior to submissionof the street plan to facilitate evaluation of the plan by the Board. The Board shall be notified in writing at least 72 hours in advance of thefollowing stages of construction.
(1) 
Completion of the subgrade. 

(2) 
Completion of, but before covering, drainage structures and pipes.

(3) 
Completion of gravel subbase.

(4) 
Beginning of construction of processed gravel base course. 

(5) 
Beginning of construction of asphalt surface. 


§ 202-6. Street grades and crowns. 
There shall be no abrupt changes of grade. Select grades shall not exceed 9% or be less than 0.5%, except that the Board may permit steeper gradesfor short distances wherein, in its judgment, existing topographic conditionsor the preservation of natural features indicate that such modification will not result in unsafe conditions. Where possible, grades shall not be greaterthan 3% within 50 feet of an intersection. Streets shall be designated with across pitch or crown of one-quarter-inch-per-foot, distance measured from the edge of the pavement to the center line of the street. 
198:151 

§ 202-7. Street width. 
All street(s) shall contain a minimum right-of-way of 50 feet unless otherwise laid out with prior written approval of the majority of theCommission. The travel path of any street shall have a minimum width of28 feet. No dead-end street shall be approved unless a turnaround (cul-de­sac) having a paved travel path of a radius of not less than 40 feet and astreet right-of-way of a radius of not less than 50 feet shall be constructedtherewith. All cul-de-sacs shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the recommended cul-de-sac layout contained in Appendix C.30 There shall be no brush, trees, or boulders within six feet of each side of the roadbed. 
§ 202-8. Roadbed construction. 
The roadbed shall be constructed as follows: 
A. Subgrade. All soft and yielding material and other portions of the subgrade which will not compact readily when rolled or which containorganic or man-made material shall be removed, and all loose rock orboulders over five inches in size shall be removed or broken to a depth of one foot below the subgrade. All holes or depressions made by theremoval of unsuitable material shall be filled and rolled uniformly witha vibratory roller weighing at least 10 tons. If the surface of an existing road is two feet or less below the proposed subgrade surface, it shall bescarified for the full width of the roadbed. All ledge rock and bouldersshall be removed to a depth of 12 inches below grade of the existing road. The allowable lift placement on fill areas shall be according tothe capacity of the equipment used and soil material being compacted;however, no fill lifts shall be greater than 18 inches. All fills will be subject to materials and compaction testing according to the Standards.The subgrade shall be constructed 28 feet wide, plus 18 inches beyondthe curb face on each side of the street. 
B. Subbase. The subbase shall be applied over the subgrade and shallconsist of bank run gravel with no stones larger than four inches. Whereledge rock is encountered, it shall be excavated to a depth of 12 inches, and the subbase shall be at least 12 inches thick. Where ledge rockis not encountered, the subbase shall be a minimum of eight inchesthick. The subbase shall be compacted to no less than 95% of the dry density as determined by the Standard Proctor method. If at any stageof construction unusual conditions appear or exist, such as in a wetlandarea, the Board shall require additional measures be taken to produce a firm subbase. 
C. 	Base course. The base course shall be applied over the subbase andshall consist of processed gravel with no stones larger than 1 1/2 inches. The base course shall be six inches thick. The base course shall be compacted to no less than 95% of the dry density as determined by theStandard Proctor method. Prior to the placing of pavement, the base 

30.Editor's Note: Appendix C is included at the end of this chapter. 
198:152 
course shall be treated with calcium chloride at a rate of 0.75 gallon persquare yard. 
D. 	Wearing surface (paved travelway). The wearing surface shall be appliedover the base course and consist of a minimum of two inches compactedthickness binder course and a minimum of 1 1/2 inches compacted thickness riding surface, presently identified as Class 2 bituminous concrete, machine laid, for a total thickness of 3 1/2 inches aftercompaction. If the riding surface is placed more than two weeks after the binder course is placed, a tacking coat shall be applied over the bindingcourse prior to the placement of the riding surface. The applicationof bituminous shall be in strict accordance with the Standards requirements.
E. All the efforts necessary for the compaction of the subgrade, subbase,the base course and the bituminous asphalt shall be accomplished with a roller weighing no less than 10 tons.
F. 	Where Portland cement concrete or granite curbing is used, the basecourse and wearing surface shall be constructed 28 feet wide. Where bituminous concrete curbing is used, the base course and wearingsurface shall be constructed 28 feet wide plus one foot beyond the curbface on each side of the street. 
§ 202-9. Side slopes. 
Slopes shall be finished in a neat manner, and where streets are cut orfilled, the side slope shall not be steeper than one foot vertical to two feet horizontal, unless the permanence of the slope shall be otherwise providedby the owner or developer to the satisfaction of the Board. All slopes andportions thereof shall be appropriately graded, loamed, and seeded so that same shall be stabilized so as to prevent any erosion. 
§ 202-10. Monuments. 
Monuments shall be set, to the proper grade, on all street lines at points of curve and at suitable intermediate points. Monuments shall be of reinforcedconcrete, not less than three feet in length, tops not less than five inchessquare with a brass or other suitable center point, sides to taper with bases not less than six inches square. No monument shall be set in place priorto completion of all required right-of-way grading, and each monumentshall be set with the brass or other suitable center place on the point of reference. The top of the monuments shall be set even with the final gradeelevation. 
§ 202-11. Curbing. 
Curbing shall be bituminous concrete, Portland cement concrete, or graniteand shall meet size and installation specifications as illustrated in the Appendix to this chapter.31 All curbing shall be properly graded and back filled. 

31.Editor's Note: See Appendix A, included at the end of this chapter. 
198:153 
§ 202-12. Drainage.
A. All shoulders shall be so constructed so that they maintain and control surface water and subsurface water. Catch basins and culvert pipe of aminimum diameter of 15 inches shall be installed at each corner of all intersections, and catch basins shall be installed at a minimum of every 300 feet on each side of the road except as may be varied by writtenpermission of the Board. All catch basins shall be connected so as tocause a continuous flow of controlled surface and subsurface water to an ultimate destination of natural flow, brook, pond, or river. All culvertpipes shall be reinforced concrete or asphalt coated corrugated metalpipe and shall be covered with a minimum of 18 inches of gravel. Double-wall, smooth-interior, high-density polyethylene (HDPE) pipe may beused only with the prior approval of the Board and/or the Commission.However, if HDPE pipe is used, the last section of pipe at the outlets (daylight) shall be concrete pipe with a concrete flared end or concreteheadwall discharging structure. All catch basins shall be constructed asper dimensions illustrated in the Appendix of this chapter.32 
B. All necessary drainage rights and/or easements for maintaining drainageover or under adjoining lands to an ultimate destination of natural flowshall be procured by the developer at no cost to the Town of Griswold. The minimum width of the easement(s) where pipe(s) is placed shall be20 feet. 
C. 	In areas where there is evidence of subsurface groundwater, a perforated culvert pipe shall be laid or a solid culvert pipe shall be laid.When a solid culvert pipe is used, a six-inch perforated pipe shall beplaced along each side of the aforenoted solid culvert pipe on a bed of washed stone, which bed of washed stone shall be laid six inches below the culvert pipe and ending six inches above the culvert pipe. Said six-inch perforated pipe shall be tied in to the catch basins. 
§ 202-13. Utilities. 
All utilities shall be in place before final grading, compacting, and surfacingof streets, and when said utilities are constructed underground, they shall be required to be contained within appropriate "sleeve piping," excludingwater mains, sewerage mains, and drainage mains. Said undergroundconstruction of utilities shall be done under the supervision and to the satisfaction of the Board. 
§ 202-14. Guardrails. 
Guardrail posts and railing shall be installed where there is an elevation drop of four feet or more between the edge of the road and the shouldersand as may be directed by the Board. 

32.Editor's Note: See Appendix B, included at the end of this chapter. 
198:154 
§ 202-15. Street signs. 
New streets shall be named by the owner or developer, subject to the approval of the Board. Street signs shall be prepared and installed bythe Town of Griswold, the costs of which shall be borne by the owner ordeveloper. 
§ 202-16. Intersections. 
Four-way intersections shall have two signs, located diagonally oppositecorners. T-intersections shall have one sign. Each sign post shall identify both intersecting streets. 
198:155 

ARTICLE IV 
Actions Involving Existing Streets 
§ 202-17. Excavations.
A. Whenever an existing street is to be excavated or dug below the surface, written application and permits shall be first obtained from the Selectmen's Office before the work is begun. A copy of the permit shallbe on file at the work site for inspection at any time by any police officer or other authorized agent of the Town. The application for said permit shall be filed in the Selectmen's Office and shall contain the following:
[Amended 3-26-2013 STM]
(1) 
Name and address of applicant;

(2) 
Proposed work to be done;

(3) 
The time and place the proposed work is to be done and such other information as the Selectmen may require;

(4) 
Proof of satisfactory liability insurance;

(5) 
Proper signs, in accordance with State of Connecticut 	or Town regulations, must be posted notifying of work to be done.

B. 
No permit shall be valid unless the work specified therein shall becommenced within a period of 15 days from the date of issuance, but a renewal thereof may be obtained from the Selectmen by filing a statement containing the reason for the delay. All work under this section shall proceed uninterrupted to the completion thereof, and such openings or excavations shall be immediately backfilled, in accordancewith the specifications of Appendix A attached hereto.33 The affected area shall be blacktopped to finish grade within 48 hours after completion of the work.

C. 	
The owner or contractor shall be responsible to make final and permanent repairs to the project site as may be required by the Board, and shall, if defects appear within two years after completion of work asa result of improper backfilling or paving by the applicant, reimburse theTown for any and all costs for necessary repair. 

D. 	
Notice by the applicant and/or contractor must be given to all emergencyunits such as fire department, police, and ambulance service as to thelength of time the road will be open and/or obstructed for work being done. When digging, if at all possible, one lane shall be kept open at alltimes. If a road must be closed completely for any reason, work shallbe completed within a four-hour limit. If work is to take longer, special written permission must be obtained from the Board.

E. 
Whenever the exigencies of public health or safety required that work bedone within a street, and the procurement of a permit is impracticable, it shall be lawful for the work to be commenced without a permit;provided, however, an application is made for such permit within 48hours of the emergency. 

F. 	
Surety bonds of not less than $5,000 cash, certified check or lien freecollateral shall be required by the Board, and shall be posted with theTown Treasurer prior to the start of any work under § 202-17 and its 



33.Editor's Note: Appendix A is included at the end of this chapter. 
198:157 
subsections. The applicant shall be responsible for and shall assumeany and all liability that may attach to or arise from work it initiates under the provisions of this section and shall indemnify the Town for anyliability incurred by it and for any and all losses it may sustain. 
§ 202-18. Construction of driveway approaches to Town roads.
A. No person, firm, or corporation shall hereafter construct, reconstruct,build or establish any driveway approach to any portion of a Town roadwithin the Town of Griswold without first having obtained a written permit to do so from the Board or the Town Building Inspector. A copyof said permit, once approved shall be filed in the Selectmen's Office.No such permit shall be issued for construction or establishment of any such driveway approach except in accordance with the provisions hereinstated. Application for a permit must be made in writing upon the formsfurnished by the Town of Griswold. Said application shall contain the name and address of the person, firm or corporation having title tothe premises over which the driveway approach is to be constructed orreconstructed, the name of the contractor or person who is to construct said driveway and the proposed location, specifications and dimensionsof such driveway.
B. All specifications for construction or reconstruction of any such driveway approach must conform to the following requirements before a permitfor construction or reconstruction will be issued. All drivewayapproaches shall be so graded that it will not be necessary to change the established grade of any adjacent Town road. No part of said drivewayapproach shall extend beyond the travel path of any street in such amanner as to change the grade of the road or obstruct the free flow of water draining off the road. Where driveway approaches cross openditches or where such construction will interfere with the drainage ofstormwater along the side of the road, culverts of such size and material as determined by the Superintendent of the Town Highway Department,or the Board, shall be installed. Where there is an existing catch basin inthe area of the proposed driveway, the tops thereof shall be removed and replaced with a manhole top with perforated lid. Said top shall be setby the Town Highway Department, and the additional costs thereof shallbe paid by the permit applicant. Blacktopping should be done in such a manner so as to blend with established tarred and paved Town road. 
C. 	The Superintendent of the Town Highway Department or the Board shallfrom time to time inspect the construction or reconstruction of such driveway approach and shall have authority to revoke the permit inthe event that said construction or reconstruction does not conform to the requirements of Subsection B as set forth herein. Any portion of a driveway from the travel path of the street to the property line shall beblacktopped.
D. 	Surety bonds of not less than $1,000 cash, certified check or lien-free collateral, plus an inspection fee of $50, shall be required by the Board,and shall be posted with the Town Treasurer prior to the start of anywork under § 202-18 and its subsections. The bond of $1,000 will be refunded after inspection and approval of the apron; the inspection fee of 
198:158 

$50 includes location approval and release of bond/installation approval.The applicant shall be responsible for and shall assume any and all liability that may attach to or arise from work it initiates under theprovisions of this section and shall indemnify the Town for any liability incurred by it and for any and all losses it may sustain. [Amended5-24-2006 STM] 
§ 202-19. Permit fee, bonds and meeting.
A. There shall be no charge by the Town for issuing any permit required by this article. All bonds required under Article IV may be released bythe Board after proper completion of all work in compliance with theprovisions hereof. 
B. When practicable, before any permits shall be issued under this ArticleIV, the applicant should meet with the Board of Selectmen at either aregular or a specially scheduled meeting to review and obtain approval for the proposed work. 
198:159 

ARTICLE V 
Acceptance; Maintenance; Penalties 
§ 202-20. Acceptance. 
After completion of construction, application for acceptance of a street shall be submitted to the Board of Selectmen in accordance with the provisions of"Procedures for the Acceptance of Streets, Town of Griswold, Connecticut."Acceptance of formal offers of cession of streets, open space, rights-of-way, and easements shall rest with the Town. 
§ 202-21. Maintenance of street and bond.
A. The owner or developer shall be required to maintain all improvements and provide for snow removal on streets and sidewalks until officialacceptance of said improvements by the Town. In no case shall a streetbe accepted until as-built drawings, in instances where construction varied from the originally approved plans, are received and found to beacceptable. Where changes occur, revised material shall be shown andvoided material crossed out. Any unauthorized changes shall required additional work by the owner or developer at his own expense.
B. Upon official acceptance by the Town, the owner or developer shall postwith the Town a cash bond passbook assignment, or letter of credit from a financial institution having offices in the State of Connecticut(hereafter "bond"), in an amount not less than 6% of the total costsof the improvements guaranteeing the work completed for a period of one year for all streets constructed in accordance with the SubdivisionRegulations of the Town of Griswold, and, for other streets, for a periodof two years from the date of official acceptance, to be free from material or installation defects arising from faulty materials or workmanship. Forstreets constructed in accordance with the Subdivision Regulations ofthe Town of Griswold, no later than 65 days after receiving a request from the owner or developer, the Town shall release or authorize therelease of any such bond or portion thereof, provided the Town is reasonably satisfied that the improvements for which such bond or portion thereof was posted have been completed, or provide the personposting such bond with a written explanation as to the additional improvements that must be completed before such bond or portion thereof may be released. For streets not constructed in accordance with the Subdivision Regulations of the Town of Griswold, 66% of themaintenance bond will be released after the first guarantee year and the remaining 34% at the end of the second guarantee year. The form,sufficiency and manner of execution of such bond shall be approved by the Town Counsel prior to acceptance by the Town of such street.
[Amended 3-26-2013 STM] 
C. 	For this one-year period for streets constructed in accordance with theSubdivision Regulations of the Town of Griswold, and, for other streets, for this two-year period, the owner or developer shall, upon writtennotice from the Board, remedy any defects arising from faulty materialsor workmanship within a reasonable period of time. Said remedial action shall be to the satisfaction of the Board. [Amended 3-26-2013 STM] 
198:161 

§ 202-22. Penalties for offenses. 
Any violation of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $250, and each day's failure to comply with the provisions hereof shallconstitute a separate and distinct violation. 
§ 202-23. Applicability. 
This chapter shall not apply to or affect any subdivision properly approvedand recorded prior to the effective date of this chapter, nor shall it applyto or affect any street or road properly accepted by the Town into its street system, and which was recorded with the Town Clerk prior to the effectivedate of this chapter. 
198:162 

ARTICLE VI 
Sidewalk Maintenance [Added 3-22-2011] 
§ 202-24. Definitions. 
For purposes of this article, the term "owner" shall be defined as the owner or owners of any property which abuts or is adjacent to a public sidewalk inthe Town of Griswold . 
§ 202-25. Maintenance obligation. 
Each owner shall be responsible for maintaining, as set forth herein, thatportion of any public sidewalk which abuts or is adjacent to his or her property. 
§ 202-26. Snow and ice removal. 
Such owner shall remove accumulation of ice or snow within 12 hours after such snow and/or ice has ceased to accumulate, or within such additional time period as the Road Superintendent of the Town of Griswold shall order,and if such owner shall fail to remove said accumulation of snow and ice within the time prescribed, the Road Superintendent may cause the same to be done, the expense therefor to be charged to the owner. Upon failureof the owner to pay such charges within 60 days, the Road Superintendentshall file upon the Town land records a lien in the amount of such costs against the owner's property. Such liens may be enforced and collected inthe same manner as is provided by law for the collection and enforcementof tax liens. Until it is practical to remove ice, it must be temporarily sanded with an abrasive or chemical substance (excluding pure salt compound). 
§ 202-27. Removal of obstructions and hazards. 
Such owner shall be responsible for maintaining such public sidewalk free from all obstructions or materials which may be hazardous to pedestriantraffic such as dirt, sand, leaves, branches, grass clippings, rocks or anyother materials. If the owner shall fail to maintain the sidewalk free from the accumulation of such materials, the Road Superintendent may cause thesame to be done and may collect the cost thereof from said owner as aboveprovided. 
§ 202-28. Limitations on Town liability for injuries. 
Pursuant to Section 7-163a of the General Statutes and notwithstanding theprovisions of Section 13a-149 or any other general statute or special act, the Town of Griswold shall not be liable to any person injured in person orproperty caused by the presence of ice or snow on a public sidewalk unlessthe Town is the owner or person in possession and control of land abutting such sidewalk, other than land used as a highway or street, provided the 
198:163 

Town of Griswold shall be liable for its affirmative acts with respect to suchsidewalk. 
§ 202-29. Responsibility of abutting owner; action to recoverdamages.
A. The owner or person in possession and control of land abutting a public sidewalk shall have the same duty of care with respect to the presenceof ice and snow on such sidewalk toward the portion of the sidewalkabutting his property as the municipality had prior to January 27, 1989, pursuant to the provisions of Connecticut General Statutes, Section7-163a, and shall be liable to persons injured in person or propertywhere a breach of said duty is the proximate cause of said injury. 
B. No action to recover damages for injury to the person or to propertycaused by the presence of ice or snow on a public sidewalk against aperson who owns or is in possession and control of land abutting a public sidewalk shall be brought but within two years from the date when theinjury is first sustained. 
§ 202-30. Appeals. 
Any person aggrieved by any order of the Road Superintendent under thisarticle may appeal such order to the Board of Selectmen within 30 days ofreceipt of the order. The Board of Selectmen shall provide a hearing and an opportunity to be heard for the owner, and may affirm, modify and affirm,and revoke any such order. 
198:164 

Chapter 207 TAXATION 
GENERAL REFERENCES 
Tax Collector — See Ch. 101. 
198:165 

ARTICLE I 
Solar Energy Systems[Adopted 5-26-1977] 
§ 207-1. Exemption granted. 
The Town of Griswold hereby authorizes the property tax exemption for solar energy heating or cooling systems set forth in Section 12-81(56)(a),
(b) and (c) of the Connecticut General Statutes. 
198:167 

ARTICLE II 
Vehicles Modified for Handicapped[Adopted 11-14-2002] 
§ 207-2. Exemption established.
A. Pursuant to the provisions Connecticut General Statutes Section 12-81c, an exemption from personal property taxation is hereby established for:
(1) 
Any ambulance-type motor vehicle that is used exclusively for the purpose of transporting any medically incapacitated individual, except any motor vehicle used to transport any such individual forprofit; and

(2) 
Any motor vehicle owned by a person with disabilities, or owned by the parent or guardian of such person, which vehicle is equipped forpurposes of adapting its use to the disability of such person.

B. 
As used in this article, the term "motor vehicle" shall have the same meaning as used in Connecticut General Statutes Section 14-1. 


§ 207-3. Exception. 
No motor vehicle that is owned by any hospital, nursing home, health care organization, or other entity that provides health care, maintenance orrehabilitation services for profit shall be entitled to an exemption under thisordinance. 
§ 207-4. Limitation. 
A motor vehicle shall be deemed to be used exclusively for transportingmedically incapacitated individuals only when such vehicle is used for no other purpose. 
§ 207-5. Definition. 
A motor vehicle that is entitled to the exemption described in § 207-2A(2), above, shall be defined as and limited to a motor vehicle that has been equipped with devices or features specifically adapted to allow the useof the vehicle by a person with disabilities, including one or more of the following: special hand or foot controls, lifts, ramps, special seating orstretchers. 
§ 207-6. Application and proof of entitlement. 
No exemption allowed pursuant to this article shall be valid unless theperson claiming such exemption submits to the Town Assessor, and theAssessor approves, a written application for such exemption, together with such reasonable proof of entitlement to such exemption as the Assessor mayrequire. Such proof may include, but is not limited to, current motor vehicleregistration, photographs, and invoices for equipment and installation. A separate application must be filed with the Assessor for each tax year (July1 to June 30) for which an exemption is claimed. The Assessor shall notapprove any application for such exemption unless the application is filed 
198:169 

with the Assessor on or before November 1 of the calendar year in whichthe relevant October 1 assessment date occurs; except, however, that an application for an exemption may also be filed within 30 days after the dateof mailing of the first tax bill to be issued by the Town after an eligible motorvehicle is added to the Town's assessment list for the first time. The failure of an applicant to submit such a request prior to the applicable deadlineshall be deemed to be a waiver of the exemption for all tax bills relating tothe relevant assessment dates. 
§ 207-7. Appeal of denial of exemption. 
In the event the Town Assessor determines that an exemption is not permitted, the applicant may appeal that decision to the Board of Assessment Appeals of the Town of Griswold by filing a notice of appealwith the Town Clerk on or before the 30th day following the date of mailingof notice that the exemption has been denied. The Board of Assessment Appeals shall, within 30 days of its receipt of notice of the appeal, considerthe appeal and render a decision. Any failure of the Board to act within thethirty-day period shall be deemed to be a denial of the appeal. A majority vote of the Board in favor of the exemption shall be necessary to overturnthe decision of the Assessor and grant the exemption. 
198:170 

ARTICLE III 
Exemption for Farm Buildings[Adopted 2-10-2009] 
§ 207-8. Exemption granted; amount; conditions. 
As authorized by Section 12-91(c) of the Connecticut General Statutes, the Town hereby provides an exemption from property taxes for any buildingthat is both (a) used actually and exclusively in farming, as that term is defined in Connecticut General Statutes Section 1-1, and (b) located on land that has been, and remains, classified as farm land pursuant toConnecticut General Statutes Section 12-107(c). Such exemption shall notexceed $100,000 of the assessed value of any eligible building and shall not apply to any building used for residential purposes. Such exemption shall besubject to the application and qualification process provided in ConnecticutGeneral Statutes Section 12-91(d). Such exemption shall also be subject to the change of ownership, conveyance tax, and classification provisions setforth in Connecticut General Statutes Sections 12-504a(a), 12-504a(c) and12-504b. All references herein to the Connecticut General Statutes are to the statutes as they may hereafter be amended. 
§ 207-9. Scope. 
The exemption provided by this article shall apply only to assessment years beginning on or after October 1, 2009. 
198:171 

ARTICLE IV 
Exemption for Housing for Homeless Veterans[Adopted 8-5-2009] 
§ 207-10. Exemption continued; conditions. 
In accordance with Section 12-81(58) of the Connecticut General Statutes, the Town of Griswold, with recognition that there exists an exemption fromreal estate taxation for the property currently owned by LaFlamme-KusekAmerican Legion Post 15, Inc. and located at 7 South Main Street, Jewett City ("the property"), hereby authorizes such exemption ("the exemption")shall continue ("the continuing exemption") and duly apply where thefollowing conditions exist: 
A. The continuing exemption shall be available should the property beleased to the American Legion Veterans’ Housing, Inc.; provided,however, that the Board of Selectmen may approve the availability of the continuing exemption to another federally tax-exempt entity uponsubmission of adequate documentation of the tax-exempt status andpurpose of such entity. 
B. The continuing exemption shall apply only to the extent the property isactually used to provide housing for homeless veterans. The Propertyshall be deemed to be so used only if: 
(1) 
The percentage of rooms or other dwelling units occupied by personswho are not veterans is no greater than 17% of the total number ofsuch rooms or other dwelling units; and 

(2) 
The Board of Selectmen determines, based upon the submission tosuch Board by the owner or lessee of the property of documentationthe Board deems to be adequate, that any revenues received from the use of the property are being expended for the purpose ofproviding housing to homeless veterans.

C. 	
The Board of Selectmen may, from time to time, require the owner or lessee of the property to provide reasonable documentation confirmingthat the requisite percentage of rooms or other dwelling units are occupied by veterans. 

D. 	
The continuing exemption shall remain available for so long as the property is owned by by LaFlamme-Kusek American Legion Post 15, Inc. 


198:173 

ARTICLE V 
Business Incentive Tax Abatements [Adopted 9-11-2012; amended 1-3-2019] 
§ 207-11. Purpose. 
Both the Town of Griswold ("Town") and its Economic Development Commission recognize that a global marketplace exists, and in an effortto attract, retain, expand and diversify the commercial tax base, promotejob growth, high-quality economic development and investment within the Town, the Town hereby adopts this Business Incentive Tax AbatementsOrdinance ("article"). 
§ 207-12. Legislative Authority. 
Pursuant to the authority set forth in Connecticut General Statutes ("C.G.S.") §§ 12-65b and 12-65h, as amended, this article authorizes theTown, following the affirmative vote of its legislative body, to enter into written agreements with actual or proposed owners or lessees of real property or air space within the Town to fix tax assessments of real property,personal property and air space for prescribed periods of time and in the manner set forth in, and subject to, this article. 
§ 207-13. Eligibility.
A. Pursuant to C.G.S. 	§ 12-65b, as amended, this article authorizes the Town, following the affirmative vote of its legislative body, to enter into awritten agreement, for a period of not more than 10 years, with any partyowning or proposing to acquire an interest in real property in the Town, or with any party owning or proposing to acquire an interest in air spacein the Town, or with any party who is the lessee of, or who proposes tobe the lessee of, air space in such Town in such a manner that the air space leased or proposed to be leased shall be assessed to the lesseepursuant to C.G.S. § 12-64, as amended, fixing the assessment of the realproperty or air space which is the subject of the written agreement, and all improvements thereon or therein and to be constructed thereon ortherein (including but not limited to rehabilitation of existing structuresfor retail business use), subject to the prescribed periods of time set forth in § 207-16 of this article; provided, notwithstanding any contraryprovision of C.G.S. § 12-65b, as amended, only the following types ofproperties or improvements shall be eligible for consideration under this article: 
(1) 
Office use;

(2) 
Retail use; 

(3) 
Manufacturing use;

(4) 
Warehouse, storage or distribution use;

(5) 
Recreation facilities; 

(6) 
Information or technology; and/or

(7) 
Mixed-use development, as defined in C.G.S. § 8-13m, as amended;and/or 

198:175 


(8) 
Use 	by or on behalf of a health system as defined in C.G.S. § 19a-508c, as amended. 


B. Pursuant to C.G.S. 	§ 12-65h, as amended, this article authorizes theTown, following the affirmative vote of its legislative body, to enter intoa written agreement with any party owning or proposing to acquire an interest in real property in the Town, or with any party owningor proposing to acquire an interest in air space in the Town or withany party who is the lessee of, or who proposes to be the lessee of, air space in the Town in such a manner that the air space leased orproposed to be leased shall be assessed to the lessee pursuant to C.G.S.§ 12-64, upon which is located or proposed to be located a manufacturing facility, as defined in C.G.S. § 12-81(72), as amended, or a wholesale andretail business as defined in C.G.S. § 12-81(54), as amended, fixing theassessment of the personal property located in the facility that is the subject of the agreement, subject to the prescribed periods of time setforth in § 207-17 of this article. 
§ 207-14. Eligibility requirements. 
The Town will consider, in addition to such other factors or requirements asdeemed appropriate by the Town in its sole discretion, the following factorsor requirements in analyzing whether to enter into any fixed assessment agreement authorized by this article:
A. The applicant must be a for-profit business that is authorized to dobusiness in the State of Connecticut. A for-profit business may include but shall not be limited to, a publically traded business.
B. The applicant must not be in violation of any applicable law, order,requirement, permit, approval or agreement with the Town and/or any federal, state or local government and/or commission or agency thereof. 
C. 	No real estate or personal property tax or other tax, fee or municipalcharge due to the Town or any of its departments, officials, commissions, boards, or agencies shall be unpaid at the time an application issubmitted and/or while it is being processed. Any resulting fixed taxassessment agreement shall contain language allowing for termination of such agreement if the applicant fails to pay any such tax, fee or chargeduring the term of the agreement.
D. 	If the applicant is a tenant operating under a proposed lease of real property or air space within the Town, the lease must be in writing andthe term of the lease must be for no less than the term of the proposedfixed assessment. A copy of the written lease shall be submitted as part of the application. Any resulting fixed tax assessment agreement shallrequire the terms of such agreement to be reflected in an amendment tosaid written lease, and the Town reserves the right to terminate a fixed assessment agreement simultaneously with the termination of the lease.
E. If an applicant is relocating a business within the Town, the applicationshall include a history of applicant's tax assessments and payments to the municipality(ies) and/or other political subdivision(s) in which thebusiness has been operating for the five years immediately precedingthe date of the application. 
198:176 

F. 	The applicant's proposed project must be a permitted use at the proposed location under the Griswold or Borough Zoning Regulations and must receive all necessary approvals, licenses and permits fromthe Griswold Planning and Zoning Commission and other Town, Stateof Connecticut and federal agencies, boards, commissions and officials having jurisdiction with respect to the project and/or property. 
G. 	The applicant and its parent and subsidiary(ies) must be in environmental compliance with the Connecticut Department of Energy and Environmental Protection and/or its successor.
H. The proposed project must have a clear economic benefit to the Town.The application shall include a description of benefits to be realized by the Town if the application is approved. 
I. 	A complete application on a form approved by the Town's Board ofSelectmen, with all required information, must be submitted. 
§ 207-15. General provisions.
A. The decision to grant or reject any application under this article shallbe within the sole and exclusive discretion of the Town. The Board of Selectmen shall not be obligated to recommend any particularapplication to the Town Meeting, and the Town Meeting shall not beobligated to approve any application. Notwithstanding anything in this article to the contrary, no application may be granted which does notcomply with this article and C.G.S. §§ 12-65b or 12-65h, as amended.
B. The Town's Assessor shall, in the Assessor's sole discretion, determine the assessment and increase in assessment of the real property or air space and/or the personal property and any and all improvementsconstructed or to be constructed on or in the real property or air space which is the subject of the agreement. The term "improvements to beconstructed" shall include any rehabilitation of existing structures forretail business use. 
C. 	The fixed assessment period shall commence the first fiscal year forwhich a tax list is prepared on the October 1 immediately following theissuance of a certificate of occupancy by the appropriate building official for construction of the buildings or manufacturing facilities or otherstructures and all improvements in or on the real property or air spacewhich is the subject of the agreement unless otherwise set forth in the written agreement fixing such tax assessment.
D. 	Notwithstanding anything in this article to the contrary, and providedin all other respects the applicant qualifies under and any resulting agreement is approved pursuant to the provisions of C.G.S. §§ 12-65b or12-65h, as amended, and this article, the Town may, in its sole discretion,offer to enter into an agreement with such applicant for abatement of taxes of a lesser percentage and/or of fewer years than the maximumauthorized by this article and/or said statute(s).
E. On a case-by-case basis, the Town Meeting, in its exclusive discretion and to further the purposes of this article, may grant an applicant, inaddition to the incentives provided by this article and C.G.S. §§ 12-65band/or 12-65h, as amended, a full or partial waiver of: 
(1) 
Fees under the Building Code; and/or 

198:177 


(2) 
Filing fees with land use agencies.


F. 	This article is not retroactive and shall be effective 15 days after publication in a newspaper having circulation in the Town. 
G. 	Unless otherwise specified in a fixed assessment agreement;construction shall commence within six months and shall be completed within two years of execution of any fixed assessment agreement.Failure to comply with this schedule may result in termination of theagreement by the Board of Selectmen; provided, however, that the Board of Selectmen may grant a reasonable extension(s) of such timeperiods, but only upon favorable recommendation by the EconomicDevelopment Commission and the showing of good cause beyond the applicant's control.
H. If the applicant, during the term of any fixed assessment agreementbetween such applicant and the Town: a) relocates its business outside the Town; b) becomes delinquent in taxes, charges or fees owed to theTown; c) declares bankruptcy; d) substantially reduces its operations onthe subject property, with substantially reduced "operations" meaning for purposes of this article, among other things, a reduction of squarefeet occupied within the facility by 20% or more, a reduction in workforce by 20% or more, a failure to construct agreed-upon additional phases of construction, and/or sale or lease of some or all of the propertyand/or as such term may be otherwise defined in the agreement; and/or e) in any other way fails to comply with the agreement, this article and/or C.G.S. §§ 12-65b and 12-65h, then the Board of Selectmen shallhave the right to terminate the agreement and any tax incentive or otherbenefit enjoyed by the applicant under the agreement and the applicant shall be required to pay back all taxes it would have been assessed hadthe application not been granted and the agreement not entered into.Each agreement shall contain a provision to this effect. 
I. 	No agreement entered into pursuant to this article shall be subject toassignment, transfer or sale without written approval of the Board ofSelectmen. 
J. 	No agreement authorized by this article shall be executed by the Boardof Selectmen until it is approved by the Town Attorney as to form andlegality. 
K. Any agreement entered into pursuant to this article shall be recorded inthe Town's land records. 
§ 207-16. Tax incentives for real property allowed under this articleand C.G.S. § 12-65b, as amended. 
For the purposes of this article: 
198:178 


198:179 


§ 207-17. Tax incentive for personal property in manufacturingfacilities allowed under C.G.S. § 12-65h, as amended. 
For the purposes of this incentive policy: 
MACHINERY AND EQUIPMENT — As defined in C.G.S. § 12-81(72), asamended, and intended to qualify for tax relief pursuant to § 12-65h, asamended, shall have a depreciable useful life of five or seven years for federal income tax purposed. 
MANUFACTURING FACILITY — As defined in C.G.S. § 12-81(72), as amended. 
PERSONAL PROPERTY — Any property that is not real property and that ismovable or not attached to the land. 
PROJECT VALUE — As set forth below shall refer to the increase in assessed value of such personal property in the facility or wholesale and retail business, as set forth in C.G.S. § 12-64h, as such increase is determined bythe Town's Tax Assessor. 

198:180 


§ 207-18. Application process.
A. Applications shall be submitted to the Town Planner on a form approvedby the Board of Selectmen. After determining that an application iscomplete, the Planner shall forward it to the Assessor and Economic Development Commission for its review. The application and the recommendation of the Economic Development Commission shall beforwarded to the Board of Selectmen and the Board of Finance. The Board of Finance shall review the materials and the recommendation of the Economic Development Commission and forward its comments to theBoard of Selectmen. 
B. After review of an application as provided in Subsection A above, anapplication reviewed favorably by the Board of Selectmen shall bereferred to the Town Attorney for purposes of approving the form and legality of the proposed fixed assessment agreement, and such application and the proposed agreement shall be submitted to a regular or special Town Meeting for a vote as to whether to authorize the Board of Selectmen to enter into a written agreement with the applicantsubject to any revisions the Town Meeting may require. 
§ 207-19. Other tax incentive rights preserved. 
This article, by specifically referencing the authority set forth in C.G.S.§§ 12-65b and 12-65h, as amended, is not intended to limit the Town'sability, in its sole discretion, to enter into, grant or allow for fixed tax 
198:181 

assessment agreements, tax abatements or other tax incentives which maybe available under other provisions of the C.G.S. and/or applicable law. 
198:182 

ARTICLE VI 
Tax Abatement for Information Technology Property[Adopted 10-9-2012] 
§ 207-20. Purpose. 
The Town of Griswold ('Town") recognizes that it exists in a global marketplace and therefore elects to use authority granted it by the Stateof Connecticut to expand and diversify its commercial tax base by retainingexisting businesses that want to expand and by attracting new business and investment into the community. Toward that end, the Town has developedthis Business Incentive Policy Ordinance ("article") as an economic development tool to promote high quality economic development projects that contribute jobs or tax base increase or both. 
§ 207-21. Legislative authority. 
This article is adopted under authority of C.G.S. §§ 12-65b and 12-65h, which each authorize the Town, following a vote by its legislative body to doso, to enter into agreements ("agreement") with applicants eligible underthe terms of said statutes and of this article to provide specified forms and amounts of tax relief for prescribed periods of time. 
§ 207-22. Eligible projects. 
The following types of projects are eligible for consideration under this article: 
A. Under C.G.S. § 12-65b:
(1) 
Office use. 

(2) 
Retail use.

(3) 
Manufacturing use.

(4) 
Warehouse, storage or distribution use. 

(5) 
Information or technology.

B. 
Under C.G.S. § 12-65h:

(1) 
Manufacturing facility, as defined in C.G.S. § 12-81(72). 


§ 207-23. Eligibility requirements.
A. The applicant must be a private, for-profit business that is authorized todo business in the state of Connecticut. 
B. The applicant must not be in violation of any law or agreement with theTown, state or federal government. 
C. 	No real estate or personal property tax or other tax, fee or municipal charge due the Town or any of its departments, officials, commissions,boards, or agencies shall be unpaid at the time an application issubmitted, while it is being processed, or at any time during the term of an agreement hereunder. 
D. 	If the applicant is a tenant operating under a lease, the term of thelease must be for no less than the tax abatement period set forth in the agreement. The agreement and the tax incentives provided by it must beclearly recited in said written lease and be for a period no less than the 
198:183 

applicable term of the tax abatement. A copy of said written lease shallbe submitted as part of the application. 
E. If an applicant is relocating a business to Griswold, the applicationshall include a five-year history of tax assessments and payments tothe municipality(ies) and/or other political subdivision(s) in which the business has been operating.
F. 	The proposed project must be a permitted use at the proposed locationunder the Griswold or Borough Zoning Regulations and must receive all necessary approvals, licenses and permits from the Griswold Planningand Zoning Commission and other Town, State of Connecticut andfederal agencies, boards, commissions, and officials having jurisdiction with respect to the project.
G. 	The applicant and its parent and subsidiary(ies) must be in environmental compliance with the Connecticut Department of Energy and Environmental Protection. 
H. The project 	must have a clear economic benefit to Griswold. The application shall include a description of benefits to be realized by Griswold if the application is granted.
I. 	A complete application on a form approved by the Board of Selectman("BOS"), with all required information, must be submitted. 
§ 207-24. General provisions.
A. The decision to grant or reject any application under this article shallbe within the sole and exclusive discretion of the Town Meeting. The Town Meeting is under no obligation to approve any application, nor isthe BOS under any obligation to forward any particular application tothe Town Meeting. But no application may be granted which does not comply with this article and C.G.S. § 12-65b or 12-65h.
B. The Town's Assessor shall, in the Assessor's sole discretion, determine the assessment of the real property or air space and/or the personal property and any and all improvements constructed or to be constructedon or in the real property which is the subject of the agreement.
C. 	The fixed assessment period shall commence the first fiscal year for which a tax list is prepared on the October 1 immediately following theissuance of a certificate of occupancy by the appropriate building officialfor construction of the buildings or manufacturing facilities or other structures and all improvements in or on the real property or air spacewhich is the subject of the agreement.
D. 	Notwithstanding anything in this article to the contrary, and provided in all other respects the applicant qualifies under the provisions of C.G.S.§ 12-65b or 12-65h and this article, the Town may, in its sole discretion,offer to enter into an agreement with such applicant for abatement of taxes of a lesser percentage and/or of fewer years than authorized bythe statute(s).
E. On a case-by-case basis, the Town Meeting, in its exclusive discretion and to further the purposes of this article, may grant an applicant, inaddition to the incentives provided by C.G.S. §§ 12-65b and 12-65h, a fullor partial waiver of: 
(1) 
Fees under the Building Code; and/or 

198:184 


(2) 
Filing fees with land use agencies.

F. 	
This article is not retroactive. 

G. 	
Construction shall commence within six months and shall be completedwithin two years of execution of the agreement. Failure to comply withthis schedule shall result in termination of the agreement by the BOS; provided, however, that the BOS may grant a reasonable extension(s)of the time periods, but only upon favorable recommendation by theEconomic Development Commission ("EDC") and the showing of good cause beyond the applicant's control.

H. 
If the applicant, during the period of his participation in this programand during the term of an agreement: a) relocates its business from Griswold; b) becomes delinquent in taxes or fees; c) declares bankruptcy; d) substantially reduces its operations on the subjectproperty during the term of the agreement, with substantially reduced "operations" meaning for purposes of this article, among other things, areduction of square feet occupied within the facility by 20% or more, areduction in workforce by 20% or more, a failure to construct agreed-upon additional phases of construction, and/or sale or lease of someor all of the property; and/or e) in any other way fails to comply withthe agreement, this article and/or C.G.S. §§ 12-65b and 12-65h, then the BOS shall terminate the agreement and any tax incentive or otherbenefit enjoyed by the applicant under this program and the agreementshall be immediately forfeited and the applicant shall be required to pay back all taxes it would have been assessed had the application notbeen granted and the agreement not entered into. Each agreement shallcontain a provision to this effect. 

I. 	
No agreement entered into pursuant to this policy shall be subject toassignment, transfer or sale without written approval of the BOS. 

J. 	
No agreement shall be executed by the BOS until it is approved by the Town Attorney as to form and legality.

K. 
Any agreement hereunder shall be recorded in the land records of theTown of Griswold. 


§ 207-25. Tax incentives for information technology/personalproperty pursuant to C.G.S. § 12-81t.
A. The Board of Selectman may exercise the authority granted by C.G.S. § 12-81t to abate up to 100% of the property taxes due for any tax year withrespect to information technology personal property.
B. For the purposes of this incentive policy: 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY BUSINESSES — Those industries that supply, manufacture, utilize, and distribute software, telecommunicationsinfrastructure and networking hardware, and Internet-only related commerce. 
198:185 


198:186 


Division 2, Regulations 
Chapter 221 
INLAND WETLANDS AND WATERCOURSES 

GENERAL REFERENCES 
Building construction — See Ch. 127.  Sewers — See Ch. 222.  
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 151.  Subdivision of land — See Ch. 223.  
Stormwater management — See Ch. 200.  Zoning — See Ch. 224.  

198:187 

ARTICLE I 
Title, Authority and Purpose 
§ 221-1. Title. 
This chapter shall be known as the "Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Conservation Commission Regulations of the Town of Griswold, Connecticut" and is hereby referred to as "this chapter." 
§ 221-2. Authority. 
This chapter has been prepared by the Griswold Inland Wetlands andWatercourses Conservation Commission. This Commission's authority isgranted by Sections 22a-36 through 22a-45 of the Connecticut General Statutes, collectively known as the "Connecticut Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Act"; and as authorized by an ordinance of the Griswold TownMeeting on November 19, 1973. 
§ 221-3. Findings; purpose.
A. The preservation and protection of wetlands and watercourses fromundesirable and unregulated use, disturbance, or destruction is in the public interest. Regulation of wetlands and watercourses is essential tothe purposes of public health, outdoor recreation and conservation of ournatural resources. Major concerns include: 
(1) 
Flood and erosion control;

(2) 
Hydrological stability;

(3) 
Recharging and purification of groundwater; and 

(4) 
The continued existence of many forms of plant and animal life.

B. 
It is the purpose of this chapter to protect the citizens of Griswold bymaking provisions for the protection, preservation, maintenance and use of wetlands and watercourses by:

(1) 
Minimizing their disturbance and pollution;

(2) 
Maintaining and improving water quality in accordance with the highest standards set by federal, state, or local authority;

(3) 
Preventing damage from erosion, turbidity, or siltation;

(4) 
Preventing loss of fish, other beneficial aquatic organisms, wildlife and vegetation, and the destruction of the natural habitats thereof;

(5) 
Deterring and inhibiting the danger of flood and pollution; and

(6) 
Protecting potable freshwater supplies from the dangers of drought, overdraft, pollution, misuse, and mismanagement.

C. 	
This chapter provides an orderly process to balance the need for theeconomic growth of the Town of Griswold with the need to protect its environment. By protecting the quality of wetlands and watercourses,the people of the Town of Griswold forever guarantee the safety of suchnatural resources for their benefit and enjoyment and for the benefit and enjoyment of generations yet unborn. 


198:189 

§ 221-4. Interpretation of regulated soils. 
All wetlands, as defined in this chapter, are shown, for general reference purposes only, on a map entitled "Inland Wetlands Map of Griswold, Connecticut" as filed in the office of the Town Clerk. In all instances, the actual characteristics of the soils of a given site, as determined by a soil scientist, shall determine whether the land in question constitutes awetland, as defined in this chapter. 
198:190 

ARTICLE II 
Definitions 
§ 221-5. Terms defined. 
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
BOAT ANCHORAGE — An area where boats can ride at anchor, sometimes designated by local authorities. 
BOAT MOORING — The act of securing and/or means to firmly secure a vessel. 
BOG — A poorly drained area containing an accumulation of organic material and characterized by an association of plants recognized as bogspecies as listed in the booklet titled "Inland Wetlands Plants of Connecticut, May 1973." 
CLEAR CUTTING — The harvest of timber in a fashion, which removes all trees down to a two-inch diameter at breast height.[Added 11-21-1996] 
COMMERCIAL ACTIVITY — Any development other than residential activity, as defined in this chapter. 
COMMISSION — The Inland Wetlands, Watercourses and Conservation Commission of the Town of Griswold, Connecticut. 
COMMISSIONER — The Commissioner of Environmental Protection for the State of Connecticut. 
DEPOSIT — Includes but shall not be limited to fill, grade, dump, place,discharge, or emit. 
DISCHARGE — The emission of any water, substance or material into thewaters of the Town of Griswold, whether or not such a substance causes pollution. 
FARMING — Shall include the cultivation of soil, dairying, forestry, raisingand/or harvesting of any agricultural or horticultural commodity, the feeding, caring, training and management of livestock on a lot containing at least five acres. The term "farm" shall include farm buildings and buildings or structures accessory thereto, nurseries, orchards, ranges, and/orgreenhouses used primarily for the raising or keeping of agricultural or horticultural commodities or livestock. 
FEASIBLE — Able to be constructed or implemented consistent with soundengineering principles. 
INTERMITTENT (SEASONAL) WATERCOURSE — Any waterway that wouldconvey water for the duration of a storm event, thaw, or seasonal high watertable, said waterway being one that accumulates and/or flows in a certain direction through a regular channel having banks and sides. Intermittentwatercourses shall be delineated by a defined permanent channel and bank,and the occurrence of two or more of the following characteristics: 
198:191 

A. 	Evidence of scour or deposits of recent alluvium or detritus; 
B. 	The presence of standing or flowing water for a duration longer than a particular storm incident; 
C. 	The presence of hydrophytic vegetation. 
LICENSE — The whole or any part of any permit, certificate, approval or similar form of permission, which may be required of any person byprovisions of this chapter. 
MARSH — An area normally covered with shallow water, subject to seasonal variations, that contains an association of herbaceous, soft-stemmed plantsrecognized as marsh vegetation. Typical examples of marsh species arelisted in the booklet titled "Inland Wetland Plants of Connecticut, May 1973." 
MATERIAL — Any substance, solid or liquid, organic or inorganic, includingbut not limited to soil, sediment, aggregate, land, gravel, clay, bog, mud, debris, sand, refuse or waste. 
MUNICIPALITY — The Town of Griswold, Connecticut. 
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, limited-liability company, company, organization or legal entity of any kind,including municipal corporations, governmental agencies or subdivisionsthereof. 
POLLUTION — Harmful thermal effect or the contamination or renderingunclean or impure of any waters of the Town of Griswold by reason of anywaste or other materials discharged or deposited therein by any public or private sewer or otherwise, so as to directly or indirectly come into contactwith any waters. 
PRUDENT — Economically and otherwise reasonable in light of the social benefits to be derived from the proposed regulated activity, provided costmay be considered in deciding what is prudent and further provided a mereshowing of expense will not necessarily mean an alternative is imprudent. 
REGULATED ACTIVITY — Any operation or use of a wetland or watercourseinvolving removal or deposition of material, any obstruction, construction,alteration or pollution of such wetlands or watercourses, and any earth moving, filling, construction, and clear-cutting of trees in a regulated area,but shall not include the activities specified in Article III of these regulations. 
REGULATED AREA — The area extending 150 feet for commercial activities, or 75 feet for all other activities, from the edge of a wetland orwatercourse as determined by a soil scientist. 
REMOVE — The taking of materials from the land by means that include butare not limited to draining, excavating, mining, digging, dredging, sucking,bulldozing, draglining or blasting. 
198:192 

RENDERING UNCLEAN OR IMPURE — Any alteration of the physical,chemical, or biological properties of any waters of the Town of Griswold, including, but not limited to, changes in color, odor, turbidity or taste. 
RESIDENTIAL ACTIVITY — Development consisting exclusively of single-family and two-family dwellings and permitted accessory uses, as defined in the Griswold and Borough of Jewett City Zoning Regulations. 
SIGNIFICANT IMPACT or MAJOR EFFECT — Any activity which would havean adverse effect on the regulated area or on another portion of a wetland or watercourse system. Such activities include, but are not limited to: 
A. 	Deposition of material. 
B. 	Removal of material. 
C. 	Changes to the natural channel or the natural dynamics of a watercourse. 
D. 	Diminishing the natural capacity to support desirable biological life, prevent flooding, supply water, assimilate waste, facilitate drainage,and/or provide recreation and open space. 
E. 	Degradation of surface and/or ground water as measured by the standards of the Water Compliance Division of the Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection. 
SOIL SCIENTIST — An individual duly qualified in accordance with standards set by the Federal Office of Personnel Management. 
SWAMP — An area with a water table at or near the surface of the groundthroughout most of the year and containing vegetation dominated by an association of trees and/or shrubs recognized as swamp species. Typicalexamples of swamp species are listed in the booklet titled "Inland WetlandPlants of Connecticut, May 1973." 
WASTE — Sewage or any substance, liquid, gaseous, solid, or radioactive,which may pollute or tend to pollute any of the waters of the Town ofGriswold. 
WATERCOURSE — 
A. 	A river, stream, brook, waterway, lake, pond, marsh, swamp, bog, andall other bodies of water, natural or artificial, vernal or intermittent, public or private, which are contained within, flow through, or borderupon the Town of Griswold or any portion thereof, not regulatedpursuant to the Connecticut General Statutes Sections 22a-28 through 22a-35, as amended. 
B. 	Intermittent watercourses shall be delineated by a defined permanentchannel and bank, and the occurrence of two or more of the following characteristics: 
(1) 
Evidence of scour or deposits of recent alluvium or detritus. 

198:193 


(2) 	
The presence of standing or flowing water for a duration longerthan a particular storm incident. 

(3) 	
The presence of hydrophytic vegetation. 


WETLANDS — Land, including submerged land, not regulated pursuant toSections 22a-28 through 22a-35 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended, which consists of any soil type designated as poorly drained, verypoorly drained, alluvial, and floodplain by the National Cooperative SoilsSurvey, as may be amended from time to time, of the Soil Conservation Service of the United States Department of Agriculture. 
198:194 

ARTICLE III 
Permitted Operations and Uses 
§ 221-6. Review of permitted and nonregulated uses.
A. Some 	types of development are exempted from regulation under Sections 22a-36 through 22a-45 of the Connecticut General Statutes.Although these statutes prohibit regulation of the land use itself, theydo not prevent this Commission from establishing reasonable procedures to determine whether a claimed exemption actually applies in a specific case. 
B. Any person proposing to carry out a permitted or nonregulated operation or use of a wetland or watercourse that may disturb the natural andindigenous character of the wetland or watercourse shall, prior tocommencement of such operations or use, notify the Commission on a form provided by it and provide the Commission with sufficientinformation to enable it to properly determine that the proposedoperation and use is a permitted or nonregulated use of the wetland or watercourse. The Commission or its designated agent shall rule thatthe proposed operation or use is a permitted or a nonregulated use oroperation or that a permit is required. Such ruling shall be in writing and shall be made no later that the next regularly scheduled meeting at which the request was received. The designated agent for theCommission may make such ruling on behalf of the Commission at any time. 
§ 221-7. Uses permitted by right. 
The following operations are permitted as of right: 
A. Grazing, farming, nurseries, gardening and harvesting of crops, andfarm ponds of three acres or less essential to the farming operation. Thisexemption shall not be construed to include: 
(1) 
Road construction or the erection of buildings not directly related tothe farming operation;

(2) 
Relocation of watercourses with continual flow; 

(3) 
Filling or reclamation of wetlands or watercourses with continualflow; 

(4) 
Clear-cutting of timber except for the expansion of agricultural crop land; and 

(5) 
Mining of topsoil, peat, gravel, or similar material from wetlands orwatercourses for the purpose of sale. 

B. 
A residential home (i) for which 	a building permit has been issuedor (ii) on a subdivision lot, provided the permit has been issued orthe subdivision has been approved by a municipal planning, zoning or planning and zoning commission as of the effective date of promulgationof the municipal regulations pursuant to Subsection (b) of Section22a-42a of the Connecticut General Statutes or as of July 1, 1974, whichever is earlier, and further provided no residential home shall bepermitted as of right pursuant to this subsection unless the permit was obtained on or before July 1, 1987. [Amended 11-21-1996] 

C. 	
Boat anchorage or mooring, not including dock construction. 


198:195 

D. 	Uses incidental to the enjoyment and maintenance of residential property, including maintenance of existing structures and landscaping, but not including removal or deposition of five or more cubic yardsof material from or onto a wetland or watercourse or the diversion or alteration of a watercourse. For the purpose of this exemption, the term "residential property" does not include a parcel of land that is larger inarea than the largest minimum residential lot size required anywherein the municipality. For example, if the largest lot size in Griswold is two acres, a homeowner having a twenty-acre lot may not claim the"residential property" exemption for activities occurring throughout theparcel, but is limited to a two-acre portion, which should be shown on a site plan.
E. The construction and operation by 	water companies as defined in Section 16-1 of the Connecticut General Statutes or by municipal water supply systems as provided for in Chapter 102 of the ConnecticutGeneral Statutes of dams, reservoirs, and other facilities necessary tothe impounding, storage, and withdrawal of water in connection with public water supplies except as provided in Sections 22a-401 and22a-403 of the Connecticut General Statutes. 
F. 	The maintenance relating to any drainage pipe which existed before the effective date of any municipal regulations adopted pursuant to Section22a-42a of the Connecticut General Statutes or July 1, 1974, whicheveris earlier, provided such pipe is on property which is zoned as residential but which does not contain hydrophytic vegetation. For purposes of thischapter, "maintenance" means the accumulated leaves, soil and otherdebris whether by hand or machine, while the pipe remains in place. 
§ 221-8. Uses permitted under certain conditions. 
The following operations and uses are not subject to municipal regulation,provided they do not disturb the natural and indigenous character of the wetland or watercourse by removal or deposition of material, alteration orobstruction of water flow, or pollution of the wetland or watercourse:
A. Conservation of soil, vegetation, water, fish, shellfish and wildlife. 
B. Outdoor recreation, including play and sporting areas, golf courses, fieldtrials, nature study, hiking, horseback riding, swimming, skin-diving,camping, boating, water-skiing, trapping, hunting, fishing and shellfishing where otherwise legally permitted and regulated.
C. 	Any dredging or any erection, placement, retention or maintenance ofany structure, fill, obstruction or encroachment, or any work incidental to such activities, conducted by a state agency, which activity is regulated under Sections 22a-28 to 22a-35 of the Connecticut GeneralStatutes, inclusive, or Sections 22a-359b to 22a-363f of the Connecticut General Statutes, inclusive, shall not require any permit or approvalunder this chapter. 
198:196 

ARTICLE IV 
Regulation of Activities 
§ 221-9. Permit required. 
The Commission shall regulate any operation within or use of a wetland or watercourse involving removal or deposition of material, or any obstruction,construction, alteration or pollution of such wetlands or watercourses andany other regulated activity, unless such operation or use is permitted or nonregulated pursuant to Article III of these regulations. In addition, theCommission shall regulate any earth moving, filling, construction, or clear-cutting of trees within a regulated area around any wetland or watercourse. 
§ 221-10. Delineation of regulated areas. 
Regulated activities adjacent to a wetland or watercourse are likely to affectthose wetlands or watercourses. The Commission will therefore regulate these activities in a regulated area extending 150 feet from the delineatededge of a wetland or watercourse for commercial activities or 75 feet fromthe delineated edge of a wetland or watercourse for all other activities. 
§ 221-11. Adoption of map. 
The map of regulated wetlands entitled "Inland Wetlands Map of Griswold,Connecticut" shall be considered a part of this chapter, and copies of said map shall be available for inspection in the office of the Town Clerk. Themap may be revised from time to time in accordance with provisions ofArticle IX of this chapter. This map is to be utilized for general reference purposes only. In all instances, the actual characteristics of the soils of agiven site, as determined by a soil scientist, shall determine whether land inquestion is a wetland; or, in the case of a watercourse, the actual conditions as determined by a soil scientist, professional biologist, and/or professionalecologist. 
§ 221-12. Access to Property. 
Commission members, their agents and designees shall have the right offree access to any part of the property under consideration for the grantingof a permit under this chapter. The property owner may require that such persons have a letter of authorization from the Chairperson or Secretary ofthe Commission prior to permitting such access. Except in an emergency,entry onto private property shall be made at reasonable hours and after reasonable notice to the owners, their agents, or by judicial authority. 
§ 221-13. Surveillance of area. 
The Commission shall maintain general surveillance of the regulated areas within the Town of Griswold to ensure that no unauthorized regulated activities occur. 
198:197 

§ 221-14. Disputes over designation. 
If an applicant disputes the designation of any part of his land as a regulated area, the applicant may be required to produce such information as theCommission deems necessary to permit an informed decision, but in nocase shall the Commission impose an unreasonable burden of proof. To meet such burden of proof, an applicant may be required to presentdocumentation by a soil scientist for a wetland, or a professional biologist,and/or a professional ecologist for a watercourse, that the land in question should not be designated as a regulated area. 
§ 221-15. Disqualification of Commission members. 
No member or alternate member of the Commission shall participate in the hearing or decision of any matter in which he/she is directly or indirectlyinvolved in a personal or financial sense. In the event of such disqualification, such fact shall be entered into the records of the Commission and a legally appointed alternate member shall be appointedfor the duration of action on the matter that required disqualification of theoriginal member. 
198:198 

ARTICLE V 
Application Procedure 
§ 221-16. Submission, form, and contents of application; reportingform. 
A. Applications to the Enforcement Officer. 	In accordance with Section 22a-42a(c)(2) of the Connecticut General Statutes, the Commissionhereby delegates to its duly authorized agent (Wetlands Enforcement Officer) the authority to approve or extend a regulated activity that islocated in a regulated area but not located in a wetland or watercoursewhen such agent finds that the conduct of such activity would result in no greater than a minimal impact on any wetland or watercourse,provided such agent has completed the comprehensive training programdeveloped by the Commissioner pursuant to Section 22a-39 of the Connecticut General Statutes. Notwithstanding the provisions for receipt and processing applications as prescribed under this article,such agent may approve or extend such an activity at any time. All approvals granted by said agent shall, within 10 days of the date ofsuch approval, be published in a newspaper having a general circulationin the Town wherein the activity is located or will have an effect. Any person may appeal such decision of such agent to the Commission within15 days after the publication date of the notice and the Commission shallconsider such appeal at its next regularly scheduled meeting, provided such meeting is no earlier than three business days after receipt by theCommission or its agent of such appeal. The Commission shall, at itsdiscretion, sustain, alter or reject the decision of its agent or require an application for a permit in accordance with Section 22a-42a(c)(1) of theConnecticut General Statutes. 
B. Applications to the Commission. Any person who: (1) has been denied a permit to conduct a regulated activity by the Enforcement Officer inaccordance with § 221-16A, (2) is claiming an exemption under usespermitted by right, of this chapter, (3) is requesting a declaratory ruling, or (4) is proposing to conduct a regulated activity within a wetland orwatercourse must submit an application to the Commission. A properlycompleted application, along with the appropriate fees, shall be submitted to the appropriate Town Hall representative. Applications maybe submitted during normal Town of Griswold working hours. In orderfor an application to be considered at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Commission, the application should be received at least14 days prior to that meeting. Later submission could result in tabling ofthe application to the following month. 
C. 	No application shall be deemed complete unless it shall be in such formand contain such information as the Commission considers necessary fora full determination of the issues. 
D. 	All applicable sections of the permit application shall be filled out.Noncompliance could be cause for denial of the permit. When engineer-prepared drawings are required, the applicant should submit seven copies of each sheet. 
198:199 

E. A reporting form shall be completed during the application processwhich provides the Commissioner of the Department of Environmental Protection with information necessary to properly monitor the inventoryof state wetlands. The reporting form shall be part of the application, andspecified sections shall be completed by the applicant. The Commission shall be responsible for the remaining information and any correctionson the form prior to filing it with the state. 
§ 221-17. Deadlines for processing.
A. Section 22a-42a(c)(1) of the Connecticut General Statutes outlines theprocedure for processing all applications as classified under § 221-21 ofthis chapter. The following is a synopsis of those sections: 
(1) 
Day of receipt. The "day of receipt" is deemed to be the earlier of:

(a) 
The 	day of the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Commission after the date the application is submitted; or 

(b) 
Thirty-five days after the application is submitted.

(2) 
Deadline for holding a public hearing. If the Commission finds thata public hearing is required in accordance with § 221-19 of this chapter, it must commence within 65 days after day of receipt.

(3) 
Deadline for completion of public hearings: within 35 days after thecommencement date. 

(4) 
Deadline for decision: within 35 days after completion of a publichearing; or within 65 days after day of receipt if a public hearing wasnot held. 

(5) 
Deadlines for notices of decision: within 15 days of the decision.


B. Except for Subsection A(5) above, the applicant may consent to oneor more extensions of the periods specified in this subsection for the commencement or closing of the hearing and for action on such application, provided the total period of all such extensions shall notexceed a cumulative total of 65 days. 
C. 	If the inland wetlands agency, or its agent, fails to act on any applicationwithin 35 days after the completion of a public hearing or, in the absenceof a public hearing, within 65 days from the date of receipt of the application, or within any extension of any such period as provided inSection 8-7d of the Connecticut General Statutes, the applicant may filesuch application with the Commissioner of Environmental Protection, who shall review and act on such application in accordance with thissection. Any costs incurred by the Commissioner in reviewing suchapplication for such inland wetlands agency shall be paid by the municipality that established or authorized the agency. Any fees thatwould have been paid to such municipality if such application had notbeen filed with the Commissioner shall be paid to the state. The failure of the inland wetlands agency or the Commissioner to act within any timeperiod specified in this subsection, or any extension thereof, shall not bedeemed to constitute approval of the application. 
198:200 

§ 221-18. Information required on application. [Amended11-21-1996] 
Applications are available at the Town Hall and shall include the followinginformation: 
A. 	The type of activity proposed; 
B. 	The Tax Assessor's description of the property (map, block, lot, volumeand page);
C. 	Fee computation; 
D. 	Other permit applications for which the applicant is applying at theTown of Griswold for this property; 
E. 	The applicant's name(s); 
F. 	The applicant's mailing address;
G. 	The applicant's telephone number;
H. The 	property owner's name(s), mailing address(es) and telephone number(s) if different from the applicant's;
I. 	The name(s) and telephone number(s) of the engineer/surveyor/contractor who prepared the plan or who is performing the work; 
J. 	The address of the property (number and street name) according to theGriswold Tax Assessor's records, and the zone in which the property islocated. 
K. 	The geographical location of the property, including description of theland in sufficient detail to allow identification on the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Map (Do not state "See attached plans."); 
L. 	The purpose and description of the proposed activity (Do not state "Seeattached plans.");
M. State the start of work date and estimated completion date (refer to § 221-33, Time limit for completion); 
N. 	Any additional information that would enable the Commission to arriveat a fair decision; 
O. 	The site plan/sketch shall include the following:
(1) 
The names of adjacent property owners.

(2) 
If proposed activity is within 75 feet of a property line, the distances to adjacent landowner's well(s) and septic system(s).

(3) 
The location of existing structures, wells, septic systems, proposedactivity, and delineation of the affected wetland or watercourse. 

(4) 
The names of frontage and side streets.

P. 
An alternative plan considered by the applicant and why the proposal toalter wetlands set forth in the application was chosen; and 

Q. 	
The certification that the information submitted in the application formand related documents is true and correct to the best of the applicant'sknowledge and authorization for the Commission and its agent to inspect the property (at reasonable times) both before a final decisionhas been issued, and before the start of work, during work, and afterwork has been completed. 


§ 221-19. Public hearings.
A. The Commission shall not hold a public hearing on an application unless:
(1) the Commission determines that the proposed activity may have a significant impact on wetlands or watercourses; (2) a petition signed by 
198:201 

at least 25 persons who are 18 years of age or older and who reside inthe municipality in which the regulated activity is proposed requesting a hearing is filed with the Commission not later than fourteen (14) daysafter the date of receipt of such application; (3) the Commission findsthat a public hearing regarding such application would be in the public interest. The Commission may issue a permit without a public hearing,provided no petition provided for in this subsection is filed with theCommission on or before the 14th day after the date of receipt of the application.
B. At any public hearing, or at any meeting at which an application is beingheard under this chapter for which a public hearing is not held, the presentation of evidence and deliberations leading to a decision shall betranscribed by a competent stenographer or be recorded by a sound-recording device. 
C. 	All notices of public hearings shall be published in a newspaper havinga general circulation in such municipality where the land that is thesubject of the hearing is located at least twice, at intervals of not less than two days, the first not more than 15 days nor less than 10 daysand the last not less than two days before the date set for the hearing.In determining the intervals of publication, the terminal days, i.e., the date of publication and the date of the hearing, shall be excluded. Saidhearing shall be conducted within the time parameters as established in§ 221-17 of this chapter. 
D. 	Maps, plans and related documents pertaining to the activity requiringthe public hearing shall be available for public inspection in the Officeof the Town Clerk or other designated location. At a public hearing, any person or persons may appear and be heard on matters relating to thesubject of the hearing. 
§ 221-20. Referral to other agencies.
A. When an application is submitted to conduct a regulated activity uponan inland wetland or watercourse, any portion of which is within fivehundred (500) feet of the boundary of another municipality, the applicant is required, in accordance with Section 22a-42c of the ConnecticutGeneral Statutes, to give written notice of the application by certifiedmail, return receipt requested, to the inland wetlands agency of the other municipality on the same day as he/she submits the application.[Repealed 10-1-2003]
B. The Commission may also submit a copy of the proposed activity for review and comment to: 
(1) 
The Eastern Connecticut Conservation District;

(2) 
The Southeastern Connecticut Council of Governments; and/or 

(3) 
Any commission, agency, 	or organization as determined by the Commission. 


C. 	When an application is filed to conduct or cause to be conducted a regulated activity upon an inland wetland or watercourse, any portion ofwhich is within the watershed of a water company as defined in Section25-32a of the Connecticut General Statutes, the applicant shall provide written notice of the application to the water company, provided such 
198:202 

water company has filed a map showing the boundaries of the watershedon the land records of the municipality in which the application is made and with the inland wetlands agency of such municipality. Such noticeshall be made by certified mail, return receipt requested, and shallbe mailed within seven days of the date of the application. The water company, through a representative, may appear and be heard at anyhearing on the application. 
§ 221-21. Classification of application. 
The Commission shall, following receipt of the application at its regularlyscheduled meeting, classify the application as one of the following:
A. Declaratory ruling (exemptions). If the Commission finds, on the basis of the evidence before it, that a proposed activity or use does not involve any regulated activity as defined in § 221-5 or involves only apermitted use as defined in Article III, permission to proceed shall be granted within 10 days. This permission shall be subject to limitation orrevocation if it is later shown that a regulated activity or nonpermitteduse is a consequence of that proposed activity. The Commission shall state in writing its reasons for finding that a proposed permitted use orother activity does not involve a regulated activity.
B. Summary ruling (permits). If the Commission finds that 	a proposed activity is a regulated activity not involving significant impact or majoreffect on the inland wetland or watercourse as defined in § 221-5 of thischapter, it may allow the activity with or without conditions after initial review. In order to grant a permit at this stage, the Commission, after afull review of the considerations set forth in § 221-25 of this chapter andother pertinent factors, shall issue an opinion presenting its reasons for granting the permit with or without conditions.
C. 	Plenary rulings. If the Commission finds that the activity applied fordoes or may involve a significant or major effect on the inland wetland or watercourse, the Commission shall request information which mayinclude but is not limited to the following:
(1) 
Site plan; 

(2) 
Soil sample data;

(3) 
Biological evaluation;

(4) 
Analysis of material to be deposited; 

(5) 
A description of the proposed activity, 	including blueprints andengineering and architectural plans or designs, where available orreasonably available; 

(6) 
A list of other property owners whose rights or interests may be orwill be affected by the proposed activity; and

(7) 
Stream characteristics. 


§ 221-22. Disposition of fees. 
Any fee or fees collected shall be turned over to the Town Treasurer forinclusion in the general fund. 
198:203 

§ 221-23. Fees. [Amended 11-21-1996] 
Pursuant to Section 22a-42a(e) of the Connecticut General Statutes, the Commission is allowed under state statute to establish a fee sufficient to cover the reasonable cost of reviewing and acting on an application,petition, or a permit renewal, including, but not limited to, the costs of certified mailings, publication of notices and decisions, and monitoringcompliance with permit conditions or Commission orders.
A. Based 	on the average costs and prior experience, the following fee schedule is in effect: 
(1) 
Residential fee (includes single-family and two-family residences):$100. 

(2) 
Commercial fee: $300.

(3) 
Commercial (multifamily residence): $50 per dwelling unit.

(4) 
State fee: $30. 


B. Plus all of the following that are applicable:
(1) 
Public hearing (see § 221-19): $175.

(2) 
Delineation of wetlands/approval for P & Z only (no request for a permit but requiring official acceptance): $75.

(3) 
Petition by any person for amendment to this chapter or amendmentto the Official Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Map: $175. 

(4) 
Subdivisions, 	for each lot within the subdivision that contains wetlands or watercourses and/or work in a regulated area: $50.

(5) 
Commercial activity, any activity of a commercial nature within a regulated area: $50.


C. 	The Commission may pass any additional costs to the applicant if theapplication is withdrawn after such costs have been incurred. 
§ 221-24. Revocation of permit for false information. 
All information submitted in the application for review shall be consideredfactual or, in the case of anticipated activity, binding. A knowing failure of the applicant or any of his or her agents to provide correct information orperformance exceeding the levels of activities anticipated shall be sufficientgrounds for the revocation of any permit issued under this chapter and/ or for penalties to be imposed. Each day of violation or deception shall beconsidered as a separate offense in accordance with Public Act 155 of theConnecticut General Assembly (see C.G.S. § 22a-36 et seq.), as amended. 
198:204 

ARTICLE VI 
Professionally Prepared Site Plan Requirements 
§ 221-25. Information required. 
The site plan required in Article V shall be prepared by a licensed land surveyor or professional engineer or architect registered in the State ofConnecticut. A master copy of the plans shall contain the signatures andseals of the creators of the plans. The plan shall be drawn to a scale which is adequate to show the information required by the Commission to evaluatethe proposed activity and its environmental impact.
A. The site plan should contain but is not limited to the following: 
(1) 	
The boundary lines, dimensions, and area of the property;

(2) 	
The locations of all wetlands and watercourses both on the property and within200 feet of the boundaries. The seventy-five-foot residential and one-hundred­fifty-foot commercial regulated areas outside the wetlands or watercourse shallbe clearly indicated. The master copy of the plans shall contain the signatureand seal, if applicable, of the soil scientist who delineated the wetlands or watercourse; 

(3) 	
Elevations at one-foot contour intervals in all areas of the property that arewithin 100 feet of a wetland or watercourse; elevations at five-foot contour intervals from 100 feet to 500 feet from the wetland or watercourse; elevations for the remainder of the property to be at a contour interval sufficient to accurately depict the topography of the site. If deposition or removal of ground materials is proposed, resulting elevations shall be shown by one-foot contourintervals; 

(4) 	
The location and description of all existing structures, roads, drainage features, and other man-made objects;

(5) 	
The locations and descriptions of all proposed activities;

(6) 	
A documented description of the soils, including the location of any soil borings or test holes; the location and results of percolation tests. Soil types shall bedescribed in accordance with categories established by the United States SoilConservation Service; 

(7) 	
A description of the vegetative cover, including dominant botanical species andany rare species;

(8) 	
Quantities and descriptions of materials to be removed or deposited in terms of volume, composition, and the possibility of erosion or leaching from depositedmaterials; 

(9) 	
Existing and proposed depths of water and high water levels for all inundated areas; 

(10) 
Erosion and sedimentation control measures that will be used throughout theproject; and 

(11) 
If pollution is expected 	or proposed, the existing and anticipated alkalinity/acidity level, turbidity, bacterial count, flows, odor, color, temperature, and tasteof affected water both above and below the ground surfaces. 

(12) 
Plans shall include the following note: [Added 11-21-1996] 


198:205 

NOTE: 	This property has wetland, watercourse, swamp, marsh or bogcharacteristics, which have been defined by this document beforethe Inland Wetlands & Watercourses Conservation Commission of the Town of Griswold, Connecticut. Purchase of this property conveysthe responsibility of abiding by all federal, state and municipalregulations for the preservation and protection of these "Regulated Areas." See the Inland Wetlands & Watercourses Conservation Commission Regulations of the Town of Griswold for permitted andregulated uses of these areas. Any subsequent changes to these plans will require the approval of the Inland Wetlands & WatercoursesConservation Commission of the Town of Griswold. 
B. The requirements for any of the above items may be waived or modified by theCommission if it determines that such information is not necessary to properly evaluate the impact of the proposed activity. 
§ 221-26. Criteria to be considered.
A. The Commission shall consider the following in making its final decision on a permit application:
(1) 
All evidence offered at or before any public hearing;

(2) 
Any reports from other commissions and/or federal or state agencies, 
including the Eastern Connecticut Conservation District, the 
Southeastern Connecticut Council of Governments and/or the 
Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection; 


(3) 
Additional requested information;

(4) 
All relevant facts and circumstances, including, but not limited to the
following: 


(a) 
The environmental impact of the proposed action;

(b) 
The alternatives to the proposed action;

(c) 
The relationship between the short-term uses of the environment and the maintenance and enhancement of long-termproductivity;

(d) 
Irreversible and irretrievable commitments of resources which would be involved in the proposed activity;

(e) 
The character and degree of injury to or interference with safety,health, or the reasonable use of property which is caused or threatened; and 

(f) 	
The suitability or unsuitability of such activity to the area forwhich it is proposed. 

(5) 
The potential use of the area for recreational purposes;

(6) 
The existence of rare, unusual, or endangered zoological or botanical
species; and 


(7) 
The importance of the area as a wildlife habitat, feeding, or breeding 
area. 



B. In addition, where a hearing is held on an application, the Commission may not issue a permit unless it finds that a feasible and prudentalternative does not exist. Although the courts have not interpretedthe words "feasible and prudent alternative" in specific relation to the Inland and Wetlands Act, the same words were used in the Connecticut 
198:206 

Environmental Protection Act and have been interpreted in that context.The Connecticut Supreme Court held that a "feasible" alternative under CEPA is one which may be accomplished using "sound engineering,"and that "prudent" alternatives "are those which are economicallyreasonable." The Court noted that cost could be a factor in deciding what is prudent, but "(a) mere showing of expense. . . will not mean that analternative is imprudent."
C. 	In reaching its decision on any application after a public hearing, the Commission shall base its decision on the record of that hearing.Documentary evidence or other material not in the hearing record shallnot be considered by the agency in its decision. 
§ 221-27. Bond. [Added 11-21-1996]
A. The applicant may be required to post a bond in the form of a letter ofcredit or passbook bond with the Commission in a form satisfactory to the Town Attorney and in an amount approved by the Town Engineerand/or the Town Planner. An itemized bond estimate shall be preparedby the project engineer or contractor and shall be based on prevailing wage rates for the work disciplines involved. The required bond shall beposted prior to the endorsement of the plans by the Chairperson. A copyof the approved site plan shall be part of the bond. No bond shall be reduced or released unless approved by the Commission. If the bond isnot renewed, it shall be considered a violation of these regulations andshall cause the immediate issuance of a cease and desist order by the Commission. 
B. Financial 	institutions shall be licensed to conduct business in Connecticut. Passbook bonds shall include a signed withdrawal slip and made payable to the Town of Griswold Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Conservation Commission. In addition, the issuing bankshall prepare a letter signed by the appropriate bank official stating that an "assignment hold" has been placed on the account, and saidaccount will not be withdrawn or reduced until such time as the bank receives a report in writing from the Commission regarding the status of the bonded work. The bank letter shall also include a statement that the applicant agrees with the terms and conditions of the bond andshall also contain a signature line for the applicant. Signatures shall be duly notarized. Insurance companies are required to send notice to theGriswold Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Conservation Commission 60 days prior to the expiration of the bond. 
198:207 

ARTICLE VII 
Action on Permits 
§ 221-28. Commission authorized to impose conditions. 
The Commission is specifically authorized to grant, deny, or limit any permit for a regulated activity. The Commission may grant an application as filedor grant it upon such terms, conditions, limitations, or modification of theregulated activity as it may deem necessary to carry out the policy of the Inland Wetlands Act. 
§ 221-29. Notification of decision. 
The applicant shall be notified of the Commission's decision to grant or deny, suspend or revoke a permit by certified mail within fifteen (15) daysof the date of a final decision. 
§ 221-30. Publication of decision. 
Within 15 days of the decision, the Commission shall cause notice of theorder of issuance or denial, suspension, or revocation of a permit to bepublished in the form of a legal notice in a daily newspaper having a general circulation in the Town of Griswold. In any case in which such notice is notpublished within the fifteen-day period, the applicant may provide for thepublication of such notice within 10 days thereafter. 
§ 221-31. Reasons for decision to be noted. 
In granting a permit, granting a permit with conditions, denying a permit,or suspending or revoking a permit, the Commission shall issue a written opinion presenting the reasons for its action. These reasons shall becomepart of the records of the Commission. 
§ 221-32. Suspension or revocation.
A. The Commission may suspend or revoke a permit if it finds that:
(1) 
The applicant has not complied with the conditions or limitations setforth in the permit; 

(2) 
The applicant has exceeded the scope of the work;

(3) 
The activity for which the permit was issued has had a more severeimpact on the inland wetland or watercourse; or 

(4) 
The activity does not involve a permitted use.

B. 
Such suspension shall occur after giving notice to the permittee of thefacts or conduct which warrants such action, and after a hearing at which the permittee is given an opportunity to show compliance with therequirements for retention of the permit. 


§ 221-33. Time limit for completion. 
Any permit issued under this chapter for the development of propertyfor which an approval is required under Section 8-3, 8-25 or 8-26 of theConnecticut General Statutes shall be valid for five years, provided the 
198:209 

Commission may establish a specific time period within which any regulatedactivity shall be conducted. Any permit issued under this chapter for any other activity shall be valid for not less than two years and not more than five years. Any such permit shall be renewed upon request of thepermit holder unless the Commission finds that there has been a substantial change in circumstances which requires a new permit application or anenforcement action has been undertaken with regard to the regulatedactivity for which the permit was issued, provided no permit may be valid for more than 10 years. 
198:210 

ARTICLE VIII 
Appeals, Penalties, and Assessment Relief 
§ 221-34. Appeals. 
Any person aggrieved by any regulation, order, decision, or action made by the Commission pursuant to this chapter may file appeal in accordancewith Section 22a-43 of the Connecticut General Statutes, provided thatsuch appeal is commenced by service of process within 15 days from the date that notice of the decision was published as required by the GeneralStatutes. 
§ 221-35. Penalties for offenses. 
Any person or his or her agent who commits, takes part in, or assists in anyviolation of any provision of this chapter shall be fined not more than $1,000for each offense. Each violation shall be a separate and distinct offense and, in the case of a continuing violation, each day's continuance thereof shallbe deemed to be a separate and distinct offense. The Superior Court, in anyaction brought by the Commission, the Town of Griswold, or any person, shall have jurisdiction to restrain a continuing violation of this chapter andto issue orders directing that the violation be corrected or removed. Allcosts, fees, and expenses in connection with such action shall be assessed as damages against the violator. The monies collected pursuant to this sectionshall be used to restore the affected wetland or watercourse to its condition prior to the violation. 
§ 221-36. Notice of violation. 
If the Commission finds that any person is conducting or maintaining anyactivity, facility, or condition which is in violation of this chapter, the Commission and/or its designated agent may issue a written order bycertified mail, return receipt requested, to such person maintaining suchfacility or condition to immediately cease such activity or to correct such facility or condition. Within 10 calendar days of the issuance of such order,the Commission shall hold a hearing to provide the person an opportunity tobe heard and to show cause as to why the order should not remain in effect. The Commission shall consider the facts presented at the hearing and,within 10 days of completion of the hearing, notify the person by certifiedmail that the original order remains in effect, that a revised order is in effect, or that the order has been withdrawn. The Commission shall publishnotice of its decision in a newspaper having a general circulation in themunicipality. The original order shall be effective upon issuance and shall remain in effect until the Commission affirms, revises, or withdraws the order. The issuance of an order pursuant to this section shall not delay orbar an action pursuant to the Section 22a-44(b) of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended. 
198:211 

ARTICLE IX 
Amendments 
§ 221-37. Authority to revise; when effective; justification; publichearing. 
Such regulations and inland wetland boundaries may be from time to timeamended, changed or repealed, by majority vote of the inland wetlandsagency, after a public hearing in relation thereto is held by the Commission, in accordance with the provisions of Section 8-7d of the ConnecticutGeneral Statutes. Regulations or boundaries or changes therein shallbecome effective at such time as is fixed by the Commission, provided a copy of such regulation, boundary or change shall be filed in the office ofthe town, city or borough clerk, as the case may be. Whenever an inlandwetlands agency makes a change in regulations or boundaries it shall state upon its records the reason why the change was made and shall providea copy of such regulation, boundary or change to the Commissioner ofEnvironmental Protection no later than 10 days after its adoption, provided failure to submit such regulation, boundary or change shall not impair thevalidity of such regulation, boundary or change. All petitions submitted inwriting and in a form prescribed by the inland wetlands agency, requesting a change in the regulations or the boundaries of an inland wetland and watercourse area, shall be considered at a public hearing held in accordance with the provisions of Section 8-7d of the Connecticut General Statutes. The failure of the inland wetlands agency to act within any timeperiod specified in this section, or any extension thereof, shall not bedeemed to constitute approval of the petition. 
§ 221-38. Amendment procedure. 
This Chapter, including wetlands boundaries as shown on the Inland Wetlands Map of Griswold, Connecticut, may, from time to time, be amended by the Commission in accordance with changes in the general statutes or regulations or guidelines of the State Department of Environmental Protection, or as new information regarding soils, hydrology or botanical or zoological species peculiar to inland wetlands and watercourses in the Town of Griswold becomes available. No changes oramendments shall be acted upon except after a public hearing conducted by the Commission. 
§ 221-39. Application to be judged using existing provisions. 
Any application for a permit submitted to the Commission shall be judged according to the regulations in force on the date of its submission. 
§ 221-40. Majority vote required; when effective; notice andpublication; public hearing. 
This chapter, including wetland boundaries as shown on the Inland Wetlands Map of Griswold, Connecticut, may be amended, changed, or 
198:213 

repealed by a majority vote of the Commission. These changes shall becomeeffective upon at such time as is fixed by the Commission, in accordance with Section 8-7d of the Connecticut General Statutes. Notice of such changes shall be filed in the office of the Town Clerk and publication of thedecision on such action shall be published in a newspaper having general circulation in the Town of Griswold. No change shall be acted upon exceptafter a public hearing conducted by the Commission. 
§ 221-41. Reasons for amendment to be included in record. 
Whenever the Commission makes changes in this chapter, includingwetland boundaries as shown on the Inland Wetlands Map of Griswold,Connecticut, it shall state in its records the reasons for such changes. 
§ 221-42. Petitions for amendment. 
Any person may petition for a change in this chapter or the boundariesof the Inland Wetlands Map of Griswold, Connecticut. All such petitions shall be received at a regularly scheduled meeting and shall be scheduledfor public hearing in accordance with the time requirements established in§ 221-17 of this chapter. Notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be published as outlined in § 221-17 of this chapter. A copy of the petitionfor change shall be filed in the office of the Town Clerk for public inspectionat least 10 days prior to the hearing. The Commission shall act upon the petitioned change within 35 days after the close of the public hearing. Inaddition, pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes Section 22a-42a(b), acopy of the notice and the proposed regulations or amendments thereto, except determinations of boundaries, shall be provided to the Commissionerof the Department of Environmental Protection no later than 10 days afterits adoption, provided failure to submit such regulation, boundary or change shall not impair the validity of such regulation, boundary or change. 
§ 221-43. Extension of periods for acting on petitions. 
The petitioner may consent to an extension of the periods provided for in § 221-42. The petitioner has the right to withdraw the petition at any timeprior to the Commission's decision. The failure of this Commission to actwithin any time period specified in this section, or any extension thereof, shall not be deemed to constitute approval of the petition. 
§ 221-44. Fee for petitions. 
See § 195-23. 
§ 221-45. Submission of material by petitioner. 
The petitioner may be requested by the Commission to submit additionalinformation as necessary to evaluate the petition. Where a change in a wetland boundary is involved, the testimony or written statement of a soil scientist, biologist, geologist, or other expert will be required by theCommission. 
198:214 

ARTICLE X 
Effect on Other Legislation 
§ 221-46. Other legislation not superseded. 
This chapter shall not supersede or rescind any other regulation or ordinance presently in force in the Town of Griswold. 
§ 221-47. Conflicts with other legislation. 
Where there is a conflict between the provisions of this chapter and those of any other applicable statute, ordinance, or regulation, the provisions ofthe statute, ordinance, or regulation which imposes the greatest restrictionon the use of the wetland or watercourse shall govern. 
198:215 

ARTICLE XI 
Records Retention and Disposition 
§ 221-48. Responsibilities. 
The Commission and the Town Clerk for the Town of Griswold shall retain complete administration records of Commission actions and dispose of suchrecords in accordance with the retention/disposition schedules set forthin Schedule M10 — Land Use and Development: Part 7: Inland Wetlands Records, effective February 2005. 
198:217 

Chapter 222 
SEWERS 

GENERAL REFERENCES 
Water Pollution Control Authority — See Ch. Mobile homes and trailers — See Ch. 176. 
111. 
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 202. Building construction — See Ch. 127. 
Inland wetlands and watercourses — See Ch. Fees — See Ch. 143. 221. 
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 151. Subdivision of land — See Ch. 223. 
222:218 

ARTICLE I 
General Provisions 
§ 222-1. Purpose. 
In order to ensure the proper removal and disposal of sewage and wastewaters within the Village of Glasgo discharging into the public sewersystem of Griswold, to ensure the proper operation and maintenance andprotection of the sewage works of the Town of Griswold at Glasgo and to provide for the keeping of adequate records and for the reasonable andproper supervision of the use and operation of such sewage works of theTown of Griswold, these rules and regulations are enacted, regulating and controlling the substances which may be discharged directly or indirectlyinto the public sewers and sewage works of the Town of Griswold andregulating and providing for the construction and maintenance of inspection, protective and treatment devices and facilities. 
§ 222-2. Definitions and word usage.
A. Unless the content specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of the terms used in this chapter shall be as follows: 
BOD (denoting "biochemical oxygen demand") — The quantity of oxygenutilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20° C., expressed in milligrams perliter (mg/l). The determination of "BOD" shall be in accordance withprocedures set forth in Standard Methods. 
BUILDING DRAIN — That part of the lowest horizontal piping of adrainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and otherdrainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five feet from the inner face of the buildingwall. 
BUILDING SEWER — The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal. 
CHLORINE REQUIREMENT — The amount of chlorine, in milligrams perliter, which must be added to sewage to produce a specified residual chlorine content or to meet the requirements of some other objective, inaccordance with procedures set forth in Standard Methods. 
COD (denoting "chemical oxygen demand") — The measure of the oxygen equivalent, expressed in milligrams per liter (mg/l), of thatportion of the organic matter in a sample that is susceptible to oxidationin accordance with procedures set forth in Standard Methods. 
COMBINED SEWER — A sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage. 
CONTRACTOR — An individual, partnership or corporation to whom or to which the State of Connecticut or its authorized agent shall haveissued a license as such to install and repair sewers and building sewers 
222:219 

during the period when such license is valid, and the proper agents andrepresentatives of such "contractor." 
DEP — The State of Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection. 
EASEMENT — Acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others. 
GARBAGE — Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking and dispensing of food and from the handling, storage and sale of produce. 
INDUSTRIAL WASTES — The liquid wastes from industrial manufacturing processes, trade or business, as distinct from sanitary sewage. 
INSPECTOR — An agent or employee of the Town of Griswold assignedby the Water Pollution Control Authority to examine and test material and work furnished by a contractor and to observe the construction ofa building sewer or any part thereof. Inspectors shall have no power towaive any part of these rules and regulations. 
NATURAL OUTLET — Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake orother body of surface or ground water. 
OWNER — Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation or group. 
PH — The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions inmoles per liter of solution. 
PUBLIC SEWER — A sewer in which all owners of abutting propertieshave equal rights and which is controlled by a water pollution controlauthority. 
SANITARY SEWER — A sewer which carries sewage and to which storm­, surface and ground waters are not intentionally admitted. 
SEWAGE (ALSO TERMED "SANITARY SEWAGE" AND "WASTEWATER") 
— A combination of the water-carried wastes from residences and the existing Post Office on 36 Water Street, together with such ground-,surface and storm waters as may be present. 
SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT — Any arrangement of devices and structures used for treating sewage. 
SEWAGE WORKS (SOMETIMES TERMED "SEWERAGE") — All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of sewage. 
SEWER — A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage. 
SHREDDED GARBAGE — The wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that has been shredded to such a degree thatall particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normallyprevailing in public sewers. 
222:220 

SLUG — Any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which inconcentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five timesthe average twenty-four-hour concentration or flow during normal operation. 
STANDARD METHODS — The examination and analytical procedures set forth in the most recent edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association and the Water Pollution Control Federation. 
STORM DRAIN (SOMETIMES TERMED "STORM SEWER") — A pipe or conduit which carries storm-and surface waters and drainage butexcludes sewage and industrial wastes, other than unpolluted cooling water. 
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — Solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in, water, sewage or other liquids and which are removableby laboratory filtering. 
TOWN — The Town of Griswold, County of New London, State of Connecticut. 
UNCONTAMINATED COOLING WATER — Process water in general used for cooling purposes which has such characteristics that it may bedischarged to natural receiving waters in accordance with all Town,state and federal regulations. 
WATERCOURSE — A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
WATER POLLUTION CONTROL AUTHORITY or AUTHORITY — The Water Pollution Control Authority of the Town of Griswold or its authorized agent or representative. 
WATER POLLUTION CONTROL PLANT — Any arrangement of devices and structures used for treating sewage.
B. "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive. 
222:221 

ARTICLE II 
Use Regulations 
§ 222-3. Prohibited discharges.
A. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, cellar drainage, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water, garbage or shredded garbageto any sanitary sewer. 
B. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the followingdescribed waters or wastes to any sanitary sewers:
(1) 
Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil 	or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas.

(2) 
Any waters containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases insufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any waste treatment process, constitute ahazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance or create anyhazard in the sewage works. 


§ 222-4. Use of storm drains for unpolluted drainage. 
Stormwater, uncontaminated cooling water and all other unpolluteddrainage shall be discharged to such pipes or conduits as are specifically designated as storm drains. 
§ 222-5. Approval of discharges required. 
The sewage works at Glasgo is designed for the collection and treatment of sanitary sewage. It is not designed for anything except normal sanitarywaste. Any discharge into the sanitary sewers other than that must beapproved by the Water Pollution Control Authority and the DEP. 
§ 222-6. Authorized users. 
The sewage works at Glasgo will provide for the existing 16 dwellings in theVillage of Glasgo, more specifically designated in the plans of the contract plans and specifications approved by the DEP letter of December 20, 1977.Any person proposing a new discharge into the system must obtain approvalfrom the Water Pollution Control Authority and the DEP before construction commences. 
222:223 

ARTICLE III 
Construction of Sewers and Connections 
§ 222-7. Permit required. 
No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereofwithout first obtaining a written permit from the Water Pollution ControlAuthority. 
§ 222-8. Permit procedure; fee. 
A permit must be obtained from the Authority before any person shallmake any excavation for or construct, install, lay, repair, alter, abandon or remove any sewer, sewer connection or appurtenance thereof in a publicstreet or private lands within the Village of Glasgo, which sewer is in anyway connected to or which discharges into any public sewer of the Village of Glasgo or is intended at some future time to be so connected or toso discharge. The permit application shall be supplemented by a buildingsewer plan(s), specifications or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the Water Pollution Control Authority. A permit applicationand inspection fee of $2 per dwelling unit for a sewer permit shall be paidto the Water Pollution Control Authority at the time the application is filed. 
§ 222-9. Expenses to be borne by owner; liability. 
All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of thebuilding sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the Town from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasionedby the installation of the building sewer. 
§ 222-10. Licenses; insurance.
A. The contractor shall furnish the information requested herein by theWater Pollution Control Authority before installing or doing any workon building sewers and shall hold a valid license appropriate to the work being done as required by the State of Connecticut OccupationalLicensing Boards.
B. The contractor shall be protected by and shall pay the premium on policies of insurance coverage for public liability, insuring him againstall liability to persons outside of his employ. As a minimum, liability coverage shall be $250,000 per person, $500,000 in total, per occurrence for bodily injury and $25,000 per any one unit of property,$50,000 in total, for all damage to property per occurrence, said policies to be insured by an insurance company licensed in the State of Connecticut. Special coverage for blasting shall be provided whenblasting will be performed. All insurance policies shall designate theTown of Griswold, the Water Pollution Control Authority and its agents as assureds. The contractor shall also carry workers' compensationinsurance in the amount of statutory limits. Certificates of insuranceshall be provided to the Water Pollution Control Authority. 
222:225 

§ 222-11. Inspections. 
All work performed under the provisions of these rules shall be subject to inspection by authorized representatives of the Water Pollution ControlAuthority. The contractor shall schedule his work so that inspections can bemade during the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. weekdays. Arrangements shall be made in advance with the Water Pollution Control Authority wheninspections are to be made outside the above hours, and the contractorshall pay for any overtime inspection costs. It is the responsibility of the contractor to notify the Water Pollution Control Authority when inspections are to be made. Inspections will be scheduled at the contractor's convenience, as far as possible consistent with inspections or work of other contractors. 
§ 222-12. Direction of work. 
Work on building sewers shall proceed from the sewer toward the structure involved. 
§ 222-13. Trenches. 
Trenching shall proceed in accordance with good practice. The trench shall be of ample width at the bottom to accommodate the pipe to be placed. 
§ 222-14. Sheeting. 
When sheeting is necessary to ensure proper installation and safety of personnel, the public or property, the contractor shall furnish and placesuch sheeting in accordance with good practice. 
§ 222-15. Trenches to be dry. 
Where water is encountered in a trench, sufficient sumps shall be constructed and adequate pumping equipment made available so that theinstallation of any building sewer or appurtenance shall be done in the dry. In no event shall water be allowed to enter the sewer or building sewer fromthe trench. 
§ 222-16. Backfill materials. 
If at any time during excavation the material being excavated is in theopinion of an inspector not suitable for backfill, such material shall beremoved from the site. Unsatisfactory material shall include but not limited to boulders, clay, muck and frozen ground. 
§ 222-17. Construction specifications. 
The size, slope, alignment and materials of construction of a building sewer and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing,testing and backfilling the trench shall all conform to the requirements ofthe Building and Plumbing Code34 or other applicable rules and regulations 
222:226 

of the Town of Griswold. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the American Society for Testing Materials and the WaterPollution Control Federation Manual of Practice No. 9 shall apply. 
§ 222-18. Proximity to wells. 
No building sewer shall be constructed within 25 feet of a water supply well.If a building sewer is constructed within 25 to 75 feet of a water supplywell, it shall be constructed of extra-heavy cast-iron pipe (ASTM 74-69) with leaded joints, ductile iron or PVC (SDR 35), whose infiltration/exfiltrationrate shall not exceed 25 gallons per diameter per mile per day. 
§ 222-19. Method of making connections. 
Each sewer shall first be connected to the public sewer or the buildingsewer which has been constructed to the owner's curbline and then be extended toward the structure to be served. 
§ 222-20. Pipes to be cleaned before placement. 
All pipe must be cleaned before placing. 
§ 222-21. Changes in pipe alignment. 
Changes in alignment shall be made only with properly curved fittings.Fittings with bends greater than one-eighth (1/8) shall not be used. 
§ 222-22. Cleanouts and manholes. 
Cleanouts or manholes shall be installed at no greater than three-hundred­foot intervals in long sewers. 
§ 222-23. Joints. 
All joints shall be properly made in the manner recommended by themanufacturer of the pipe being used to eliminate all sources of leakage. 
§ 222-24. Inspection prior to connection. 
The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the Water PollutionControl Authority when the building sewer is ready for inspection andconnection to the public sewer. The connection and testing shall be made under the supervision of the Water Pollution Control Authority or its representative. Under no circumstances shall backfill be permitted aroundand over the building sewer pipe until the pipe, joints, alignment, elevations and workmanship have been inspected, tested and approved by the inspector. 

34.Editor's Note: See Ch. 127, Building Construction. 
222:227 
§ 222-25. Backfilling procedure. 
Each installed building sewer shall be covered with hand-placed sand or gravel approved by the inspector, to a depth of at least one foot over thepipe, prior to backfilling the remainder of the trench. 
§ 222-26. Compaction of backfill material. 
The contractor shall be responsible for the satisfactory compaction of thebackfill material so as to avoid excessive future settlement. 
§ 222-27. Guarding of excavations; restoration of public property. 
All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guardedwith barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets,sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the Town. 
§ 222-28. Unauthorized connections. 
At the time of installing the building sewer it shall be the responsibility of the contractor to investigate the existing plumbing and disconnect allunauthorized connections. Roof drains, yard drains, cellar drains, coolingwater and all other sources of water other than sanitary sewage cannot be accepted into Town sanitary sewers and must be disposed of by meansapproved by others. The contractor shall be prepared to demonstrate tothe inspector that all such unauthorized connections have been properly diverted. 
§ 222-29. Failure of contractor to comply. 
Failure of a contractor to comply with any of these rules and regulations shall be cause for the Authority not issuing further permits to him forinstalling building sewers. 
§ 222-30. Separate sewers required; exception. 
A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for everybuilding, except that where one building stands at the rear of another on aninterior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the frontbuilding may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered asone building sewer, but the Town of Griswold does not and will not assume any obligation or responsibility for damage caused by or resulting from anysuch single connection aforementioned. 
§ 222-31. Use of old building sewers. 
Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings onlywhen they are found, on examination and test by the Water Pollution ControlAuthority, to meet all requirements of this chapter. 
222:228 

§ 222-32. Connection specifications. 
The connection of the building sewer into the public shall conform to the requirements of the Building and Plumbing Code35 or other applicable rulesand regulations of the Town of Griswold or the procedures set forth inappropriate specifications of the American Society for Testing Materials and the Water Pollution Control Federation Manual of Practice No. 9. All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight and verified by propertesting. 

35.Editor's Note: See Ch. 127, Building Construction. 
222:229 
ARTICLE IV 
Damage to Sewage Works 
§ 222-33. Tampering prohibited; penalties for offenses. 
No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or remove any manhole cover or tamperwith any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the sewage works. No person shall deposit in any sewer manhole or appurtenance refuse of any kind. Any person violating this provision shallbe subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly conduct. 
222:231 

ARTICLE V 
Powers and Duties of Authority 
§ 222-34. Right of entry; easements.
A. The 	Water Pollution Control Authority and/or a duly authorized representative of the Authority, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter all properties only for thepurposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with the provisions of these regulations.
B. The 	Water Pollution Control Authority and/or a duly authorized representative of the Authority, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter all private properties throughwhich the Town holds a duly negotiated easement only for the purposesof inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, construction, repair and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying within saideasement. An entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved. 
222:233 

ARTICLE VI 
Enforcement 
§ 222-35. Notice of violation. 
Any person found to be violating any provision of these rules and regulations, except Article IV, shall be served by the Water Pollution ControlAuthority with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit, not to exceed 10 days, for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated insuch notice, permanently cease all violations. 
§ 222-36. Penalties for offenses. 
Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit providedfor in § 222-35 or who violates the provisions of Article IV shall be guiltyof a misdemeanor and, on conviction thereof, shall be fined in an amount not exceeding $100 for each violation. Each day in which any such violationshall continue shall be deemed a separate offense. 
§ 222-37. Liability. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall becomeliable to the Town and the Water Pollution Control Authority for anyexpense, loss or damage occasioned the Town by reason of such violation. 
222:235 

Chapter 223 
SUBDIVISION OF LAND 

GENERAL REFERENCES 
Aquifer Protection Agency — See Ch. 6. Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 202 
Planning and Zoning Commission — See Ch.Inland wetlands and watercourses — See Ch. 

68. 221. 
Regional Council of Governments — See Ch. Sewers — See Ch. 222. 

78. Zoning — See Ch. 224. Building construction — See Ch. 127. 
Planning and Zoning Commission Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 151. Bylaws — See Ch. 232. 
Mobile homes and trailers — See Ch. 176. 	Jewett City Zoning Regulations — See Ch. A242. 
Chapter 224 
ZONING 

GENERAL REFERENCES 

Planning and Zoning Commission — See Ch. 	Inland wetlands and watercourses — See Ch. 
68. 	221. 

Zoning Board of Appeals — See Ch. 115. 	Subdivision of land — See Ch. 223. 
Building construction — See Ch. 127. 	Planning and Zoning Commission Bylaws — See Ch. 232. Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 151. Jewett City Zoning Regulations — See Ch. Mobile homes and trailers — See Ch. 176. A242. 


Division 3, Bylaws 
Chapter 231 
CONSERVATION COMMISSION BYLAWS 

GENERAL REFERENCES 
Conservation Commission — See Ch. 18. Meetings — See Ch. 56. 
Code of Ethics — See Ch. 35. Inland wetlands and watercourses — See Ch. 

221. 
§ 231-1. Purpose and statutory authorization. 
The objectives and purposes of the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Conservation Commission of Griswold are those set forth in Chapter 97 
222:236 
of the Connecticut General Statutes, Section 7-131a, and Chapter 440,Section 221-36 through 221-45, as amended, and those powers and duties delegated to the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Conservation Commission by the aforementioned statutes by ordinance enacted at theTown Meeting of November 18, 1971,36 and in accordance with the above enabling law. 
§ 231-2. Title. 
The Commission shall be known as the "Griswold Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Conservation Commission." 
§ 231-3. Offices; records. 
The office of the Griswold Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Conservation Commission shall be the Town offices where all Commission records shall be kept. Copies of all official documents, records, maps, etc., will be filed orrecorded in the Planning and Community Development office. 
§ 231-4. Membership.
A. Membership shall consist of seven regular members and three alternatemembers initially appointed by the Board of Selectmen as established by the aforementioned ordinance and subsequently appointed as follows:four members to four-year terms; and three members to two-year terms.Each appointee shall be appointed for four years after the initial term. Alternate members are appointed by the Board of Selectmen for two-year terms.
B. Alternate members shall be appointed by the Chairman to act as full members upon the absence or disqualification of one or more full members. During the hearing of an application, during a public hearing or otherwise, alternate members may ask questions or otherwise participate in the proceeding. Upon the closing of a public hearingor entry into deliberations for a decision on an application, alternatemembers may no longer speak or otherwise participate in such deliberations unless seated as full members. Once seated for deliberations on an application, the alternate member shall continue tobe seated for that application until a decision is made thereon. Alternate members shall be appointed in rotation for an entire meeting or forindividual agenda items as the Chairman considers appropriate underthe circumstances. 
C. 	The Commission, by a majority vote, may accept honorary and/orassociate members to the Commission who would serve in an advisorycapacity. 
D. 	Six months of consecutive unexcused absence from regular meetings ofthe Commission shall constitute a voluntary resignation of appointmentby the absentee member. 
36.Editor's Note: See Ch. 18, Conservation Commission, Art. I. 
222:237 
§ 231-5. Officers; staff. [Amended 2-15-2018] 
The officers of the Commission shall consist of a Chairperson, Vice Chairperson, and a Secretary-Treasurer.
A. Chairperson.
(1) 
The Chairperson shall preside at all meetings of the Commission and shall have the duties normally conferred by parliamentary usage onsuch officers. The Chairperson shall have the authority to appointcommittees, certify expenditure of funds up to $50 without prior approval of the Commission, call special meetings, and generallyperform other duties as may be prescribed in these bylaws.

(2) 
The Chairperson shall be a member of the Commission. He/she shall have the privilege of discussing all matters before the Commissionand of voting thereon.


B. Vice Chairperson. The Vice Chairperson shall perform any and all duties of the Chairperson in the absence or disqualification of the Chairperson. 
C. 	Secretary.
(1) 
The Secretary shall attend to correspondence of the Commission, and perform such other duties as are normally carried out by aSecretary.

(2) 
In the absence of Secretary because of illness 	or personal or disqualification reasons, the Chairperson shall appoint a SecretaryPro Tem. 


D. 	Recording Secretary. The Recording Secretary shall keep the minutes and records of the Commission and may prepare the agenda of regularand special meetings. 
§ 231-6. Election of officers.
A. An annual organization meeting shall be held at the regular Decembermeeting at which time officers shall be elected. A quorum must bepresent before election of officers can take place. 
B. Nominations shall be made from the floor at the annual organizationmeeting, and election of the officers specified in § 231-5 shall followimmediately thereafter. 
C. 	A candidate receiving a majority vote from the membership of theCommission will be declared elected and shall serve for one year or untilhis successor shall take office. New officers shall take office immediately upon election at the annual meeting.
D. 	Vacancies in offices shall be filled by a special election within theGriswold Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Conservation Commission at its next regular meeting.
E. Removal of officers may be undertaken by written complaint of 	a majority of full membership. After seven days' notice and opportunity to be heard by a full membership at a special meeting, such officer may bedivested from office by a majority vote of members other than himself/herself. 
F. 	Resignations from the Commission shall be in written form and transmitted to the Chairperson who will then forward the same to theBoard of Selectmen. 
222:238 

G. 	Vacancies on the Commission shall be filled by appointment made by theBoard of Selectmen in accordance with the Town Code. New members shall finish the unexpired term of the member replaced. Vacancies shallbe deemed to be effective upon acceptance of a letter of resignation bythe Commission or in the case of resignation under § 231-4D, upon the vote of the Commission to accept such voluntary resignation.
H. No alternate member shall serve as an officer of this Commission, other than as Secretary-Treasurer Pro Tem in accordance with § 231-5C. 
§ 231-7. Meetings; quorum; notices.
A. Regular meetings will be held on the third Thursday of each month, ata time to be determined by the Commission, in the Town Hall or other location as may be determined by the members of the Commission. Inthe event of conflict with holidays or other events, a majority at anymeeting may change the date of said meeting. The Recording Secretary shall notify the membership in advance of all such meetings. Notice ofsuch change will be posted in the Town Hall. Anyone on the agenda willalso be notified. 
B. A majority of the membership of the Commission shall constitute 	a quorum. A quorum is necessary to transact a business meeting.
C. 	The notice of a meeting, other than a regular meeting, shall specify the purpose of such a meeting, and no other business may be considered.Special meetings shall be called by the Commission and/or the Chairperson and posted and/or noticed by the Recording Secretary. 
D. 	All Commission meetings shall be open to the public when in session andshall be closed to the public for executive session when so voted by themajority of the Commission members present and voting. 
E. Unless otherwise specified, Robert's Rules of Order shall govern theproceedings at the meeting of the Commission. 
§ 231-8. Conflicts of interest. 
In accordance with Chapter 35 of the Code of the Town of Griswold, entitled"Ethics, Code of," in any matter coming before the Commission in whicha member of the Commission has a personal or financial interest, that member shall be disqualified from voting on that matter. 
§ 231-9. Order of business. 
Unless otherwise determined by the Chairperson, the suggested order of business at regular meetings shall be as follows:
A. 	Call to order. 
B. 	Roll call and determination of a quorum. 
C. 	Applications.
D. 	Written complaints. [Amended 2-15-2018] 
E. 	Communications. [Amended 2-15-2018] 
F. 	Applications. [Amended 2-15-2018] 
G. 	Reports from enforcement officer. [Amended 2-15-2018] 
H. 	Old business. [Amended 2-15-2018] 
I. 	New business. [Amended 2-15-2018] 
222:239 

J. 	Reports from Commission members. [Amended 2-15-2018] 
K. 	Conservation Commission's matters. 
L. 	Adjournment. [Added 2-15-2018]
M. Aquifer Protection Agency. [Added 2-15-2018] 
§ 231-10. Additional employees; enforcing agent.
A. Within the limits of the funds available for its use, the Commission mayemploy such staff personnel and/or consultants as it sees fit to aid the Commission in its work. Appointments shall be made by a majority voteof the entire membership. The Chairperson may be authorized to signcontracts for employing personnel and contracting for services as might be approved by the Commission.
B. Enforcing agent.
(1) 
The Commission, by majority vote, shall appoint an inland wetlands and watercourses enforcing agent who shall perform such dutiesas deemed necessary by the Commission. The enforcing agent shallserve for one year and shall be appointed at the annual organization meeting.

(2) 
The duties of the enforcement officer shall include but not be limitedto the following: 

(a) 
Personally 	investigating complaints and reporting to the Commission on any activity alleged to be in conflict with theregulations of the Commission. 

(b) 
Inspecting and providing assurance to the Commission that theproper soil erosion and sedimentation control measures are being employed on permitted projects and that said measures are properly installed.

(c) 
Inspecting and providing assurance to the Commission that allstipulations as outlined in official decisions rendered by the Commission have been met by the applicant.

(d) 
Provision of an oral report to the Commission during the regularmeeting on any matter which the enforcement officer, in his/her professional opinion, feels the Commission should be aware of tothe best performance of his/her duties. Should the enforcementofficer anticipate absence from the next regular meeting, a written report shall be submitted to the membership five daysprior to the regular meeting. 


§ 231-11. Committees. 
Committees may be appointed by the Chairperson for purposes and termswhich the Commission approves. Chairpersons of such committees mustbe duly appointed members of the Commission. However, nonmembers may serve on such committees or subcommittees to perform specific tasks.It is the policy of the Commission to encourage participation from thecommunity. 
222:240 

§ 231-12. Public relations. 
The Chairperson or duly appointed Commission member or staff personnel shall act as public relations or publicity director for the Commission. His/her duties include the preparation of all news releases to be distributedto the communications media. All information releases shall reflect the thinking of the majority of the Commission. 
§ 231-13. Amendments. 
Bylaws must be reviewed by the Commission at least annually at a regular or special meeting. These bylaws may be amended by a two-thirds vote ofthe entire membership of the Commission, only after the proposed changehas been read and discussed at a previous regular meeting. 
Chapter 232 
PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION BYLAWS 
GENERAL REFERENCES 
Meetings — See Ch. 56. 	Subdivision of land — See Ch. 223. 

Planning and Zoning Commission — See Ch. Zoning — See Ch. 224. 
68. 
§ 232-1. Purpose; statutory authority. 
The following bylaws are adopted by the Planning and Zoning Commission of the Town of Griswold to facilitate the performance of its duties and theexercising of its powers pursuant to Chapter 126 of the Connecticut GeneralStatutes.37 
§ 232-2. Officers.
A. Selection. At the first meeting of each calendar year, the Commissionshall elect from its membership a Chairman, Vice Chairman and Secretary. [Amended 3-10-1997]
B. Tenure. The Chairman and Vice Chairman shall take office immediatelyfollowing their election and shall hold office for a term of one year oruntil their successors are selected and assume office. 
C. 	Vacancies. In the event of a vacancy in any of the above offices, theCommission shall appoint one of its members for the unexpired portionof the term. 
§ 232-3. Duties of officers.
A. Chairman. The Chairman shall preside at all meetings and hearings,appoint committees and perform such other duties as may be ordered by 

37.Editor's Note: See Connecticut General Statutes Section 8-18 et seq. 
222:241 
the Commission and, with the Town Planner, shall certify all maps, plans,records and reports of the Commission. He shall have the privilege of discussing all matters before the Commission and voting thereon.
B. Vice Chairman. The Vice Chairman shall act in the capacity of theChairman in the event of his absence. 
C. 	Secretary. The Secretary shall act in the capacity of the Chairman andVice Chairman in the event of their absence. The Secretary shall perform such other duties as the Chairman may direct. [Amended 3-10-1997] 
D. 	Town Planner. The Town Planner shall act in the capacity of Corresponding Secretary to the Commission and shall keep a written record of all business transacted by the Commission. The Town Plannershall review all matters that come before the Commission and shall prepare reports accordingly. The Town Planner shall also perform such other duties as the Commission may direct. [Amended 3-10-1997]
E. Recording Secretary. The Recording Secretary shall keep the minutesand records of the Commission. The Recording Secretary shall alsoperform all clerical duties for the Commission, Town Planner and Planning and Zoning Office. [Added 3-10-1997] 
§ 232-4. Meetings; quorum.
A. Regular meetings.
(1) 
Regular meetings of the Commission shall be held on the secondMonday of each month at 7:00 p.m. in the office of the Planning and Zoning Commission. [Amended 3-12-2018]

(2) 
When the regular meeting falls on a holiday, the meeting shall beheld on the following day.

(3) 
Notice of regular meetings shall be sent to members by the Town Planner at least seven days prior to such meeting, along with anagenda for the proposed meeting. [Amended 3-12-2018]


B. Special meetings. Special meetings may be called by the Chairman atany time or may be called at the written request of three members of theCommission. 
C. 	Emergency meetings.
(1) 
Emergency meetings may be called by the Chairman at any timeor may be called at the written request of three members of the Commission. 

(2) 
Notice of emergency meetings shall be given to all members andshall state the purpose, place and time of such meeting. 

(3) 
The minutes of said meeting shall be filed within 72 hours with theTown Clerk of the Town of Griswold. 


D. 	Public meetings. 
(1) 
All meetings of the Commission shall be open to the public; however,the Commission reserves the right to hold a closed executive sessionfor the purpose of preliminary discussion, the presentation of preliminary consultant planning progress reports and for the consideration of other tentative or preliminary matters.

(2) 
No regulation, rule or formal action of any kind shall be adopted in executive session. 

222:242 


E. 
Quorum. Three members of the Commission shall constitute a quorumfor the transaction of all business or the taking of official actions. Whenever a quorum is not present at a regular or special meeting, thosepresent may adjourn the meeting to another day or hold the meeting forthe purpose of considering such matters as are on the agenda. No action taken at such meeting shall be final or official unless and until verified ata subsequent meeting at which a quorum is present by approval of theminutes of the meeting at which a quorum was not present. 

F. 	
Voting.

(1) 
Voting shall be by voice unless a request is made by a Commissionmember that the Commission be individually polled. 

(2) 
No motion or vote shall be adopted by the Commission unless it shallhave received the affirmative votes of at least three members of the Commission or as otherwise specified in the Connecticut General Statutes. 

(3) 
Ex officio members have the same status as appointed members,except that they will not be entitled to a voting privilege. 

G. 	
Order of business. The order of business for a regular or special meetingshall be: 

(1) 
Call to order. 

(2) 
Roll call. 

(3) 
Determination of quorum.

(4) 
Approval of minutes of preceding meeting. 

(5) 
Communications. 

(6) 
Reports.

(7) 
Unfinished business. 

(8) 
New business: 

(a) 
Subdivisions.

(b) 
Site plans. 

(c) 
Zoning.

(d) 
Comprehensive plan.

(e) 
Other matters. 



(9) 
Scheduling of items for public hearing.

(10) 
Adjournment. 


§ 232-5. Hearings.
A. Scheduling. 	All public hearings shall be held separately from the regularly scheduled meetings of the Commission. The time and place ofsuch hearings may be established by the Chairman at any time following a determination that a sufficient number of members will be in attendance. 
B. Hearings regarding subdivisions. All public hearings regarding the adoption of subdivision regulations or subdivision maps, or amendments or changes thereto, subdivisions, resubdivisions or revisions of subdivisions shall be held in accordance with the provisions of Section 8-25 of the Connecticut General Statutes. 
C. 	Hearings regarding the Comprehensive Plan. All public hearingsregarding the adoption of the Comprehensive Plan or any part thereof 
222:243 

shall be held in accordance with the provisions of Section 8-23 of theConnecticut General Statutes. 
D. 	In addition to those required by law, the Commission may, at its discretion, hold public hearings on other matters when it decides thatsuch hearings will be in the public interest. 
§ 232-6. Committees.
A. Standing committees. The following committees may be appointed bythe Chairman: 
(1) 
Subdivision Committee. Duties shall be to examine all applicationsfor subdivisions, etc., inspect the site and make recommendations tothe Commission thereon. 

(2) 
Zoning Committee. Duties are to review all applications for rezoning or for special use permits, inspect the site and make recommendations to the Commission thereon. 

(3) 
The Planning Commission shall work closely with the Town Plannerin matters pertaining to the Comprehensive Plan and Plan of Conservation and Development and make recommendations to the Commission thereon. [Amended 3-12-2018]


B. Tenure. Standing committees shall be appointed for one year and shall consist of three members. Vacancies shall immediately be filled by theChairman. 
C. 	Special committees. Special committees may be appointed by the Chairman with the approval of the Commission for such purposes andterms as he may specify. 
§ 232-7. Amendments; suspension.38 
A. Amendments. These bylaws may be amended at any regular or specialmeeting by a minimum of three affirmative votes, provided that theamendment shall be introduced at a regular meeting at least 30 days prior to the meeting at which action to amend is made.
B. Suspension. The Commission may temporarily suspend any of thesebylaws by a unanimous vote of the members present. 
Appendix 


Chapter A241 
SPECIAL ACTS 
38.Editor’s Note: Former § 232-7, Community Development Action Plan, was repealed3-12-2018 by the Planning and Zoning Commission. The Commission also redesignated §232-8 as § 232-7. 
A241:244 
§ A241-1. Resolve Incorporating the Town of Griswold. 
Resolved by this Assembly, That all that part of Preston lying within thefollowing limits, viz., Beginning at the mouth of Broad brook, so called thence a true east course to the division line between the first and second societies in said town; thence on said division line to the town of North Stonington, thence on the line of the town of North Stonington to the line of the town of Voluntown, thence on the line of Voluntown to the line of the town of Plainfield, thence on said line to the town of Canterbury, thenceon said Canterbury to Quinebaug River, thence on Quinebaug River to the place of beginning, together with all the inhabitants residing in saidlimits, be and the same hereby is incorporated into a distinct town by thename of "Griswold," and the inhabitants thereof shall have and enjoy all the powers, privileges and immunities of other towns in this state, with theright of sending one Representative to the General Assembly of this state,and said town of Griswold shall pay its proportion of all charges, expences and debts, already accrued by and now due from said town of Preston, alsoits proportion of the expence, cost, and charges of building one and thatthe next new bridge over Shetucket river, at such time and place, as is or may be directed by the proper authority, which proportions of expences,debts, costs and charges, shall be ascertained by the list of 1815, perfectedin 1816. And the poor now supported by said town of Preston, who belong to that part now incorporated into the town of Griswold shall be deemedinhabitants of said town of Griswold and be maintained accordingly. 
And the Town and Freeman's meeting of said town of Griswold, shall beholden at the meetinghouse in said limits belonging to the EcclesiasticalSociety therein, and the collector of the State tax for the year 1815, already appointed by the town of Preston, is hereby authorized to collect of theinhabitants of said town of Griswold, their proportion of said tax, accordingto the list on which it was laid in the same manner as if this resolve had not passed. 
And the first town meeting in said town of Griswold, shall be holden atsaid meeting house on the last Tuesday of November next, and AndrewHuntington of said town of Griswold, shall be the moderator of said town meeting, and said town shall have and enjoy at said first town meeting, andat all other meetings, the powers and privileges of other towns, and theofficers chosen at said first meeting, shall hold their offices until the next annual meeting, and said Andrew Huntington shall warn said first meetingby setting up a notification thereof on the public signpost in said Griswold,at least eight days before said last Tuesday of November, and in case of absence, death, or incapacity of the said Huntington, the duties herebyassigned to said Huntington, may and shall be performed by Moses Lester,Esquire, of said Town of Griswold. 
Provided always, that said town of Griswold shall be liable to maintainall such town poor of said town of Preston as are or may be now absent therefrom, who may hereafter be chargeable, provided such poor personor person, when he, she, or they left said town, resided or dwelt in suchpart of said town of Preston, as is by this resolve hereby incorporated. 
A241:245 

Passed October 1815. 
§ A241-2. Resolve Establishing the Dividing Line Between theSchool Society of Griswold and First School Society in Preston. 
Resolved by this Assembly, That the line which divides the towns of Prestonand Griswold, shall hereafter be the dividing line between the first school society in Preston and the school society in Griswold; and that so much ofthe first school society in Preston as lies within the town of Griswold, be,and the same hereby is annexed to the school society in Griswold. 
Passed May 1832. 
§ A241-3. Resolve Authorizing the Jewett City Fire Engine Company. 
Resolved by this Assembly, That the Selectmen of Griswold, be, and they hereby are authorized to meet at the dwelling house of John Johnson insaid village, on the twentieth day of June, A.D. 1832, then and there toenlist a Fire Company, which shall be called The "Jewett City Fire-Engine Company," and shall consist of not more than sixteen persons, twelve ofwhom only shall be taken from the ranks of the militia, and all shallbe residents in said Griswold, and within the distance of three-fourths of a mile from the meeting house in said village; with power to fill allvacancies that may happen, by voluntary enlistment, which Company whenso enlisted, shall have power to appoint the necessary officers for said Company; with power of making by-laws respecting the times and places ofmeeting, and other concerns of said Company; and said Company shall beentitled to all the powers and privileges which are granted to Fire Engine Companies in this State, except the members thereof shall not be excusedfrom their poll tax. 
Provided, that this grant shall be subject to be altered, amended or repealed, at the pleasure of the General Assembly. 
Passed May 1832. 
§ A241-4. Changing the Boundary Line Between the Towns ofLisbon and Griswold. 
Resolved by this Assembly, That a certain island in the Quinebaug river,containing about twenty-two acres, more or less, situated in the town ofGriswold, and county of New London, and owned and occupied by Sylvester 
B. Woodmancy, of the town of Lisbon, in said county, be and the sameis hereby set to the town of Lisbon, aforesaid, so that the boundary linebetween the aforesaid towns of Griswold, and Lisbon shall be and remain on the east side of said island as the main channel of the said Quinebaugnow runs, instead of on the west side as formerly. 
Approved June 14, 1867. 
A241:246 

§ A241-5. An Act Relating to Electors and Elections in the Town ofGriswold. 
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives in GeneralAssembly convened: 
SECTION 1. That the town of Griswold, in New London county, be, and thesame hereby is, divided into two voting districts for the accommodation of the electors therein at electors' meeting, and also for the purposesof the annual town meetings for the choice of town officers, as followsnamely: said division line shall commence at the Preston town line on the road westerly from the residence of George D. Palmer in said town of Griswold thence following said road in a northerly direction to the roadleading easterly by Shepard Brown's thence following said road easterly and northerly by the Woodword school house to the four corners westerlyof the house of the late Calvin Woodward thence westerly and northerly byhouses of David A. and Samuel Geer, the Brewster school house, the houses of John D. Geer and Dwight T. Corey to the Plainfield town line east of thehouse of Joseph Rood. 
SECTION 2. All that part of the territory of the town of Griswold lyingsoutherly and easterly of said above described roads, shall be and remainthe first district, and the electors dwelling upon said territory shall vote at Pachaug. All the territory of said town lying northerly and westerly ofsaid above described roads shall be and remain the second district, and the electors dwelling upon said territory shall vote at Jewett City. 
SECTION 3. The annual meetings of said town for the choice of selectmen, town clerk, registrar, treasurer, treasurer of the school fund, collector oftown taxes, constable, grand jurors, school visitors, assessors, board ofrelief, and registrars of voters, shall be held on the first Monday of October in each year, and said officers shall be chosen by ballot on one generalticket. At said annual town meetings, after the ballot boxes are closed inboth districts as hereinafter provided, a town meeting shall be held at the place of voting in the first district, by the voters of the town of Griswoldthere present, for the purpose of electing such officers as are not requiredby law or a vote of the town to be chosen by ballot, hearing the annual accounts, laying taxes, and for transacting the ordinary business of thetown. The ballot boxes at the annual town meetings for the election of theofficers by ballot, shall be open in said districts for the reception of ballots at eight o'clock in the forenoon, and shall be closed at two o'clock in theafternoon, and at electors' meetings the ballot boxes shall be opened insaid districts at eight o'clock in the forenoon, and shall be closed at five o'clock in the afternoon. 
A241:247 

SECTION 4. The selectmen shall provide a suitable and convenient placefor voting, and the necessary ballot boxes for the use of the voters in eachof said districts at said electors' and annual town meetings, and shall in the warning of such meetings give in addition to the notice now requiredby law, that ballot boxes be opened in each of said voting districts for thereception of votes, and shall specify therein the particular place of voting in each district, together with the boundaries of each district and the timeof opening and closing the ballot boxes; and such warning shall be postedat the place of voting and also on the public sign-post nearest the place of voting in each district, or if in either of said districts there shall be nopublic sign-post, then in some public and conspicuous place in said district. 
SECTION 5. At said annual town meetings those persons only may votewho were registered on the revised registry lists of voters as entitled tovote at electors' meetings in said town, last completed according to law, and every person so registered shall be permitted to vote; provided, that inaddition to being otherwise qualified, he shall have statedly resided in thedistrict in which he offers to vote, and shall have had his regular lodging place therein for thirty days previous to his offering to vote; provided,that no one shall lose his right to vote in the district of his last previousresidence in less than thirty days from his removal, if he still resides in the town. And every person so offering to vote may be challenged as to hissaid residence and lodging place in said district, and in such case he shall,before he votes, prove his said residence and lodging place in said district, by the testimony, under oath, of at least one other elector. And any electorof said town may challenge for said causes and the moderator of the polland the district registrars, or a majority of them, shall thereupon hear said party challenged and all such witnesses as may be offered for or against hisright to so vote, under oath, and shall decide upon the right of the personso challenged to vote, and said moderator and said registrars, and each of them, are hereby empowered to administer the oath to said party andsuch witnesses as may be offered; and any person who shall swear falselyin such examination shall be deemed guilty of perjury. 
A241:248 

SECTION 6. The registrars of voters chosen at said annual town meetingsfor said voting districts shall be electors entitled to vote in the district forwhich they are elected. It shall be the duty of each registrar, immediately after his election, to appoint a deputy registrar; and in case said registrarshall from any cause be unable to perform the duties of his office, then thedeputy registrar shall perform the duties of the office of registrar, during the time of inability of the registrar to act, and not otherwise; and in caseof the death or resignation of the registrar, then said deputy registrarshall become the registrar, and shall immediately appoint another person to the office of deputy registrar; and in case of the death or resignation ofany deputy, the registrar shall immediately appoint another person to theoffice of deputy registrar; all which said appointments shall be immediately deposited with the town clerk, and by him duly recorded, provided, thatthe registrars and deputy registrars now in office in said town, or theirsuccessors in office,with the assistance of town other deputy registrars which such registrars are hereby empowered and directed to appoint forthat purpose in the mode now prescribed by law for the appointment ofdeputy registrars of voters, shall discharge the duties prescribed by this act for district registrars, of said town, until the first Monday of October,1871; and said registrars shall make said appointment of two other deputyregistrars and the town clerk and the selectmen shall assign the districts in which said registrars and deputy registrars shall serve respectively towit; three in each district, at least thirty days before said first Monday ofOctober, 1871. 
SECTION 7. At said annual town meetings for the choice of officers, thereshall be appointed by the registrars in each district from the electors in said district, a ballot box tender and a substitute ballot box tender in said district, which officers, as well as the district registrars aforesaid, shallbe duly sworn to a faithful discharge of their duties; and said box tenders or substitute box tenders in their respective districts, shall at such annualtown meetings, receive and deposit or permit the voters to deposit in theirrespective boxes, the votes offered in accordance with law, and said votes, if folded when offered, shall not be opened by the box tender or any personuntil counted, and said votes shall not be counted until the ballot box is closed, and said registrars shall, in their respective districts, choose either the box tender or the substitute box tender for said district to be the moderator of the poll in said district, who shall be sworn and have andexercise the powers and duties of presiding officer in like cases. In case said registrars shall name different persons for box tender, for substitutebox tender, or for moderator, and cannot agree in designating the same,they shall be assigned by said registrars by lot from the persons so named. No person shall have charge of any ballot box during the taking of anyvote except the particular persons appointed thereto, and no person who isknown to be a candidate for any office, except said registrars, shall be put in charge of the box in which said candidate is to be voted for, or take partin the count of the votes in such box, and any violation of this section byany candidate for office shall render the votes cast for him void. 
A241:249 

SECTION 8. The town clerk of said town shall, at least thirty days beforethe day of holding such annual town meeting for the choice of townofficers, prepare (from) the registry list of the electors of said town, as last completed, written or printed copies of the list of electors in each district,with the boundaries of said district specified and annexed thereto, whichshall be certified to by him as correct copies one of which shall be delivered by him to each of the registrars in each of said districts, to be used bythem as check lists at said annual town meetings; and said registrars shallcheck thereon the names of all persons voting at said annual meeting, and said list so checked shall, within twenty-four hours after the ballot box isclosed in each district, be lodged by said registrars in the office of thetown clerk, and there preserved; and said town clerk, for his services in preparing said copies, and said registrars for checking the same, shall bepaid a reasonable compensation by said town. 
SECTION 9. Immediately after the ballot boxes are closed at said electorsand annual town meetings the registrars in the second district shall, withthe assistance of such other persons as they may select, proceed to sort and count the ballots which have been given, and said registrars in saiddistrict shall make a true certificate of all the ballots given in their saidsecond district for the respective officers voted for, and shall forthwith transmit their said certificate, together with the ballots received, andthe boxes containing the same, with the list of voters as checks, to themoderator of the first district, who, having ascertained the result of the ballots in the whole town, as given in the two districts thereof, shall declarethe same in open town meeting in said first district, and shall make suchreturn thereof as the law directs. 
SECTION 10. If any person shall, without just or reasonable cause, neglect or refuse to perform any of the duties required of him by this act,appertaining to said annual town meeting, or if he shall be guilty of fraudin performing such duties, or if any person shall make any alteration by addition, erasure, or otherwise in the registry lists herein provided to beused at the annual town meetings for the choice of officers; or if any personin charge of a ballot box shall neglect or refuse to receive and deposit in such box any vote offered at said annual town meetings, as provided in thisact, or shall receive and deposit, or suffer the voter to deposit any vote notduly offered, he shall for each and every offense be punished by a fine of one hundred dollars or by imprisonment in a common jail for thirty (days)or by such fine and imprisonment both. 
SECTION 11. Nothing in this act shall be construed to prevent said townfrom filling any vacancy that may occur at a time other than the time ofthe annual town meeting for the election of officers as provided in this act, and in case of such vacancy so occurring the same may be filled,except vacancies in the offices of registrar and deputy registrar, in thesame manner as if this act had not been passed. 
SECTION 12. All acts and parts of acts, so far as they may be inconsistent herewith, are hereby repealed. 
Approved July 15, 1871. 
A241:250 

§ A241-6. Relating to Electors and Elections in the Town ofGriswold. 
Resolved by this Assembly: 
SECTION 1. That hereafter, at all electors' meetings in the second votingdistrict in the town of Griswold, the ballot boxes shall be closed at four o'clock in the afternoon. 
SECTION 2. This act shall take effect from its passage. 
Approved July 2, 1875. 
§ A241-7. Incorporating the Jewett City Water Company. 
Resolved by this Assembly: 
SECTION 1. That Alfred A. Young, James O. Sweet, Adelbert R. Young, John 
E. Phillips, Arthur C. Ladd, George H. Jennings, Alfred A. Young, Jr., andJames H. Finn, with all such persons as may hereafter associate with themfor the purpose of supplying the town of Griswold with water for public and domestic use, their successors and assigns, be and they are herebyincorporated by the name of The "Jewett City Water Company, and by thatname shall be and are hereby made capable in law to have, purchase, possess, and enjoy to them and their successors, lands, tenements, andeffects of what kind and quality soever necessary for the specified purposeof this company, and the same to sell, grant, demise, and dispose of, to sue and to be sued in all courts of this state and elsewhere; also to make such by-laws as may be necessary for the government of said corporation, notcontrary to this act, the laws of this state or the United States, and to do all and singular the things which to them may or shall appertain, subject tothe provisions hereinafter prescribed. 
SECTION 2. The capital stock of this company shall be forty thousanddollars with the privilege of increasing the same from time to time, to seventy-five thousand dollars to be divided into shares of the par valueof such amounts as said company may determine, which shares shall bedeemed personal property, and be transferable only on the books of the company, as provided by the by-laws of the company, and may issue bondsfor an amount not exceeding seventy-five per centum of it capital stock,and bearing a rate of interest not exceeding six per centum per annum, and may secure the payment of the same by a mortgage or mortgages ofits property. 
A241:251 

SECTION 3. School District No. 12 of the town of Griswold, including thevillage of Jewett City, is hereby authorized and empowered to contract withThe Jewett City Water Company for a supply of water for the protection of any or all property situated within the limits of said district, whetherowned by said district or not, and for water for other purposes; andthey are hereby authorized to include in the taxes of each year, and to assess on all the property, both real and personal, such sums as they mayrequire to meet their respective liabilities under said contract or contracts,exempting therefrom all property lying south of a line running east and west thirty rods south of the house of Shubel Meech. 
SECTION 4. The persons named in the first section hereof shall open books to receive subscriptions for the capital stock of said company, at such timesand places as they, or a majority of them, may direct, and shall give suchnotice of the times and places of opening of such books as they may deem reasonable, and shall receive said subscriptions under such regulations asthey may adopt for the purpose. 
SECTION 5. The office of said company shall be located in the town ofGriswold, and the stock, property, and affairs of said corporation shall be managed and conducted by not less than three nor more than sevendirectors, the number of said directors to be determined by the by-lawsof said corporation, to be chosen by a ballot from among and by the stockholders, which directors first chosen shall hold their offices until the next annual meeting of said corporation. 
SECTION 6. The directors of said corporation shall elect from among theirnumber a president, who shall be president of the board and also presidentof the corporation, and shall also appoint a secretary and treasurer, and such clerks and agents as shall be deemed by them advisable for conducting the business of the company, and require such security to begiven as they may think proper; and in case any vacancy shall occur in the board of directors, the remaining directors may choose a director ordirectors from among the stockholders to fill such vacancy, who shall holdthe appointment until another is chosen. 
SECTION 7. The persons named in the first section hereof, or the major part of them, are hereby authorized and directed to call the first meetingof the stockholders of the company in such way and at such time andplace as they may appoint, to organize under this charter, by the election of directors; and the annual meeting of the stockholders for the choice ofdirectors shall be holden at such time and place and upon such notice asthe by-laws of the company may prescribe. 
SECTION 8. The directors shall have full power to make and prescribesuch by-laws, rules, and regulations as they shall deem needful and proper, touching the business, management, and effects of said company, notcontrary to law; also for the election and meetings of said directors, andother matters connected with the business and concerns of said company. 
A241:252 

SECTION 9. The directors of said company may require the payment ofthe sum or sums subscribed to the capital stock of said company at suchtimes and in such proportions and upon such conditions as they may deem proper; and in case any stockholder shall neglect or refuse to makepayment pursuant to the requisitions of the board of directors, the stockof such stockholder, or so much thereof as shall be necessary, may be sold under the direction of said board at public auction after the lapse ofsixty days from the time the payment became due, and all surplus moneyremaining from the avails of such sales, after deducting the payment due the company, the interest thereon, and necessary expenses of said sale,shall be paid over to such negligent stockholder. 
SECTION 10. Said company is hereby authorized and empowered to openthe ground in any streets, lanes, avenues, highways, and public grounds,for the purpose of laying down and sinking, or for repairing such pipes or conduits as my be necessary for conducting water to and distributingthe same within and in the immediate vicinity of the territory specified inthe first section hereof, and said company may, for the purpose aforesaid, carry and conduct any aqueduct or other works by them to be madeand constructed under or over any watercourse, street, turnpike, road,railway, or other way, or public grounds; provided such water-course, street, turnpike, road, railways, highway, or other way be put as speedilyas possible in as good condition as before laying and constructing saidaqueduct or other works. 
SECTION 11. Said company is hereby authorized and empowered, under the provisions of this chapter, to construct, maintain, and prepare suchreservoir or reservoirs as may be deemed expedient and necessary, andto take and use the water of any spring or springs, stream or streams, or other waters within the limits of the town of Griswold to such extent as may be deemed necessary and expedient in carrying into effect theobjects of this act; also to construct, repair, and maintain such canals and aqueducts as may become necessary and convenient for the retention andconveying of water at or to such points as they may desire, and be entitledto retain or convey the same; also to take and hold by purchase or gift, in the manner hereinafter provided, any real estate or easements necessaryfor the purpose of this act, or for laying and maintaining aqueducts andreservoirs for holding, conducting, and distributing water, and for all buildings and structures necessary for the most perfect and completesupply of the territory specified in the first section hereof with pure waterfor public and private uses, and for preserving said lands and water for the uses of said company pure and free from all contaminations and nuisances,drains and sewers; and the company may make, establish, and enforce allnecessary and proper regulations and by-laws for the preservation of the same, provided such regulations and by-laws shall not be contrary to thelaws of this state or of the United States. 
A241:253 

SECTION 12. Said corporation shall pay all damages that shall be sustained by any person or persons or corporation in their property orestate by the taking of any real estate or easement, or by the taking of water from any spring or springs, ponds, lakes, or brooks, or from anyother source, or by constructing or laying any pipes, aqueducts, reservoirs,or other works for the purposes of this act, which damages, unless the same shall be agreed upon by the parties, shall be assessed by a committeeto be appointed by the superior court for New London county, uponapplication made to said court by said corporation, or by any person or corporation sustaining such damages, within three years after the timeof actual taking, which application shall be accompanied by a summonsserved upon the owner of the property as in case of civil process before said court; but if no application is made within three years, as aforesaid,the party claiming to have suffered damages shall be deemed to havewaived his claim therefor. The committee appointed by said court shall consist of three disinterested men, who, after being being sworn and givingreasonable notice, shall hear the parties, view the property in question,assess just damages, if any to the respective owners or parties interested in the premises or property so damaged or required and proposed to betaken for the purpose of this act, as the case may be, to the party or parties,and report their doings to the court; and such report may be rejected in the discretion of the court. The acceptance of the report of such committeeshall be final as the amount of damages and other facts found therein, andsaid court may make any order necessary for the protection of the rights of all persons or corporations interested in said property or sustaining suchdamages. 
SECTION 13. The occupant of any house, tenement, or building who shalltake the water of said company shall be liable for the price of the rent of thesame, and the agents of said company intrusted with the superintendence of the works may at all reasonable times enter the premises so supplied toexamine the pipes and fixtures and to prevent unnecessary waste. 
SECTION 14. Any person living within the limits of the territory specifiedin the first section hereof, and within reasonable distance of the mains of said company, shall be entitled to have and use water from the said mains,upon complying with the by-laws of said company and paying a reasonablecompensation therefor. 
SECTION 15. All property, real and personal, of said corporation and itscapital stock and bonds shall be exempt from taxation by a majority vote of the said town of Griswold at any town meeting legally and specially warnedfor that purpose. 
SECTION 16. If any person or persons shall wilfully, wantonly, or maliciously divert the waters or obstruct the same, or any part thereof, from or in any aqueduct, reservoir, stream, or spring, or other place whichshall be taken or used, or constructed by said company, or shall corruptthe same by committing any nuisance therein or otherwise, such person or persons so offending shall be liable to said company in triple damagestherefor. 
A241:254 

Approved May 25, 1893. 
§ A241-8. An Act Dividing the Town of Griswold into VotingDistricts. 
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives in General Assembly convened: 
SECTION 1. The town of Griswold is hereby divided into two voting
districts for the accommodation of the electors therein at electors' 
meetings and also for the purposes of the annual town meetings for the 
choice of town officers, as follows, namely: The division line shall
commence at the Preston town line on the road westerly from the
residence of George D. Palmer in said town of Griswold; thence following 
said road in a northerly direction to the road leading easterly by the
residence of Fred S. Brown thence following said road easterly and
northerly by the Woodward schoolhouse to the four corners westerly of 
the house of the late Calvin Woodward, thence westerly and northerly by
houses of David A. Geer and Samuel Norman, the Brewster school-house 
the houses of Samuel Geer and the late Dwight T. Corey to the Plainfield 
town line east of the house of Joseph Rood. 
SECTION 2. All that part of the territory of the town of Griswold lying
northerly and westerly of said above described roads shall be and remain
the first district, and the electors dwelling upon said territory shall vote at 
Jewett City. All the territory of said town lying southerly and easterly of
said above described road shall be and remain the second district, and the 
electors dwelling upon said territory shall vote at Pachaug. 
SECTION 3. The annual town meeting of said town of Griswold for the
purpose of electing such officers as are not required by law or by vote of 
the town to be chosen by ballot, and for the purpose of hearing the annual
accounts, laying taxes, and for transacting the ordinary business of the
town, shall be held at Pachaug in the second district on the last Monday in 
September in each year. 
SECTION 4. The selectmen shall provide a suitable and convenient place
for voting and the necessary ballot boxes for the use of voters in each of
said districts at said electors' and annual town meetings, and the 
warnings of such meetings shall specify the particular place of voting in
each of said districts. 
SECTION 5. The registrars of voters chosen at said annual town meetings
for said voting districts shall be electors entitled to vote in the district for
which they are elected. 
SECTION 6. No elector shall lose his right to vote in the district if his last 
previous residence is less than thirty days from his removal, if he still
resides in said town. 
Approved May 29, 1901. 
A241:255 

§ A241-9. An Act Concerning the Annual Town Meeting in the Townof Griswold. 
Section 3 of a special act approved July 15, 1871, entitled "An Act Relating to Electors and Elections in the Town of Griswold," is amended to read as follows: The annual election of said town for the choice of selectmen, town clerk, registrar, treasurer, treasurer of the school fund, collector of town taxes, constables, grand jurors, school visitors, assessors, board oftax review, registrars of voters and other elective town officers shall beheld on the first Monday of October in each year. On said day at a time designated by the selectmen, a town meeting shall be held at the placeof voting in the first district, by the voters of the town of Griswold therepresent, for the purpose of hearing the annual accounts, laying taxes and for transacting the ordinary business of the town. 
Approved April 29, 1955. 
§ A241-10. An Act Providing for Minority Representation on theBoard of Finance in the Town of Griswold. 
Beginning with the election to be held in the town of Griswold on the firstMonday in October, 1957, the board of finance of said town shall consist of seven members. At said election four members of the board shall be elected to hold office for two years and three for four years from said date, andbiennially thereafter members shall be elected for a term of four years each to replace those whose terms expire. When the number of members to beelected is even, no elector shall vote for more than half the number; and when the number to be elected is odd, no elector shall vote for more than a bare majority of the number. The terms of the members of said board inoffice at the time of the passage of this act shall expire the first Monday inOctober, 1957. 
Approved June 17, 1957. 
§ A241-11. An Act Concerning the Annual Town Meeting in theTown of Griswold. 
Number 86 of the special acts of 1955 is amended to read as follows: Theelection of said town for the choice of selectmen, town clerk, registrar,treasurer, treasurer of the school fund, collector of town taxes, constables, grand jurors, school visitors, assessors, board of tax review, registrars ofvoters and other elective town officers shall be held on the first Mondayof October in the odd-numbered years. On the first Monday of October in each year, at a time designated by the selectmen, a town meeting shall beheld at the place of voting in the first district for the purpose of hearing theannual accounts, laying taxes and for transacting the ordinary business of the town. 
Approved June 16, 1959. 
A241:256 

§ A241-12. An Act Establishing a Department of Assessment for theTown of Griswold. 
The board of assessors of the town of Griswold is hereby abolished, and the duties of said board shall be assumed by a department of assessment ofthe town of Griswold, which shall consist of one assessor and such clerical assistants as may be necessary to carry out the duties of the assessor. Such assessor shall be appointed by the chairman of the board of selectmenafter competitive examination and he shall serve as long as he faithfullyperforms the duties of his office at a salary fixed by the board of selectmen. Such assessors shall have all the powers and shall perform all the dutiesimposed on assessors by the general statutes. 
Approved June 14, 1961. 
Chapter A242 
JEWETT CITY ZONING REGULATIONS 
A241:257 



Z
O
N
I
N
G 
R
E
G
U
L
A
T
I
O
N
S 

F
O
R 
T
H
E 

T
O
W
N 
O
F 
G
R
I
S
W
O
L
D
, 
C
O
N
N
E
C
T
I
C
U
T 


EFFECTIVE DATE: JULY, 1973 
REVISED TO: DECEMBER 1, 2018 
Table of Contents 

SECTION 1: 	TITLE, AUTHORITY, PURPOSE ............................................................................................................ 1 

1.1 	Title and Authority ...................................................................................................... 1 

1.2 Purpose ........................................................................................................................ 1 
SECTION 2: ADMINISTRATION AND PROCEDURES ............................................................................................... 2 

2.1 	Enforcement ............................................................................................................... 2 

2.2 	Zoning Permit .............................................................................................................. 3 

2.3 	Special Exceptions ........................................................................................................ 3 

2.4 	Variances ..................................................................................................................... 3 

2.5 	Zone Changes ............................................................................................................... 3 

2.6 	Certificate of Zoning Compliance ................................................................................. 3 

2.7 	Recording ..................................................................................................................... 4 

2.8 	Expiration .................................................................................................................... 4 

2.9 	Other Permits .............................................................................................................. 4 

2.10 	Application Fees and Due Dates ................................................................................... 5 

2.11 	Penalties ...................................................................................................................... 5 

2.12 	Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Plan ....................................................................... 5 

2.13 	Inland Wetlands ........................................................................................................... 5 

2.14 	Notice to Neighboring Municipalities ........................................................................... 5 

2.15 	Notice to Abutting Property Owners of Public Hearing ................................................ 5 

SECTION 3 	ZONING MAP .................................................................................................................................... 6 

3.1 	Zoning Map .................................................................................................................. 6 

SECTION 4 	R-80 RURAL RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS, R-60 LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS, AND R-40 MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS OSPR – OPEN SPACE PASSIVE RECREATION DISTRICT........................................................................ 7 
4.1 	Purpose ........................................................................................................................ 7 

4.2 	Permitted Uses ............................................................................................................ 7 
4.2.5(f)  Accessory to Principle Farming ........................................................................ 7 

4.2.6	      Temporary and limited moratorium on residential Subdivisions/re-subdivisions.......................................................................... 9 
4.2.7 	Garage Sales/Yard Sales ................................................................................. 9 

4.2.8 	OSPR District Permitted Uses .......................................................................... 9 

4.3 	Special Exceptions ...................................................................................................... 11 

4.4 	OSPR District Special Exceptions ................................................................................. 12 

SECTION 5 	This Section 5 has been intentionally left blank...............................................................................13 

SECTION 6 	This Section 6 has been intentionally left blank ..............................................................................13 

SECTION 7 	C-COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS.............................................................................................................13 

7.1 	Purpose ...................................................................................................................... 14 

7.2 	Permitted Uses ........................................................................................................... 14 

7.3 	Special Exceptions ...................................................................................................... 16 

i 
8.1 	Purpose ...................................................................................................................... 19 

8.2 	Minimum Size ............................................................................................................ 20 

8.3 	Permitted Uses .......................................................................................................... 20 

8.4 	Special Exceptions ...................................................................................................... 20 

8.5 	Access ......................................................................................................................... 21 

8.6 	Lot Coverage............................................................................................................... 21 

8.7 	Utilities ...................................................................................................................... 22 

8.8 	Sidewalks ................................................................................................................... 22 

8.9 	Dimensional Requirements......................................................................................... 22 

SECTION 9: 	I – INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS........................................................................................... 23 

9.1 	Purpose ...................................................................................................................... 23 

9.2 	Procedure ................................................................................................................... 23 

9.3 	Permitted Uses ........................................................................................................... 23 

9.4 	Special Exceptions ...................................................................................................... 23 

SECTION 10:	  DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS ................................................................................... 24 

10.1 	Minimum Lot Size ....................................................................................................... 24 

10.2 	Minimum Street Frontage .......................................................................................... 24 

10.3 	Minimum Front Yard................................................................................................... 25 

10.4 	Minimum Side and Rear Yards ................................................................................... 25 

10.5 	Maximum Lot Coverage .............................................................................................. 25 

10.6 	Maximum Building Height .......................................................................................... 26 

10.7 	Area and Frontage Exception -Merger Lots of Record ................................................ 26 

10.8 	Driveway access Design and Construction Standards.................................................. 26 

10.9 	Common and Loop Driveways..................................................................................... 27 

SECTION 11: SUPPLEMENTARY REQUIREMENTS ............................................................................... 29 

11.1 	Definition ................................................................................................................... 29 

11.2 	Multiple Uses and Buildings ....................................................................................... 29 

11.3 	Proximity to Water .................................................................................................... 29 

11.4 	Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA) ............................................................................... 29 

11.5 	Fences ........................................................................................................................ 37 

11.6 	Corner Visibility ......................................................................................................... 37 

11.7 	Home Occupation ...................................................................................................... 37 

11.8 	Landscaping Screening, Buffer and Architectural Design Requirements...................... 38 
Landscape Design Standards – Commercial Zone (fig. 1)............................................. 46 
Landscape Design Standards Parking Lots & Sidewalks (fig. 2).................................... 47 

11.9 	Mobile Homes ............................................................................................................ 48 

11.10 	Corner Lot................................................................................................................... 48 

11.11 	Animals ...................................................................................................................... 48 

11.12 	Refuse Disposal .......................................................................................................... 49 

11.13 	Package Stores ........................................................................................................... 49 

11.14 	Antique Shops ............................................................................................................ 49 

11.15 	Wind Energy Conversion Systems (WECS)................................................................... 49 

11.16 	Earth Station – Dish Antennae ................................................................................... 50 

11.17 	Unregistered Motor Vehicles ..................................................................................... 50 

11.18 	Accessory Apartments ............................................................................................... 50 

11.19 	Wireless Communications Facilities ........................................................................... 51 

11.20 	Storage Containers ..................................................................................................... 58 

ii 
12.1 	Definition ................................................................................................................... 59 

12.2 	Hearing and Amendments ......................................................................................... 59 

12.3 	General Evaluation Criteria ........................................................................................ 59 

12.4 	Excavation ................................................................................................................. 59 

12.5 	Multi-family Dwellings (deleted and intentionally blank) ........................................... 60 

12.6 	Recreation Campground ............................................................................................ 61 

12.7 	Alcoholic Beverages ................................................................................................... 61 

12.8 	Kennels ...................................................................................................................... 62 

12.9 	Hotels and Motels ...................................................................................................... 62 

12.10 	Commercial Recreation Facilities ............................................................................... 62 

12.11 	Convalescent and Nursing Homes .............................................................................. 62 

12.12 	Private Aircraft Landing Facilities ............................................................................... 62 

12.13 	Amusement Game Arcades ........................................................................................ 63 

12.14 	Banquet Halls and Banquet Facilities ......................................................................... 63 

12.15 	Bed & Breakfast Facilities ........................................................................................... 63 

12.16 	Gasoline Stations with Convenience Stores ............................................................... 64 

12.17 	Hotels and Conference Centers .................................................................................. 64 

12.18 	Warehousing, Wholesaling, and Wholesale Distribution Centers............................... 65 

12.19 	Country Inn and Banquet Facilities ............................................................................. 65 

12.20 	Non-Profit Small domestic Animal Shelter .................................................................. 66 

12.21 	Over 55 Neighborhood Housing Communities and/or 55 Plus Active Adult Neighborhood Housing Communities ......................................... 66 
12.22 	Convalescent and/or Nursing Homes, Rehabilitation Facilities, Assisted Living Facilities, Continuing Care Facilities, Elder Care Facilities, Adult Day Care Facilities....................................................................................................... 73 
12.23 	Child Day Care Centers................................................................................................ 74 

12.24 	Permanent Year-Round Commercial Farm Stores ....................................................... 74 

SECTION 13:	  SITE PLAN REQUIREMENTS ............................................................................................................. 75 

13.1 	Purpose ...................................................................................................................... 75 

13.2 	Procedure .................................................................................................................. 75 

13.3 	Site Plan Ingredients .................................................................................................. 75 

13.4 	Erosion and Sediment Control Plan............................................................................. 76 

13.5 	Waivers ...................................................................................................................... 77 

13.6 	Site Plan Evaluation ................................................................................................... 77 

13.7 	Performance Guarantee ............................................................................................. 78 

13.8 	Amendments to Approved Site Plans filed pursuant to Sections 12 or 13......................................................................................................... 79 
13.9 	Minor site Plan Amendments to Previously Approved Zoning Permits or Special Exceptions ..................................................................................... 80 
SECTION 14:	  PARKING REQUIREMENTS............................................................................................................... 81 

14.1 	General ...................................................................................................................... 81 

14.2 	Requirements ............................................................................................................ 82 

SECTION 15:	  SIGNS..............................................................................................................................................84 

15.1 	General Requirements ............................................................................................... 84 

15.2 	Signs in Residential Districts ...................................................................................... 85 

15.3 	Signs in Commercial and Industrial Districts .............................................................. 85 

15.4 	Signs on Town-owned Property for all Zoning Districts............................................... 87 

iii 
16.1 General....................................................................................................................... 88 

16.2 Change of Use ............................................................................................................ 88 

16.3 Enlargements ............................................................................................................. 88 

16.4 Alterations ................................................................................................................. 88 

16.5 Reconstruction .......................................................................................................... 88 

16.6 Abandonment ............................................................................................................ 88 

SECTION 17:  APPEALS AND VARIANCES .............................................................................................................. 89 

17.1 Appeals ...................................................................................................................... 89 

17.2 Variances ................................................................................................................... 89 

17.3 Variance Notification ................................................................................................. 89 

SECTION 18:  AMENDMENTS................................................................................................................................ 89 

SECTION 19:  SEPARABILITY ................................................................................................................................. 90 

SECTION 20: EFFECTIVE DATE..............................................................................................................................90 

SECTION 21:  DEFINITIONS ................................................................................................................................... 91 

APPENDIX A APPLICATION FEES & APPLICATION FORM DUE DATES ............................................................. 99 

APPENDIX B TOWN OF GRISWOLD ZONING MAP ...................................................................................... 103 

APPENDIX C BOROUGH OF JEWETT CITY ZONING MAP ............................................................................. 104 

iv 
ZONING REGULATIONS 
TOWN OF GRISWOLD, CONNECTICUT 

SECTION 1:  TITLE, AUTHORITY, PURPOSE 

1.1 	Title and Authority. These Regulations shall be known and may be cited as the “Zoning Regulations, Town of Griswold, Connecticut”, which herein are called “these Regulations”, and have been prepared and adopted in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 124 of the Connecticut General Statutes 
1.2 	Purpose. The purpose of these Regulations is to protect the public, health, safety, convenience and property values; and, in accordance with the Griswold Plan of Development, adopted December 14, 1992, And enacted in modified form most currently on June 11, 2007 to lessen congestion in the streets; secure safety from fire, panic, flood and other dangers; to promote health and the general welfare; to provide adequate light and air; to prevent the overcrowding of land; to avoid undue concentration of population and to facilitate the adequate provision for transportation, water, sewage, schools, parks, and other public requirements. (8/10/09) 
Section 1.3 Official Rulings was removed in its entirety effective 8/1/2017. 
1 

Griswold Zoning Regulations 	Revised: December 01, 2018 

SECTION 2:  ADMINISTRATION AND PROCEDURES 
2.1 	Enforcement. These Regulations shall be enforced by the Commission or its appointed agent, the Zoning Enforcement Officer.  A Deputy Zoning Enforcement Officer may be appointed by the Commission to enforce the zoning regulations in the limited periods when the Zoning Enforcement Officer is absent or in the case where the Zoning Enforcement Officer may have or appear to have a conflict of interest with a property owner. (8/10/09) 
2.2 	Zoning Permit. No building shall be erected, moved or structurally altered and no use shall be established or changed without a Zoning Permit from the Zoning Enforcement Officer (under Section 4.1 and 4.2) or the Commission (for all other uses) issued in conformance with the provisions of these Regulations.  (8/10/09) 
2.2.1 	Application for a Zoning Permit shall be made on a form provided for that purpose and obtainable in the office of the Zoning Enforcement Officer. 
2.2.2 	Applications for permitted uses in the Residential districts and for any single-family and two-family dwellings and accessory buildings and uses or expansions or additions to such buildings may be approved by the Zoning Enforcement Officer provided they meet the requirements of these Regulations. The Zoning Enforcement Officer may require a plot plan prepared, signed, and sealed by a licensed land surveyor or registered professional engineer to insure compliance with these Regulations. The Zoning Enforcement Officer may further require that location markers for the building foundation be set by a licensed land surveyor in accordance with the plot plan prior to the issuance of a Zoning Permit. Applications for all other uses and buildings shall be reviewed by the Commission and shall be submitted together with a site plan as prescribed in Section 13 of these Regulations, to the Zoning Enforcement Officer or the Commission. The Commission shall review all such applications and site plans in accordance with Section 13 of these Regulations. The Commission may require that location markers for the building foundation be set by a licensed land surveyor in accordance with the site plan prior to the issuance of a Zoning Permit. 
2.2.3 	A permit may not be issued for buildings or structures for uses of land or buildings or structures not clearly permitted by these Regulations in the various districts, except that uses similar to permitted uses may be permitted in accordance with Section 2.2.4, below. (7/27/12) 
2.2.4 	In any case where a use is alleged to be similar to a specified use permitted by these Regulations, its status shall be determined by the Commission by reference to the most clearly similar use or uses permitted by these Regulations, or it shall be declared that the use is not similar. When the status of a use has been so determined, such determination shall thereafter have general applicability to all uses of the same type. 
2.2.5 	A Zoning Permit is not required for the normal maintenance and upkeep of property in any district. 
2.2.6 	A Zoning Permit shall not be issued for any use which creates, or may reasonably be expected to create, a dangerous condition, objectionable noise, smoke, dust, fumes or water pollution detectable at the property 
2.2.6.1 	Commercial poultry and animal slaughter, the distillation of bones, rendering or dumping of dead animals and tanneries, 
2.2.6.2 	Coal or petroleum distillation or derivation of by-products, 
2.2.6.3 	Blast furnaces or smelting of ores or metal, 
2 
Griswold Zoning Regulations 	Revised: December 01, 2018 

2.2.6.4 	Manufacture of explosives, 
2.2.6.6 	Fat rendering in the manufacture of tallow, grease or oil, 
2.2.6.7 	Refining and recovery of products from fish or animal refuse, 
2.2.6.8 	Gas manufacture and storage by other than a public utility company except for on-site use, except that the storage for local retail distribution purposes and local retail distribution of liquefied petroleum products may be permitted, provided they comply with the standards of the National Board of Fire Underwriters and applicable state laws, 

2.2.6.9 	Distilleries that produce alcoholic beverages, 
2.2.6.10 	Adult bookstores and adult theaters; such establishments are customarily not open to the public generally but only to one or more classes of the public, excluding minors by reason of age, 
2.2.6.11 	A hazardous waste facility, a hazardous waste disposal site, or hazardous waste storage, as used in this section, a hazardous waste facility means a facility as defined in Chapter 445, Section 22a-115(2) of the General Statutes; hazardous waste shall mean waste as defined in Chapter 445, Section 22a-115(1) of the General Statutes; hazardous waste disposal shall mean disposal as defined in Chapter 445, Section 22a­115(3) of the General Statutes and hazardous waste storage shall mean storage and long term storage as defined, respectively, in Chapter 445 Sections 22a-115(5) and (6) of the General Statutes 

2.2.6.12 	Ash landfills, 
2.2.6.13 	Commuter parking lots, motor vehicle storage lots or a similar use as a primary or accessory use is prohibited in all zoning districts within the corporate limits of the Town of Griswold (12/8/97), and 
2.2.6.14 
Junk Yards Prohibited in All Zones. Junkyards, as defined in these Regulations shall be prohibited in all zones. The inclusion of this prohibition is for clarity only and does not amend pre-existing prohibition against junkyards which arose by virtue of Section 2.2.3 of these Regulations.  (7/30/9) 
2.3 	Special Exceptions. Applications for Special Exceptions shall be made on a form provided for such use and available from the Planning & Community Development Department. Such applications, together with site plans as specified in Section 13 of these Regulations, shall be submitted to the Planning & Community Development Department or the Commission and shall be processed in accordance with the provisions of Section 12 of these Regulations. 
2.4 	Variances. Any person whose application for a Zoning Permit is denied because the application is not consistent with the requirements of these Regulations may apply to the Zoning Board of Appeals for a Variance. 
2.5 	Zone Changes. Any person seeking a change in these Regulations or a change in the Zoning Map may apply for such change on a form prescribed for that purpose and available from the Planning & Community Development Department. (See Section 18 of these Regulations.) 
2.6 	Certificate of Zoning Compliance. No newly constructed or enlarged building shall be occupied until a Certificate of Zoning Compliance has been issued. A Certificate of Zoning Compliance shall be issued by the Zoning Enforcement Officer, without charge, upon completion of the work if the building and use comply with these Regulations and the approved application. The Zoning Enforcement Officer may require an as-built site plan to facilitate this review. (12/28/00) (3/21/2013) 
3 
Griswold Zoning Regulations 	Revised: December 01, 2018 
2.6.1 	A Certificate of Zoning Compliance shall remain valid only so long as the building, the use thereof or the use of the land remains in full conformity with these Regulations or of an amendment thereto.  (12/28/00) (3/21/13) 
2.6.2 	After the effective date of these Regulations, the Zoning Enforcement Officer will issue, without charge, upon request of the owner or occupant, a Certificate of Zoning Compliance for any legal nonconforming building existing on the effective date of these Regulations.  (12/28/00) (3/21/13) 
2.6.3 	If any work required in accordance with an approved Zoning Permit, Site Plan, Special Permit, Variance, or other approval required under these Regulations, shall be incomplete or not in compliance with approved plans or the terms of such approval, no Certificate of Zoning Compliance shall be issued; provided, however, that the property owner may, at its option, post a performance guarantee in the form of cash or a non-revocable letter of credit to assure the completion of any such incomplete or deficient work.  Such performance guarantee shall be in a form satisfactory to the Zoning Enforcement Officer, and shall be issued by a financial institution having offices within the State of Connecticut. (3/21/13) 
2.7 	Recording. No Variance or Special Exception shall become effective until a copy thereof, certified by the Zoning Board of Appeals or this Commission, as appropriate, containing a description of the premises to which it relates and specifying the nature of such Variance or Special Exception, including the zoning provision which is varied in its application or to which a Special Exception is granted, and stating the name of the owner of record, is recorded in the Town’s Land Records. The Town Clerk shall index the same under the Grantor’s Index under the name of the then record owner and the record owner shall pay for such recording. 
2.8 	All Zoning Permits, as approved by the Commission and all Special Exceptions shall be endorsed by the Commission Chairman or Secretary and shall describe the kind of special exception granted and any conditions of approval attached and shall be filed on the Griswold land records. When a Special Exception document is filed for uses on a property, previous Special Exceptions on the parcel shall be null and void unless the previously approved Special Exceptions for any other ongoing uses on that same parcel unrelated to the new Special Exception application shall remain in force. Special Exceptions shall expire in five (5) years unless all work has been completed and certified as zoning compliant.  (8/10/09) (06/10/13) 
2.9 	Other Permits. A Zoning Permit indicates that the application complies with the provisions of these Regulations. However, other permits may be required before the applicant can begin the related building or use, such as those concerned with driveways, wetlands, water and sewer facilities, fire protection, building code and health code. Determining what other permits are required and obtaining such other permits is the responsibility of the applicant. 
2.9.1 	No Building Permit shall be issued by the Building Official for a building, use or structure subject to these Regulations without certification in writing from the Zoning Enforcement Officer that such building, use or structure is in conformity with these Regulations or is a valid non­conforming use under these Regulations. 
2.9.2 	No permit for road/drainage improvements to support subdivision lots or site or infrastructure plans for commercial projects where over one (1) acre of land in total is disturbed shall be issued without the applicant securing whatever additional permits that may be required by other federal, state, or local entities and having signed an affidavit of such permit details and/or registrations.  This requirement would include but not be limited to a General Permit for Construction Activities from CTDEP (forms and guidance document available from the Town Planner) as suggested in the Town of Griswold’s Municipal Stormwater Management Plan, certification as required by the State Traffic Commission, certificate from Department of Public Utilities Commission, State Department of Health, Department of Energy and Environmental Protection.  (8/10/09) 
4 
Griswold Zoning Regulations 	Revised: December 01, 2018 

2.10 	New Appendix A. Land Use Application Fees and Special Review Fee Ordinance for the Town of Griswold. 
(8/10/09) 
2.10.1 	No fee shall be charged to an official municipal agency, board, department or commission of the Town of Griswold or the Borough of Jewett City.  (12/28/00) 
2.11 	Penalties. In accordance with Section 8-12 of the General Statutes, the owner or agent of any building or premises where a violation of any provision of these Regulations has been committed or exists, or the lessee or tenant of an entire building or premises where such violation has been committed or exists, takes part or assists in any such violation, shall be fined not less than ten ($10) nor more than two hundred ($200) dollars for each day that such violation continues; but if the offense is willful, the person convicted thereof shall be fined not less than $100 nor more than $250 for each day that such violation continues, or imprisoned not more than ten (10) days for each day such violation continues or both; and the circuit court shall have jurisdiction of all such offenses, subject to appeal as in other cases. 
2.12 	Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Plan. A soil erosion and sediment control plan shall be submitted with any application for development when the disturbed area of such development is cumulatively more than one-half (1/2) acre. The soil erosion and sediment control plan shall be submitted pursuant to Section 13.4 of these Regulations. A single-family dwelling that is not a part of a subdivision of land shall be exempt from this soil erosion and sediment control plan requirement. The Commission, in its sole discretion, shall determine what constitutes the size of the disturbed area. 
2.13 	Inland Wetlands. If an application for a Special Exception or an application for site plan approval involves an activity regulated under the provisions of Chapter 440 of the General Statutes, the applicant shall submit an application for a permit to the Griswold Inland Wetlands Commission not later than the day such application is filed with the Griswold Planning and Zoning Commission. The decision of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall not be rendered until the Griswold Inland Wetlands Commission has submitted a report with its final decision to the Planning and Zoning Commission. In making its decision, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall give due consideration to the report of the Griswold Inland Wetlands Commission. 
2.14 	Notice to Neighboring Municipalities. The Commission shall notify the clerk of any adjoining municipality of the pendency of any Special Exception or site plan concerning any project on any site when: (1) any part of the property affected by the Commission’s decision is within 500 feet of the adjoining municipality; (2) a significant portion of the traffic to the completed project will use streets within the adjoining municipality to enter and exit the site; (3) a significant portion of the sewer and water drainage from the project on the site will flow through and significantly impact the drainage or sewer system within the adjoining municipality; or 
(4) water runoff from the improved site will impact streets or other municipal or private property within the adjoining municipality. Such notice shall be made by registered mail and shall be mailed within seven (7) days of the date of receipt of the application or site plan and no hearing shall be held on the application or site plan until after the adjoining municipality has received such notice. A representative from the adjoining municipality may appear and be heard at any hearing on any such application or site plan. 
2.15 	Notice to Abutting Property Owners of Public Hearing. Whenever an application is filed with the Planning and Zoning Commission that requires a public hearing per the Griswold Zoning Regulations, or whenever the Commission deems it necessary to hold a public hearing for an application, the applicant shall, no later than ten (10) days prior to the date of the scheduled public hearing send notices to all abutting property owners by First Class Mail, and proof of such mailing shall be evidenced by a certificate of mailing. Such ownership shall be indicated on the most recent Grand List. Said notices shall contain the following information: (3/9/04) (8/10/09) 
5 
Griswold Zoning Regulations 	Revised: December 01, 2018 
a. 
A copy of the zoning application filed with the Commission. (3/9/04) 

b. 	
A copy of the site plan. If the site plan contains multiple sheets, the sheet that best describes the proposed project shall be forwarded. The copy may be reduced as long as the document is readable. (3/9/04) 

c. 	
A narrative describing the proposed development. (3/9/04) 


d 	A copy of the legal notice giving the date, time and place of the public hearing. (3/9/04) 
SECTION 3:  ZONING MAP 
3.1 	Zoning Map. The map entitled “Zoning Map, Griswold, Connecticut”, is a part of these Regulations. The zoning map shows the boundaries and zoning designations for each district of the Town of Griswold. Use and dimensional requirements for each district are found in these Regulations. 
3.1.1 	All district boundaries shown on the official zoning map dated September 2000 and as amended occasionally through 2007 will be modified to follow outside boundaries of digital tax parcel map layer and the districts modified as shown on the replacement digital Official Zoning Map to be made effective on  August 10, 2009 
3.1.2 	Districts as modified from the August 10, 2009 Town of Griswold Zoning District map shall also include an overlay zone showing the Aquifer Protection Area for the Hopeville Road Wellfield Level A Map. (01/15/12) 
6 
Griswold Zoning Regulations 	Revised: December 01, 2018 
SECTION 4: 	R–80 RURAL RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS 
R–60 LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS AND 
R–40 MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS 
OSPR – OPEN SPACE PASSIVE RECREATION DISTRICT 

4.1 	Purpose R–80 Districts include most of the Town’s existing or proposed open space and recreation areas, are generally remote from existing or planned public sewer and water service, contain valuable natural resources such as aquifers, or present physical limitations for development. Minimum lot sizes are 80,000 square feet. 
R–60 Districts are intended to provide a low density residential transition zone between the high and medium density residential zones and the rural density residential zone. The areas are usually remote from existing or planned public sewer and water services and may present physical obstacles for development. Minimum lot sizes are 60,000 square feet. 
R–40 Districts are intended to encourage most residential development to take place in areas of the Town that are conveniently accessible, have suitable physical conditions for on-lot sewage disposal, and which focus on areas of previous residential growth. These areas are not expected to be served by public sewers in the foreseeable future, but may be served by public water systems. Minimum lot sizes are 40,000 square feet. 
OSPR District – Open Space Passive Recreation Districts are intended to be those areas most appropriate for use as low activity open space and passive recreation; and are shown on the Zoning Map as Open Space Passive Recreation areas. (8/10/09) 
4.2 	Permitted Uses. The following uses are permitted by right in R-40, R-60 and R-80 Districts provided appropriate site plan review materials have been reviewed and approved by the Zoning Enforcement Officer (for Sections 4.2.1 and 4.2.2) or the Commission (for other sections including Section 4.2.3); Go to Section 2.2.2 for more details of Zoning Permit requirements. (8/10/09) 
4.2.1 	Single-family dwellings. 
4.2.2 	Two-family dwellings provided that the lot area is twice that required for a single-family dwelling. 
4.2.3 	Home Occupations. 
4.2.4 	Accessory uses and buildings, except that no accessory building shall be used as a residence. 
4.2.5 	Farming for commercial purposes, including agriculture, forestry, truck and nursery gardening, greenhouses, dairy farming, livestock and poultry raising, provided that: 
a. 
The lot contains not less than five (5) acres. 

b. 
No building, other than a residence or garage shall be located closer than 150 feet from any street line or from the nearest dwelling on a lot under separate ownership. 

c. 
Buildings for housing livestock or poultry which are kept for domestic use only shall be located not less than 100 feet from a street line and not less than 40 feet from a side or rear lot line. 

d. 
Seasonal roadside stands for the sale of farm produce shall not be larger that 200 square feet, shall have not more than two signs with an aggregate of 12 square feet in area for advertising the produce. Such stands shall not be less than 20 feet from any adjoining property line 


1. 	The commission may, by special exception, permit a permanent year round commercial farm store for the sale of farm grown or farm raised products provided it 
7 

Griswold Zoning Regulations 	Revised: December 01, 2018 
meets the conditions of section 12.24 and section 11.8 of these regulations. (2/15/14) 
e. 
Buildings, pens or other enclosures for pigs shall not be located closer than 500 feet from the nearest residence on a lot under separate ownership. 

f. 	
As accessory to the principal farming use as defined in Section 4.2.5, the farming premises may be used for such uses as weddings wedding receptions, birthday parties, nuptial showers, barbecues, cross country running events, craft shows and similar type uses. Said facility may contain structures and may be developed in phases provided that each phase must be subject to appropriate site plan review by the Commission 


1. 	
The lot area of the farm must be ten (10) acres or more and the accessory use may be located within the total farm lot area. 

2. 	
Provisions shall be made for adequate parking for the accessory uses and such parking areas shall be located anywhere within the total farm area. 

3. 	
The area subject to parking as provided in subparagraph 3, above, may be on a parking area that is surfaced with processed gravel. Said parking area shall be of adequate size so as to provide one (1) parking space for three (3) anticipated patrons utilizing the accessory use. 

4. 	
The commission may, by special exception, permit a permanent year round commercial farm store for the sale of farm grown or farm raised products provided it meets the conditions of Section 12.24 and Section 11.8 of these regulations. (2/15/14) 

5. 	
The area subject to parking need not be adjacent to the site of the accessory use but shall be under common ownership provided if the site of the accessory use and the parking area is not under common ownership, then in such an event if the owner of the site for the accessory use has a written easement or license agreement with the owner of the parking area, then the parking requirement as provided in this subparagraph shall be deemed satisfied. District. 

6. 	
Alcoholic beverages may be consumed at the event on the site provided they are furnished by the individual and/or entity using the site and are not sold to patrons of the event. In the event a caterer is used to furnish food and beverages, including alcoholic liquors, such caterer shall hold a current valid Caterer Liquor Permit issued by the Connecticut Department of Consumer Protection 

7. 	
Accessory uses under this subparagraph may commence at 7 AM and shall terminate at 10 PM; provided any activity that is an accessory use involving bands, music and/or serving and or use of alcoholic beverages may commence at 9 AM and terminate at 10 PM. 

8. 	
Potable water shall be available at the site and sanitation shall be furnished by an on-site sewerage system or by portable restrooms. All water and sanitation systems must satisfy the State health Code and be approved by the Uncas Health 

9. 	
Running races conducted from the farm shall be limited solely to persons and all races involving motor vehicles, ATV's, motorcycles and/or snowmobiles shall be prohibited. 

10. 	
The uses provided in this Section 4.2.5.f shall be subject to site plan review by the Commission. The applicant for site plan review may request waivers of specific sections of Section 13 of these regulations provided the sections subject to the waivers do not jeopardize the Commission's ability to determine if the accessory use enhances the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Griswold. 


8 

Griswold Zoning Regulations 	Revised: December 01, 2018 
11. Should the principal farm use be abandoned and/or discontinued, the accessory uses as provided in this subsection 4.2.5.f shall be terminated and shall not become the principal use. 
12 	Any accessory use to a farm use as described in Section 4.2.5 of these regulations that will involve the sale of services, goods, foods and/or beverages, other than services provided by a caterer holding a caterer Liquor Permit shall, if required by ordinance of the Town of Griswold, require the provider/vendor of such services, t. al., to secure a vendor's permit. 
13 	In reviewing a Special Exception application under this section, the commission may consider the area of land under active cultivation, the number of livestock maintained, or other indicators of the scope of the principal farming use in order to assure that the uses permitted by this subsection to assure that the proposed uses are accessory to the principal commercial farming use, as the term “accessory” is defined in these regulations. (Effective date December 01, 2018 Application ZP 01-19) 
4.2.6 	Temporary and limited moratorium on residential subdivisions/re-subdivisions. (2/1/08) 
4.2.6.1 	Purpose. The purpose of this moratoriums to provide the relief from considering larger subdivisions often involving proposed new town roads in regular scheduled meetings for the commission so that they may consider and adopt through public hearings modifications to the zoning and/or subdivisions Regulations that are the result of planned studies or discussion of goals recommended in the updated Plan of Conservation and Development effective July 30, 2007. 
4.2.6.2 	Applicability: During this temporary and limited moratorium, no new subdivision or re-subdivision applications relating to parcels from the R-40, R-60, and R-80 zoning districts dealing with creation of a total of five lots (including the parent parcel) or more or any subdivision containing a new proposed town road or extension to a town road shall be reviewed or approved by the Commission. 
4.2.6.3 	Effective Date/Term: This temporary and limited moratorium will be effective on February 1, 2008, and remain in effect for a term through and including August 10, 2009 
4.2.6.4 	Revisions to the terms of this moratorium may be made for good cause through a similar public hearing process as created this section. 
4.2.7 	Garage Sales/Yard Sales. Garage or yard sales are an accessory activity to a residential use and are permitted in any residential zone provided no such sale shall occur on the same lot more than four (4) times in a calendar year, and each occurrence shall be limited to no more than three (3) consecutive days; and provided that in regard to all garage or yard sale activities which are located on lots fronting on any State highway, the lot owner shall provide parking areas on-site, off the highway, for safety and driving sight-line purposes.  Garage Sales and/or Yard Sales on lots which do not or cannot provide on-site, off State Highway parking, are not permitted. (8/10/09) 
4.2.8 	OSPR District Permitted Uses. The following uses are permitted by right (zoning permit). (8/10/09) 
4.2.8.1 	Open space; usually for habitat preservation, forestry preservation and the like. (8/10/09) 
9 

Griswold Zoning Regulations 	Revised: December 01, 2018 
4.2.8.2 	Passive recreational uses, such as biking trails or hiking paths, with no motorized vehicles allowed.  (8/10/09) 
4.2.9 Aquifer Protection Area Overlay Zone Registration and Permitted Uses 
The following existing uses on the effective date of Aquifer Protection Area Regulations (March 15, 2012) and the Overlay Zone may fill out registration forms and documents with the use of Best Management Practices (BMPs)  in order to be allowed to continue or expand by seekingmodified permit. (01/15/12) 
10 

Griswold Zoning Regulations 	Revised: December 01, 2018 
a. 	
Underground storage or transmission of oil or petroleum. 

b. 	
Oil or petroleum dispensing for the purpose of retail, wholesale, or fleet use. 

c. 	
On-site storage of hazardous materials for the purpose of wholesale sale 

d. 	
Repair or maintenance of vehicles or internal combustion engines of vehicles. 

e. 	
Salvage operations of metals or vehicle parts. 

f. 	
Wastewater discharges to ground water other than domestic sewage and stormwater. 

g. 	
Car and truck washing (unsewered). 

h. 	
Production or refining of chemicals. 

i. 	
Clothes or cloth cleaning service (dry cleaner). 

j. 	
Industrial laundry service (unsewered). 

k. 	
Generation of electrical power by means of fossil fuel (power plant). 

l. 	
Production of electronic boards, electrical components, or other electrical equipment 

m. 	
Embalming or crematory services (unsewered). 

n. 	
Furniture stripping operations. 

o. 	
Furniture finishing operations. 

p. 	
Storage, treatment, or disposal of hazardous waste under a Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA) permit (hazardous waste facility). 

q. 	
Biological or chemical testing, analysis or research (unsewered). 

r. 	
Pest control services. 

s. 	
Photographic finishing. 

t. 	
Production or fabrication of metal products. 

u. 	
Printing, plate making, lithography, photoengraving, or gravure. 

v. 	
Accumulation or storage of waste oil, anti-freeze, or spent lead-acid batteries (recycling facility under a DEEP Permit). 

w. 	
Production of rubber, resin chemicals, elastomers, or plastic. 

x. 	
Storage of de-icing chemicals. 

y. 	
Accumulation, storage, handling, recycling, disposal, reduction, processing, burning, transfer or composting of solid waste. (under a DEEP permit; a solid waste facility, landfill, transfer station, composting facility, processing center) 

z. 
Dying, coating or printing of textiles, or tanning of finishing of leather. aa. Production of wood veneer, plywood, reconstituted wood or pressure-treated 


wood. bb. Pulp production processes. 
4.2.9.2 New Permitted Uses Only by those entities Registered in 4.2.9.1 above 
Uses a. through bb. above in 4.2.9.1 may be new permitted uses applied for only by those Registrants above who can demonstrate to the Aquifer Protection Area (APA) Commission appropriate compliance to Best Management Practices (BMPs) for the new uses on a parcel within the Aquifer Protection Area Overlay Zone on the Zoning Map enacted (January 15, 2011). 
Special Exceptions. The following uses are permitted in R-40, R-60 and R-80 zones provided they meet the conditions of Section 12 of these Regulations and Section 11.8 of these Regulations. (8/26/99)  (8/10/09 
4.3.1 	Convalescent facilities, and/or nursing homes, rehabilitation facilities assisted living facilities and continuing care facilities. (8/10/09) 
4.3.2 Educational or religious uses and social clubs. 
11 

Griswold Zoning Regulations 	Revised: December 01, 2018 
4.3.3 	Cemeteries. 
4.3.4 	Private aircraft landing fields. 
4.3.5 	Public service company facilities, as defined in Section 16.1 of the General Statutes 
4.3.6 	. Excavations. 
4.3.7 	Commercial recreation facilities, such as facilities for skating, shooting, golf, horseback riding, skiing, boating, tennis, baseball and swimming. 
4.3.8 	Recreational campgrounds. 
4.3.9 	Offices for the practice of medicine, veterinary medicine and dentistry, hospitals, clinics and other medical buildings. 
4.3.10 	Kennels with more than 6 dogs or cats over six months of age for commercial purposes. (8/10/09) 
4.3.11 	Funeral homes. 
4.3.12 	Public government facilities such as town offices, firehouses, police stations, ambulance garages, and public works garages. 
4.3.13 	Bed and breakfast facilities.  (7/1/93) 
4.3.14 	Country Inns (4/30/98) 
4.3.15 	Non-Profit Small Domestic Animal Shelters.  (2/1/08) 
4.3.16 	Over 55 Neighborhood Housing Communities and/or 55 Plus Active Adult Neighborhood Housing Communities as described in Section 12.21. (8/10/09) 
4.3.17 	Public service structures such as pump stations, associated piping, and water towers up to a maximum height of 100 feet for service, pressure maintenance, and fire protection. (8/10/09) 
4.3.18 	Accessory Building in any residential zone shall meet the following conditions: 
4.3.18.1 	Accessory Buildings in any residential zone, with the exception of Section 4.2.5, that is 1,200 sq. ft., shall meet all applicable building setbacks and maximum lot coverage requirements as referenced in Section 10. And shall not be located closer to the street than primary residential structure. 
4.3.18.2 	Accessory Building shall not be located closer than 6 feet of the main primary residential structure or other building. 
4.3.18.3 	An Accessory Building, in order to be permitted shall be compatible with and be compatible and be complimentary to the primary residential structure in all aspects such as siding, roofing materials and general aesthetic appearance. 
4.3.18.4 	Accessory Buildings shall meet all applicable local and state codes. 
(4.3.18 – 4.3.18.4 effective 12/01/18 application ZP 01-19) 
OSPR District Special Exceptions. The following uses are permitted provided they meet the conditions of Section 12 of these regulations.  (8/10/09) 
12 

Griswold Zoning Regulations 	Revised: December 01, 2018 
4.4.1 	Public parks and active recreation facilities to include but not be limited to playgrounds, ball fields, nature education areas and related accessory uses such as necessary parking lots, sanitary and other support facilities. (8/10/09) 
SECTION 5: R–20 HIGH DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS 
SECTION 5: R-20 High Density Residential Districts has been eliminated in its entirety in Zoning Regulations; this Section 5 has been intentionally left blank.  (8/10/09) 
SECTION 6: C–1 VILLAGE COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS 
SECTION 6   C Village Commercial Districts and Section 7:  C-2 Highway Commercial Districts, in their entirety have been blended to form a new SECTION 7:   C – COMMERICAL DISRICTS in these Zoning Regulations. This Section 6 has been intentionally left blank.  (5/12/16) 
13 

Griswold Zoning Regulations 	Revised: December 01, 2018 
SECTION 7:  C -COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS 
(Entire Section effective 5/12/16) 
7.1 	Purpose. The “C” Commercial District is intended to provide opportunities for a variety of professional, financial, retail and service establishments, grouping of automotive and related commercial establishments which will complement each other and thereby encourage sound economic conditions for all uses. 
Permitted Uses. The following uses are permitted by right in these Districts, provided they meet the 
7.2 
conditions of Section 13 and Section 11.8 of these Regulations. (8/26/99)  (3/3/00 
7.2.1 	Retail businesses, such as variety stores, apparel stores, drug stores, grocery stores, antique shops, music shops, sporting goods stores, and book, stationery, magazine, candy, and tobacco shops which contain up to and including 5,000 square feet. Uses in excess of 5,000 square feet shall require a Special Exception in accordance with Section 12. (3/3/00) (8/10/2009) (11/9/2010) (11/18/11) (7/11/12) 
7.2.2 	Business services, such as banks, credit unions, loan companies, and other financial institutions, real estate and insurance agencies, utility offices, government and business and professional offices which contain up to and including 5,000 square feet. Uses in excess of 5,000 square feet shall require a Special Exception in accordance with Section 12.  (3/3/00) (8/10/09) 
7.2.3 	Personal services, such as barber shops, beauty salons, photographic studios, tailor, dressmaking, and millinery which contain up to and including 5,000 square feet of gross floor area. Uses in excess of 5,000 square feet shall require a Special Exception in accordance with Section 12. (3/3/00) (8/10/09) 
7.2.4 	Temporary Garage Sales/Yard Sales. Temporary Garage or yard sales are an accessory activity to a village commercial use and are permitted provided no such sale shall occur on the same lot more than four (4) times in a calendar year, and each occurrence shall be limited to no more than three (3) consecutive days; and provided that in regard to all temporary garage or yard sale activities which are located on lots fronting on any State highway, the lot owner shall provide parking areas on-site, off the highway, for safety and driving sight-line purposes. Temporary Garage Sales and/or Yard Sales on lots which do not or cannot provide on-site, off State Highway parking, are not permitted. (8/10/09) 
7.2.5 	Food Vending Operations 
Intent: The purpose of this regulation is to provide reasonable standards relative to the accessibility, appearance, and safety regarding mobile commercial food vending operations. 
Exemptions: The provisions of this section shall not apply to special events, festivals, community projects or public events which occur on a periodic basis and/or those that are specifically approved by the Griswold Board of Selectmen (and/ or the Borough Board of Burgesses) as an approved community-based special event. 
Responsibility: It shall be the applicant's responsibility to obtain any and all applicable permits over and above the local permits referenced in Section 7.2.5.1 of this regulation. 
Violations: The vendor, property owner/lessee and assigns shall be responsible for any violation of this section or any other sections of the Town of Griswold Code of Ordinances. Such violations may result in the revocation or denial of a Certificate of Zoning Compliance and for any future vending permits 
General Requirements: Mobile food vending carts may be allowed as a conditional and temporary use in the C Commercial zone provided they meet the following criteria: 
14 

Griswold Zoning Regulations 	Revised: December 01, 2018 
7.2.5.1 	Evidence of compliance with the applicable regulations of Uncas Health District and the Griswold Fire Marshal for the proposed food-vending vehicle and which shall be in the form of written documentation from the Uncas Health District and the Griswold Fire Marshal. This evidence of compliance is a prerequisite to and required to start the application process. 
7.2.5.2 	A site plan drawn to scale showing that the proposed vending vehicle placement meets the applicable front, side and rear setbacks for its underlying zoning district 
7.2.5.3 	There is a principal structure and/or business on site 
7.2.5.4 	The number of vending vehicles permitted per parcel shall be determined based on a site plan prepared in accordance with Sections 13. 
7.2.5.5 	A minimum of five (5) parking spaces shall be provided and maintained in addition to the minimum parking required for the principal business. Access driveways and parking areas shall be constructed in accordance with Section 14 of these regulations entitled Parking Requirements. 
7.2.5.6 	No portion of the vending vehicle shall be allowed to occupy or obstruct access to any parking stall or parking aisle required by the Zoning ordinance. 
7.2.5.7 	The vending vehicle shall not be located within twenty five (25) feet of an ingress /egress driveway. 
7.2.5.8 	The placement of the vending vehicle shall not create a hazard for traffic circulation within the site. 
7.2.5.9 	A letter or copy of an official lease agreement from the property owner to the vendor if the property is not owned by the vendor. 
7.2.5.10 	The Zoning Officer and/or Town Planner must find that the proposed operation complies with all applicable provisions of this Section, and that the proposed operation will not adversely affect traffic accessibility, or health and public safety. 
7.2.5.11 	The vending vehicle must obtain an annual zoning compliance permit and shall be required to satisfy the requirements of this section. 
7.2.5.12 	Isuance of a food vehicle vending permit shall be on a temporary basis and pay and the fees are as follows: $25 for a weekend up to a maximum of 3 days, $75 for a season up to a maximum of 7 week, and $250 for an annual fee. 
7.2.5.13 	Proposed signage shall conform to Section 15 of the Griswold Zoning Regulations for commercial zones. Flashing, blinking or strobe type lights to attract attention are strictly prohibited. 
7.2.5.14 	Vending on any street or sidewalk where vending is otherwise prohibited. 
7.2.5.15 	Vending between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. is prohibited. 
7.2.5.16 	Sell food or beverages for immediate consumption unless there is a litter receptacle available for patrons use. 
7.2.5.17 	Te use of any device which produces loud noise, FLASHING, OR STROBING LIGHTS or the use of any loudspeaker, public address system or similar device to attract the attention of the public is strictly prohibited. 
15 
Griswold Zoning Regulations 	Revised: December 01, 2018 
7.2.5.18 	All charcoal and gas fired grills shall be property screened, fenced or blocked to prevent the general public from accessing the heated surfaces. 
7.2.5.19 	Portable bathroom facilities shall be provided when vending operations provide outdoor seating for the general public. 
7.2.5.20 	Temporary Fabric Canopy Structures shall comply with the following regulations: (10/03/16) 
a. 	
A canopy structure shall not exceed the ICC and NFPA square footage guidelines. A canopy is a manufactured structure constructed of fabric or pliable materials and is open without side walls or drops. Tarps do not qualify as a canopy. 

b. 	
A minimum clearance of 15 feet shall be maintained between the canopy and all structures including the mobile commercial food vending cart / vehicle. 

c. 	
Canopy structures shall be properly anchored in accordance with the manufacturer’s recommendations. Support stakes and tie down ropes shall be properly marked so that they do not create a trip hazard. 

d. 	
The maximum number of canopy structures permitted is two. When two canopies are in use, the minimum clearance between canopies shall be 10 feet. 

e. 	
Canopy installation approval shall run concurrently with the vending permit issued.  The canopy permit fee shall be $150.00 each. 


Special Exceptions. The following uses are permitted provided they meet the conditions of Section 12 and Section 11.8 of these Regulations. (8;16/99 (3/3/00) 
7.3.1 	Assembling, converting, altering, finishing, cleaning or any other processing of products which is clearly accessory to a retail or service business and where goods so produced and/or processed are to be sold exclusively from the lot provided that:  (3/3/00)  (8/10/09) 
a. 	
The area used for such purposes shall be fully concealed from any street, and shall not be greater in area than 20% of the square feet devoted to retail sales;  (3/3/00) 

b. 	
Not more than four (4) employees are engaged in such production or processing (3/3/00) 


7.3.2 	Hospitals, Clinics, Medical Laboratories, Veterinary Services and other related Medical Services, and other medical buildings.(3/3/00) 
7.3.3 	Accessory uses and buildings, including the residence of the owner or an employee of the principal use, provided any residence shall be located within the same building or a separate building from the principal use.  (3/3/00) 

7.3.4 	Hotels, motels, restaurants and other eating establishments 
7.3.5 	Commercial recreation, including dance halls, billiard and pool parlors, bowling alleys, skating facilities, and drive-in theaters and similar establishments. (3/3/00) 
7.3.6 	Automotive service stations, automotive, marine, recreation and agricultural equipment sales, service, and repairs; airports for air commerce and general aviation as defined in Section 15-41­21 of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies, including the sales, servicing and repair of new and used aircraft and a flight school, with a runway not in excess of 3,000 feet in length. 
16 

Griswold Zoning Regulations 	Revised: December 01, 2018 (3/3/00) 
17 
Griswold Zoning Regulations Revised: December 01, 2018 
7.3.7 	Excavations 
7.3.8 	Amusement Game Arcades 
7.3.9 	Non-automotive repair services, such as electronics, radio, television and appliance shops, plumbing shops, carpenter shops, upholstery shops, and repair shops, except that no such operation shall require more than three (3) full-time employees. 
7.3.10 	Laundromats and Dry-Cleaning Establishments. (3/3/00) 
7.3.11 	Banquet Halls, Banquet Facilities (7/1/93) 
7.3.12 	Bed and Breakfast Facilities (7/1/93) (3/3/00) 
7.3.13 	Gasoline stations with or without convenience stores or food–related drive–through windows. (7/1/93)  (8/10/09) 
7.3.14 	Hotels, Banquet Facilities and Conference Centers 
7.3.15 	Funeral Homes and Crematories 
7.3.16 	Country Inns 
7.3.17 	Public Service Company Facilities, Public Service Structures such as pump stations, associated piping, and water towers up to a maximum height of 100 feet for water service, pressure maintenance, and fire protection. (8/10/09) 
7.3.18 	Over 55 Neighborhood Housing Communities and/or 55 Plus Active Adult Neighborhood Housing Communities as detailed in Section 12.21. (8/10/09) 
7.3.19 	Convalescent / Nursing Homes, Rehab Facilities, Assisted Living, Continuing Care 
7.3.20 	Liquor stores are permitted by Special Exception as long as there is not consumption of liquor on the premises and as long as there are not other liquor stores located on a lot within 500 feet of a lot containing another liquor store or any other retail business selling alcoholic beverages. SEE Section 11.13. (7/27/12) 
7.3.21 	Retail businesses which are not package or liquor stores and which are permitted to sell beer and/or wine, not for consumption on the premises, and which receive subsequent state permits. (7/27/12) 
7.3.22 	Warehousing, Wholesaling, Wholesaling  Distribution Centers 
7.3.23 	Child or Adult Day Care Centers 
7.3.24 	Home improvement supplies, including plumbing and lumber supplies. (3/3/00) 
7.3.25 	Self-storage facilities. (7/1/93) (3/3/00) 
7.3.26 	Truck terminals and repairs. (3/3/00) 
7.3.27 	Commercial nurseries, greenhouses, and garden centers. (3/3/00) 
18 

Griswold Zoning Regulations 	Revised: December 01, 2018 

7.3.28 Mixed Use Developments 
The following Mixed Use Development shall be permitted in all “C” – Commercial Zones by Special Exception.  The development shall be designed as a cohesive project designed to encourage and promote a well thought out and planned development. The mixed-use development shall consist of the uses permitted in item “1.a.” below and a minimum of at least three (3) of the herein permitted land use types permitted in items “1. b. thru g” below to be considered for review.  The development shall be subject to the following condition: (01/01/2017) 
1. 	The following land use types shall be permitted: 
a. 	
Retail, Commercial, Restaurant Use 

b. 	
Office Space including professional, medical 

c. 	
Alzheimer’s / Dementia Care 

d. 	
Senior Assisted Living Care 

e. 	
Active Adult / 55 Plus Housing 

f. 	
Senior Independent Living 

g. 	
Non – Age Restricted Housing (Conventional Market Rate Housing) 

h. 	
A minimum of 10 percent of the site shall be dedicated for Open Space for both Private and Public Use 


2. 	
The development shall contain a minimum of 10 acres of land. And shall satisfy the minimum Dimensional Requirements of the “C” Commercial Zone. 

3. 	
The development shall be services by public water and public sewers. 

4. 	
All roads within the proposed development shall remain as private roads and shall be constructed to the Town of Griswold Road Standards. 

5. 	
The total number of housing units shall not exceed Ten (10) units per acre. 

6. 	
All applicable sections of the Griswold Zoning Regulations shall apply including Sections 12, 13 and 14. 


SECTION 8:  BP – BUSINESS PARK DISTRICT 
(Entire Section effective 8/18/05) 
8.1 	Purpose. The Business Park District zoning classification is intended to provide for the establishment of business/commercial districts located in close proximity to an interstate highway exchange; and it is intended that the BP District will be located where suitable and compatible commercial and industrial land uses, consistent with these Regulations and consistent with environmental preservation guidelines, may be sited. Sound environmental preservation guidelines, for the purposes of the Town of Griswold Zoning Regulations are defined as guidelines for zoning approvals which take into consideration the need to preserve the town’s natural resources, to preserve air quality, water quality, and to consider the safety and security of nearby property and nearby property owners. These guidelines, therefore, shall eliminate uses which create unreasonable or severe impact, or create an unreasonable risk of severe impact on aquifers, water supplies, water quality, air quality, soil quality, forest and other natural resources. 
8.2 	Minimum Size. A Business Park District shall contain a minimum of 50 contiguous acres of land area, a portion of which must be readily accessible to an interstate highway, and which must have a minimum of fifty (50) feet of road frontage on one of the following State Highways in the Town of Griswold: 
19 

Griswold Zoning Regulations 	Revised: December 01, 2018 
8.2.1 	Route 12 
8.2.2 	Route 138 
8.2.3 	Route 164 
8.2.4 	Route 201 
8.2.5 	Route 165 
For the purposes of this section, one or more parcels under different ownership may be combined to achieve the minimum acreage requirements, provided that all owners sign the application documents and the application includes such rights-of-way, cross easements, declarations, or other legal documents as may be required to assure the development and use of the parcels in accordance with the plans presented. 
8.3 	Permitted Uses. The following uses are permitted by right, provided they shall meet the conditions of Section 11.8 “Landscaping, Screening, Buffer and Architectural Design Requirement”, and provided that they shall meet all other applicable sections of these Regulations, including but not limited to Section 13 “Site Plan Requirements”, and provided that they shall meet the architectural review of the Commission, landscaping amenities appropriate to the location and adjacent properties, the posting of required performance guarantee; and the submission of all site plan documents under the signature and seal of a Connecticut licensed design professional.  (8/10/09) 
8.3.1 	Business, corporate, administrative and professional offices, bank or other financial institution. 
8.3.2 	Hospitals, medical offices and clinics. 
8.3.3 	Government Offices. 
8.4 	Special Exceptions. The following uses may be permitted, provided they meet the conditions of Section 12, Section 13, and Section 11.8 and all other applicable sections of these Regulations:   (8/10/09) 
8.4.1 	Restaurants, fast food establishments, hotels, motels, conference centers, and banquet facilities. 
8.4.2 	High-tech manufacturing uses, including but not limited to electronics, aerospace, pharmaceuticals, and medical supplies. 
8.4.3 	Retail businesses such as variety stores, department stores, apparel stores, sporting goods stores, home improvement stores, etc. having a minimum square footage of 30,000 square feet per retail use. 
8.4.4 	Automotive, marine, recreational, construction and agricultural equipment rental, sales, service and repair. 
8.4.5 	Light industrial fabrication, manufacturing, processing or assembling of products other than those specified in Section 8.4.2. 
8.4.6 	Public service company facilities. 
8.4.7 	Commercial nurseries, greenhouses and garden centers. 
8.4.8 	Convalescent and/or nursing homes, rehabilitation facilities, assisted living facilities and continuing care facilities and/or elder care facilities including elder care day care. (8/10/09) 
20 

Griswold Zoning Regulations 	Revised: December 01, 2018 
8.4.9 	Child or Adult Day Care Centers.  See Section 12.23  (8/10/09) (7/27/12) 
8.4.10 	Woodworking shops 
8.4.11 	Construction industry offices and equipment storage facilities 
. 

8.4.12 	Warehouses and wholesale distribution centers. 
8.4.13 	Research and development offices and laboratories. 
8.4.14 	Health or exercise clubs 
. 

8.4.15 	Theaters, bowling alleys or indoor skating rinks 
. 

8.4.16 	The Planning and Zoning Commission may issue a Special Exception for a reasonable and compatible recreation use facility. For purposes of this section, the words “recreational use” shall mean indoor or outdoor sports and fitness facilities, playing fields, picnic areas and facilities for the sale and serving of food, health products and beverages incidental and related to permitted recreational use. For the purposes of this section, the words “recreational use” shall not mean professional or semiprofessional sporting events, trade shows, theaters, music concerts, or nightclubs.  (8/10/09) 
8.4.17 	Public Service Structures such as pump stations, associated piping, and water towers up to a maximum height of 100 feet for water service, pressure maintenance, and fire protection. (8/10/09) 
8.4.18 	Retail businesses which are not package stores that may wish to sell beer and/or wine, not for consumption on the premises, and which receive subsequent state permits. (11/18/11) 
8.5 	Access. Lots within a Business Park District may be used for the purposes set forth in this Section 8 only if they comply with the following access requirements and with the frontage and dimensional requirements as specified in Section 8.9 herein. 
8.5.1 	In order to maintain and preserve the residential and rural character of the abutting areas of Griswold which will be adjacent to the new Business Park District(s), the Planning and Zoning Commission shall require, if practicable, developers or businesses within each district to create internal business park roadways, which intersect a state road, and which provide ingress and egress to the Business Park District. The use of existing town roads for these internal roadways shall be prohibited only if the subject road serves more than one (1) residential dwelling unit(s). Said internal business park roadways shall meet all the road construction requirements of the Town of Griswold as specified in Griswold Road Ordinances, except that the minimum roadway width shall be thirty (30) feet to accommodate the higher frequency of two-way trailer truck traffic. (6/28/06) 
8.5.2 	Access to Town roads that serve more than one (1) dwelling unit(s) shall be gated for emergency vehicle access only. (6/28/06) 
8.6 	Lot Coverage. Maximum lot coverage by impervious surfaces, including all parking areas, buildings, and other structures, shall be limited to sixty percent (60%) of the total lot area.  (8/10/09) 
The Planning and Zoning Commission may, by Special Exception, increase said maximum lot coverage to eighty percent (80%) of the total lot area, provided that the stormwater generated by all impervious areas is subject to collection in an approved stormwater management system designed and constructed using low impact development techniques to reduce stormwater impact consistent with the guidelines of the current Connecticut Department of Energy and Environmental Protection Stormwater Management Manual (2004) or more recent amendments. (8/10/09) 
21 

Griswold Zoning Regulations 	Revised: December 01, 2018 
8.7 	Utilities. Land development projects within the Business Park District shall utilize public sewer and public water utilities; however, in the event that connection to public sewer and/or public water is impracticable due to the location of the lot or lots, then the land development project must include a private sewer system and private wells adequate for the project as determined by the State Department of Health and the Town of Griswold Department of Health. Consideration must be given to the impact of the construction and development as a whole, and the sewer system and well/water system, in particular, on surrounding and nearby wells, residences, aquifers and wetlands. 
8.7.1 	All utility appurtenances including sewer, water, stormwater management, electrical, fiber optic, cable television, telephone, etc. shall be located underground to the extent reasonably possible, and in accordance with all applicable local, state and federal regulations. 
8.8 	Sidewalks. The Commission may require an applicant to construct sidewalks on one or both sides of internal roadways and/or along existing State Highways where frontage is utilized in accordance with this Section. 
8.9 	Dimensional Requirements. The following dimensional requirements shall apply to lots within the Business Park District and said requirements shall be cross-referenced to Section 10 of these Regulations: 

8.9.1 	Lots which front on a State Highway: 
8.9.1.1 	The minimum lot size shall be 80,000 square feet. 
8.9.1.2 	The minimum street frontage shall be 150 feet. 
8.9.1.3 	Maximum Lot Coverage: See Section 8.6 of these Regulations. 
8.9.1.4 	Minimum Front Yard Requirement: 50 feet. 
8.9.1.5 	Minimum Side and Rear Yard Requirement when the Business Park District abuts a Commercial lot:  30 feet. (06/28/06) (8/10/09) 
8.9.1.5.1 	Minimum Side and Rear Yard Requirement for a Business Park water tower where abutting any Residential (R) district or use:  100 feet. (8/10/09) 
8.9.1.6 	Minimum Side and Rear Yard Requirement when the Business Park District is adjacent to any residential lot or any lot in residential use:   50 feet 

8.9.2 Lots which front on the internal business park roadways, but not on any State Highway: 
8.9.2.1 	The minimum lot size shall be 60,000 square feet. 
8.9.2.2 	The minimum street frontage shall be 100 feet. 
8.9.2.3 	Maximum Lot Coverage: See Section 8.6 of these Regulations. 
8.9.2.4 	Minimum Front Yard Requirement: 30 feet. 
8.9.2.5 	Minimum Side and Rear Yards: 20 
22 

Griswold Zoning Regulations 	Revised: December 01, 2018 
SECTION 9: I – INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS 
9.1 	Purpose. This section is intended to provide for the establishment of Districts where certain manufacturing and related activities may occur. 
9.2 	Procedure. Industrial Districts may be established by the Commission or in response to an application for a change of zone. On receipt of an application for a change of zone, the Commission shall proceed as provided for in Section 8-3 of the General Statutes. No application for a change of zone to establish an Industrial District shall be approved unless the following conditions are met. 
9.2.1 	The proposed zone includes at least ten (10) acres of land. 
9.2.2 	The application is accompanied by a site plan for the proposed use, prepared in accordance with Section 13 of these Regulations. 
9.3 	Permitted Uses. The following uses are permitted in the Industrial Districts, providing they meet the conditions of Section 13 and Section 11.8 of these Regulations. (8/26/99) (8/10/09) 
9.3.1 	Manufacturing, assembling, processing and packaging of raw materials or products, except as prohibited in Section 2.2.6 of these Regulations, and provided that all such activity is conducted within buildings. 
9.3.2 	Truck terminals and warehouses. 
9.3.3 	Research laboratories. 
9.3.4 	Printing and publishing. 
9.3.5 	Accessory uses and buildings 
9.4 	Special Exceptions. The following uses are permitted, provided they meet the conditions of Section 12, Section 13, and Section 11.8 of these Regulations.   (8/26/99) (8/10/09) 
9.4.1 	Excavations. 
9.4.2 	Banquet halls and banquet facilities.   (7/1/93) 
9.4.3 	Public Service Structures such as, associated piping, and water tower up to a maximum height of 100 feet for water service, pressure maintenance, and fire protection. (8/10/09) 
9.4.4 	Convalescent and/or nursing homes, rehabilitation facilities, assisted living facilities and continuing care facilities and/or elder care facilities including elder care day care. See Section 


12.22. (7/27/12) 
9.4.5 	Medical Clinics, Medical Offices, Research Laboratories, and other related Medical Services including Veterinary Services. (11/10/14) 
9.4.6 	Mixed Use Developments such as Multi-Family Residential, Elderly Residential, Retail, Restaurants and Office Uses. Mixed-use development is defined as a development consisting of a blend of compatible uses including commercial, multi-family residential,  elderly residential, professional offices and medical uses planned as a cohesive  project designed to encourage and promote a well planned development.  A mixed-use development shall consist of a minimum of at least three of the herein permitted land use types in to be considered for review. (11/10/14) 
23 

Griswold Zoning Regulations 	Revised: December 01, 2018 
SECTION 10:  DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS 
10.1 Minimum Lot Size. 
R-80 -80,000 square feet C--40,000 square feet R-60 -60,000 square feet I -40,000 square feet R-40 -40,000 square feet BP -80,000 square feet with frontage on a State Highway. (8/18/05) 
60,000 square feet with frontage on an internal business park roadway. (8/18/05) 
10.1.1 	Interior or rear lots are allowed under these regulations, provided that the lot includes an access strip no less than 50 feet wide at all points, and provided that the access strip connects to an improved town or state road, and provided that the lot has at least twice the required minimum lot size for the underlying zone not including the access corridor strip or any part of the parcel under 100 feet wide, provided, however, that the Commission may approve a rear lot having a lot size of one and one-half (1 1/2) times that required in the subject zone with an access corridor width of 30 feet in a Conservation Subdivision under Subdivision Regulation Section 6.3.8; and provided however the commission may approve a rear lot having a lot size of two (2) times that required in the subject zone with an access corridor width of 30 feet in a Conventional Subdivision with two tiers of rear lots in Subdivision Regulation Section 5.2.6. For other requirements for rear lots, see the following section. (8/10/09) 
10.2 Minimum Street Frontage. 
R-80 -200 feet C--150 feet R-60 -175 feet I -150 feet R-40 -150 feet BP -150 feet with frontage on a State Highway.  (8/18/05) 
100 feet with frontage on an internal business park roadway. (8/18/05) 
10.2.1 	Minimum frontage requirements may be reduced to no less than 50 feet by vote of the Commission on the zoning permit site plan for lots facing a circular turn-around at the end of a permanent dead end street, provided that the frontage requirement is maintained at the building line.  (8/10/09) 
10.2.2 	The minimum frontage requirement may be reduced by vote of the Commission, for rear lots or interior lots to no less than fifty (50) feet for an interior lot, provided such lot has a minimum lot size which is two times the standard required lot size for that zoning district, unless otherwise provided in these regulations. At no point shall a lot line be closer than fifty (50) feet apart, unless otherwise provided by these regulations. Not more than four (4) such rear lots with reduced frontage shall be located adjacent to each other in either one or two tiers behind the street frontage lots. The Commission, in its sole discretion, may require at any time that the applicant submit a survey which conforms to Class A-2 standards for accuracy, as defined in the Regulations of State Agencies pursuant to Conn. Gen. Stats. §20-300b, as amended.   (8/10/09) 
10.2.3 	The access strip for each rear lot must be owned in Fee Simple by the lot owner.  (8/10/09) 
24 

Griswold Zoning Regulations 	Revised: December 01, 2018 
10.3 Minimum Front Yard 
R-80 -75 feet C -40 feet 
R-60 -50 feet I -40 feet 
R-40 -50 feet 
BP -50 feet with frontage on a State Highway.  (8/18/05) 

30 feet with frontage on an internal business park roadway. (8/18/05) 
The street line from which the minimum front yard is measured shall be considered to be no closer than twenty-five (25) feet from the centerline of the roadway. 
10.3.1 	ADA Access Ramps. In the R-40, R-60, and R-80 zones, the front yard setback requirement shall not apply to the construction of an ADA handicap ramp for single family and two-family residential buildings built prior to 2009 
10.4 Minimum Side and Rear Yards. 
R-80 -50 feet C -30 feet 
R-60 -30 feet I -30 feet 
R-40 -30 feet 
BP -30 feet with frontage on a State Highway.  (8/18/05) 

20 feet with frontage on an internal business park roadway. (8/18/05) 50 feet from any adjacent Residential (R) district.  (6/28/06) 
10.4.1 	Side and rear yards may be reduced by one-half (1/2) for accessory buildings on residential lots. 
10.4.2 	Side yards may be reduced by vote of the Commission on a zoning permit or special exception site plan as applicable between commercial buildings on adjoining lots in the C-Commercial zone, provided the Commission determines that such reduction will not result in limiting access to all parts of the property by emergency vehicles and will enhance the attractiveness and economic welfare of the adjoining establishments. (8/10/09) 
10.4.3 	Corner lots. When a lot has two front yards, setbacks shall be maintained on corner lots where the front yard shall be the street side on which the house faces and the rear yard shall be opposite the front yard, and the remaining sides shall be the side yards. The setback dimensions shall be determined by the setback requirement for the zone. 
10.5 Maximum Lot Coverage 
R-80 -10 % C -45% 
R-60 -15% I -60% 
R-40 -20% 
BP -See Section 8.6 of these Regulations. 

25 

Griswold Zoning Regulations 	Revised: December 01, 2018 
10.6 	Maximum Building Height. No residential building shall exceed three (3) stories, nor shall the total building height above a finished grade exceed thirty-five (35) feet, except that features such as steeples, cupolas, water towers, antenna structures for individual dwellings, chimneys, wind energy conversion systems, and agricultural buildings may exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height, up to a maximum of fifty (50) feet in height, and any such structure which exceeds thirty-five (35) feet shall require a Special Exception in accordance with Section 12 of these Regulations. The Commission may, by Special Exception in accordance with Section 12 of these Regulations, permit a nonresidential building higher than thirty-five 
(35) feet or three (3) stories if it determines that such building shall not constitute a safety hazard or be visually inconsistent with the general character and appearance of the surrounding area. All items higher than thirty-five (35) feet must have fall space, on the same lot, equal to the height of the item, to protect adjacent property. 
For non-residential buildings, the maximum building height shall not exceed five (5) stories, nor shall the total building height above a finished grade exceed fifty-five (55) feet in height except for features such as steeples, cupolas, water towers, antenna structures for individual non-residential buildings, chimneys, wind energy conversion systems.  Agricultural buildings may exceed 55 feet up to a maximum of sixty (60) feet; and except that the Commission may, by Special Exception in accordance with Section 12 of these Regulations, permit a non-residential building of higher than fifty-five (55) feet or five stories if it determines that such building shall not constitute a safety hazard or be in visual conflict with the general character and appearance of the surrounding area. 
Water towers for storage, pressure maintenance, and fire protection shall be limited to 100 feet in height. All structures higher than fifty-five (55) feet shall be permitted only by Special Exception. For Wind Energy Conversions Systems (WECS), see Section 11.15 of these Regulations. For Wireless Telecommunication Facilities Towers and other commercial radio tower structures, see Section 11.19 of these Regulations. (1/15/99) (8/10/09) 
10.7 	Area and Frontage Exception. Any lot of record in separate ownership and not contiguous with other lots in the same ownership at the time of adoption of these Regulations and which does not meet the area and frontage requirements for the district in which it is located, may be used for the purposes permitted in that district, provided that the yard and other requirements, excepting those for lot area and frontage, can be met. In addition, all water and sewage systems shall comply with the appropriate regulations of the Town of Griswold and the State of Connecticut. 
Documentary proof of pre-existing lots or lots of record in separate ownership and not contiguous with other lots in the same ownership at the time of adoption of these Regulations shall be provided to the Zoning Enforcement Office at, or prior to, the time that an application for a zoning and/or building permit is made. Such proof shall include but not be limited to deeds, maps and certified title searches.  (6/01/90) 
10.8 	Driveway Access Design and Construction Standards 
No Zoning Permit shall be issued by the ZEO or the Commission as applicable to the use of land unless the driveway shall conform to these standards. (8/10/09) 
10.8.1 	Surface flow from driveways: Driveways shall be designed to prevent surface flow onto existing or proposed streets. The Board of Selectmen or their designated agent may review and approve a design to prevent surface flow from Town property onto private property. Privately owned and maintained drainage diversion swales, detention areas, and/or dry wells shall be utilized to the greatest extent possible. Where private drainage features are utilized, a declaration and covenant, to the satisfaction of the Town Attorney, shall be filed in the land records requiring that maintenance of such features is the responsibility of the lot owner and that, subject to proper notification by the Town. (8/10/09) 
26 

Griswold Zoning Regulations 	Revised: December 01, 2018 
10.8.2 	Construction Standards: Driveways shall be constructed of a durable, non-erodible, load-bearing material capable of supporting emergency equipment up to 50,000 pounds. Sub–base shall be bank run gravel with a minimum depth of 8 inches. Base material shall be processed gravel with a minimum depth of 4 inches. Culverts in the Town right-of-way shall be a minimum 15 inches internal diameter and should be located no closer than 10 feet from another driveway. Use of ACCMP is not allowed. (8/10/09) 
10.8.3 	Slope and Grading Standards: Driveway grades shall not exceed 15% and driveways stretches where grades exceed 10% shall be paved with concrete or asphalt. (8/10/09) 
Driveway grade shall not exceed 3% over the first 20 feet from the front property line. Driveway side slopes shall not exceed a slope of three horizontal to one vertical (3:1) unless retaining walls or other stabilizing measures are provided. (8/10/09) 
10.8.4 	Width: Driveway width shall be a minimum of 12 feet. Driveways shall have sufficient radius at curves to accommodate emergency equipment. (8/10/09) 
10.8.5 	Vertical Clearance: To avoid damage to emergency equipment, a minimum vertical clearance of 14 feet shall be maintained by the property owner over the entire driveway.  (8/10/09) 
10.8.6 	Sightline: Minimum sightline distances at the intersection of the driveway with the public road shall conform to the requirements of the Connecticut Department of Transportation. This distance may be increased where the Board of Selectmen or their designated agent has determined that the speed or volume of traffic requires a higher standard for safety. (8/10/09) 
10.8.7 	Angle of Intersection: Driveways shall intersect with the public road at an angle of approximately ninety degrees for at least the first 20 feet from the front property line adjacent to the public road as a measure to assure sightline and traffic visibility.  (8/10/09) 
10.9 Common and Loop Driveways 
10.9.1 	Intent. The intent of this section is to reduce the impact to native habitat, including wetlands and watercourses, to protect natural features including rare flora, large specimen trees, scenic points, ledge outcroppings, and stonewalls, and to allow a mechanism by which the cost of maintenance of separate long driveways can be reduced. The Commission may require that a common driveway be utilized to minimize curb cuts where traffic conditions are hazardous due to high speeds and heavy volume, to enhance scenic vistas and rural character, or to protect natural and historic features of special interest. (8/10/09) 
10.9.2 	Approval. Common and Loop driveways shall be constructed only following site plan approval. The final site plan shall be filed in the land records. (8/10/09) 
10.9.3 	Loop Driveway Design. A loop driveway shall typically be parallel to the road and no structures shall be located between the loop (common) driveway and the road. (8/10/09) 
10.9.4 	Limit on number of users. The Commission may approve utilization of a loop driveway for up to five dwelling units and common driveways for up to four dwelling units. Additional users are not permitted. (8/10/09 
10.9.5 	Fire Marshal Review. Any common driveway or loop driveway proposal may be submitted to the Fire Marshal for review, comment, and approval.  (8/10/09) 
27 

Griswold Zoning Regulations 	Revised: December 01, 2018 
10.9.6 	Driveway Maintenance Agreement. A driveway maintenance agreement shall be approved by the Commission and filed in the Land Records prior to filing of a final approved site plan. The following statement shall be included in the agreement document: "The common driveway is to be privately owned and is not to be maintained or constructed or improved as a public highway or road by the Town of Griswold either now or in the future. All obligations regarding its maintenance, construction, and improvement shall rest with the owners of the subject lots." (8/10/09) 
10.9.7 	Width and Vertical Clearance. The driveway width shall be a minimum of 14 feet, except that the width of the driveway may be adjusted by the Commission depending on environmental conditions such as wetlands or ledge. Vertical clearance shall be 14 feet for the entire width and length. (8/10/09) 
10.9.8 	Certification of Construction. Certification that the driveway was built according to the approved plan shall be provided by the installer. The Zoning Enforcement Officer may require that such certification is provided by a Professional Engineer in order to determine compliance with the approved plan and applicable regulations. (8/10/09) 
10.9.9 	Passing Areas. Pullouts to accommodate two-way traffic, measuring at least 8 by 50 feet, may be required where recommended by the Fire Marshal. Passing areas shall generally be provided at 500 foot intervals, depending on site conditions. (8/10/09) 
10.9.10 	Street Numbers. Street numbers shall be posted on the loop road or on the common driveways where each individual driveway intersects it; and also at the intersection of the State or Town road. (8/10/09) 
28 

Griswold Zoning Regulations 	Revised: December 01, 2018 
SECTION 11:  SUPPLEMENTARY REQUIREMENTS 
11.1 	Definition. These are requirements which apply to more than one zoning district or to specific uses, regardless of where they may occur. 
11.2 	Multiple Uses and Buildings. The Commission may permit more than one permitted building or use to be located and conducted on a lot under the same ownership for commercial, industrial, recreational, institutional, governmental, educational and farming purposes. Such buildings or uses shall be planned as a unit, with integrated parking, access, building design and landscaping and shall meet the requirements of these Regulations. Only one principal structure shall be permitted on a residential lot unless otherwise permitted by the Commission.  (8/10/09) 
11.3 	Proximity to Water. No building, except a boathouse, shall be located within twenty-five (25) feet of any watercourse, as that term is defined in the Griswold Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations. All subsurface sewage disposal systems shall be set back from streams, rivers, brooks, lakes and ponds according to the requirements of the State Health Code. (8/10/09) 
11.4 	Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA) Requirements. The SFHA includes all areas identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in its Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for New London County, Connecticut, dated July 18, 2011, and accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM), dated July 18, 2011, and other supporting data applicable to the Town of Griswold, and any subsequent revisions thereto, are adopted by reference and declared to be a part of these regulations. Since mapping is legally adopted by reference into this regulation, it must take precedence when more restrictive until such time as a map amendment or map revision is obtained from FEMA. The area of special flood hazard includes any area shown on the FIRM such as Zones A and AE, including areas designated as a floodway on a FIRM. Areas of special flood hazard are determined utilizing the base flood elevations (BFE) provided on the flood profiles in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for a community. BFE's provided on a Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) are only approximate (rounded up or down) and should be verified with the BFEs published in the FIS for a specific location. 
The degree of flood protection required by this regulation is considered the minimum reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering consideration and research. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This regulation does not imply or guarantee that land outside the Special Flood Hazard Area or uses permitted in such areas will be free from flooding and flood damages. This regulation shall not create liability on the part of the Town of Griswold or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this regulation or any administrative decision lawfully made there under. The Town of Griswold, its officers, and employees shall assume no liability for another person's reliance on any maps, data or information provided by the Town of Griswold. 
For the purposes of this subsection of these Regulations, certain words or terms are defined as follows: (7/11/11) 
Above-ground Storage Tanks: Above ground storage tanks (oil, propane, etc.) which are located outside or inside of the structure must either be elevated above the base flood elevation (BFE) on a concrete pad, or be securely anchored with tie-down straps to prevent flotation or lateral movement, have the top of the fill pipe extended above the BFE, and have a screw fill cap that does not allow for the infiltration of flood water. (7/11/11) 
Base Flood: The flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. (1/1/93) 
29 

Griswold Zoning Regulations 	Revised: December 01, 2018 
Base Flood Elevation (BFE): The elevation of the crest of the base flood or 100-year flood. The height in relation to mean sea level expected to be reached by the waters of the base flood at pertinent points in the floodplains of coastal and riverine areas. (7/11/11) 
Basement: That portion of a building having its floor sub grade (below ground level) on all sides.  (1/1/93) 
Compensatory Storage: The water holding capacity of the floodplain, except those areas which are tidally influenced, shall not be reduced. Any reduction caused by filling, new construction or substantial improvements involving an increase in footprint to the structure, shall be compensated for by deepening and/or widening of the floodplain, storage shall be provided on-site, unless easements have been gained from adjacent property owners; it shall be provided within the same hydraulic reach and a volume not previously used for flood storage; it shall be hydraulically comparable and incrementally equal to the theoretical volume of flood water at each elevation, up to and including the 100-year flood elevation, which would be displaced by the proposed project. Such compensatory volume shall have an unrestricted hydraulic connection to the same waterway or water body. Compensatory storage can be provided off-site if approved by the municipality. 
Cost: As related to substantial improvements, the cost of any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, alteration, repair or other improvement of a structure shall be established by a detailed written contractor's estimate. The estimate shall include, but be limited to:  the cost of materials (interior finishing elements, structural elements, utility and service equipment); sales tax on materials, building equipment and fixtures, including heating and air conditioning and utility meters; labor; built-in appliances; demolition and site preparation; repairs made to damaged parts of the building worked on at the same time; contractor's overhead; contractor's profit; and grant total. Items to be excluded include: cost of plans and specifications, survey costs, permit fees, outside improvements such as septic systems, water supply wells, landscaping, sidewalks, fences, yard lights, irrigation systems, and detached structures such as garages, sheds and gazebos. (7/11/11) 
Development: Any man-made change to improved real estate including, but not limited to construction of buildings or structures: the construction of buildings or structures; the construction of additions, alterations or substantial improvements to buildings or structures; the placement of buildings or structures; mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment; the storage deposition, or extraction of materials or permanent storage of materials; and the installation, repair or removal of public or private sewage disposal systems or water supply facilities (7/11/11) 
Equal Conveyance: Within the floodplain, except those areas which are tidally influenced, as designated on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for the community, encroachments resulting from filling, new construction or substantial improvements involving an increase in footprint of the structure, are prohibited unless the applicant provides certification by a registered professional engineer demonstrating, with supporting hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice, that such encroachments shall not result in any (0 feet) increase in flood levels (base flood elevation). Work within the flood plan and the land adjacent to the flood plain, including work to provide compensatory storage shall not be constructed in such a way so as to cause an increase in flood stage or flood velocity. (7/11/11) 
Existing Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision: A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, as a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before April 1, 1978, the effective date of the flood plain management regulations adopted by the community. (7/11/11) 
30 

Griswold Zoning Regulations Revised: December 01, 2018 
Expansion to an Existing Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision: The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufacturing homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. (7/11/11) 
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA): The federal agency that administers the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP). (7/11/11) 
Finished Living Space: As related to fully enclosed areas blow the base flood elevation (BFE), a space that is, but is not limited to, heated and/or cooled, contains finished floors, tile, linoleum hardwood, etc.), has sheetrock walls that may or may not be painted or wallpapered, and other amenities such as furniture, appliances, bathrooms fireplaces and other items that are easily damaged by floodwaters and expensive to clean, repair or replace. (7/11/11) 
Flood or Flooding: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from either the overflow of inland or tidal waters, or the unusual and rapid accumulation/runoff of surface waters from any source. (7/11/11) 
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM): The official map of a community on which the Federal Emergency management Agency (FEMA) has delineated both the special flood hazard areas (100-year floodplain) and the insurance risk premium zones applicable to a community. (7/11/11) 
Flood Insurance Study (FIS): The official study of a community in which the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has conducted an examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations. (7/11/11) 
Floodway: The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one (1) foot. 
Floor: The top surface of an enclosed area in a building (including the basement), i.e., top of slab in concrete slab construction or top of wood flooring in wood frame construction. The term does not include the floor of a garage used solely for parking of vehicles.  (1/1/93) 
Functionally Dependent Use or Facility: A use or facility that cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities. The term does not include seafood processing facilities, long-term storage, manufacturing, sales or services facilities. (7/11/11) 
Historic Structure: Any structure that is: (a) Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; (b) Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historic significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; (c) Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or (d) Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either (1) By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or (2) Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. (7/11/11) Lowest Floor: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including the basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, useable solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building’s lowest floor. 
31 

Griswold Zoning Regulations Revised: December 01, 2018 
Lowest Floor: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including the basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, useable solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building’s lowest floor. 
Manufactured Home: A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term also includes park trailers, travel trailers, recreation vehicles, and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property.  (1/1/93) 
Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision: A parcel, or contiguous parcels of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
Market Value: As related to substantial improvement and substantial damage, the market value of the structure shall be determined by the appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. (7/11/11) 
Mean Sea Level: The North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on the Town of Griswold’s Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced. (7/11/11) 
New Construction: Structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after April 1, 1978 and includes any subsequent improvement to such structures.  (1/1/93) 
New Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision:  A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after April 1, 1978, the effective date of the floodplain management regulation adopted by the community. (7/11/11) 
No Structures Entirely or Partially Over Water: New construction, substantial improvements and repair to structures that have sustained substantial damage cannot be constructed or located entirely or partially over water unless it is a functionally dependent use or facility. (7/11/11) 
Portion of Structure in Flood Zone: If any portion of a structure lies within the Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA), the entire structure is considered to be in the SFHA. The entire structure must meet the construction requirements of the flood zone. The structure includes any attached additions, garages, decks, sunrooms, or any other structure attached to the main structure. Decks or porches that extend into a more restrictive flood zone will require the entire structure to meet the standards of the more restrictive zone. (7/11/11) 
Recreational Vehicle: A vehicle which is: (a) built on a single chassis; (b) four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; (c) designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and (d) designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling put as a temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. (7/11/11) 
Special Flood Hazard Area: The area within Griswold subject to one percent (1%) or greater chance of flooding in any given year, as identified on the Griswold FIRM.  (1/1/93) 
Start of Construction: Start of construction includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. 
32 

Griswold Zoning Regulations Revised: December 01, 2018 
The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of a structure (including a manufactured home) on a site, such as pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the state of excavation or placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units and not part of the main structure.  For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. (7/11/11) 
Structure: A walled and roofed building which is principally above ground, including a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank, or other man-made facilities or infrastructures. (7/11/11) 
Structures in Two Flood Zones: If a structure lies within two or more flood zones, the construction standards of the most restrictive zone apply to the entire structure (i.e., V zone is more restrictive than A zone; structure must be built to the highest BFE).  The structure includes any attached additions, garages, decks, sunrooms, or any other structure attached to the main structure. (Decks or porches that extend into a more restrictive zone will require the entire structure to meet the requirements of the more restrictive zone.) (7/11/11) 
Substantial Damage: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.  (1/1/93) 
Substantial Improvement: Any combination of repairs, reconstruction, alteration, or improvements to a structure, taking place during a one-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure. The market value of the structure should be either the appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the occurring damage. For the purposes of this definition, “substantial improvement” is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however, include any project for improvement of a structure required to comply with existing health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions. 
Variance: A grant of relief by a community from the terms of the flood plain management regulation that allows construction in a manner otherwise prohibited and where specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship. (7/11/11) 
Violation: Failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without required permits, lowest floor elevation documentation, flood-roofing certifications or required floodway encroachment calculations is presumed to be a violation until such time as that documentation is provided. (7/11/11) 
Water Surface Elevation: The height, in relation to the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988, (or other datum, where specified) of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the Floodplain of costal or riverine areas. (7/11/11) 
The following requirements are intended to reduce the threat to public safety and loss of property values resulting from periodic flooding and to ensure eligibility for continued participation by the Town of Griswold in the National Flood Insurance Program. In cases where conflicts occur between the requirements of the underlying zoning district and these SFHA requirements, the requirements of this subsection shall control. The following regulations apply with the SFHA: 
33 

Griswold Zoning Regulations Revised: December 01, 2018 
11.4.1 	All applications for Zoning Permits or Special Exceptions for new development or subdivisions (including manufactured home parks and subdivisions) greater than fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres whichever is lesser, shall include with such applications base flood (a flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year) elevation data for that portion of development located within the SFHA. (7/11/11) 
11.4.2 	Within the SFHA, the following requirements shall be met: 
a. 	
All new construction and substantial improvement of residential structures shall have the lowest floor elevated to or above the base flood level. 

b. 	
All new construction and substantial improvement of nonresidential structures shall have the lowest floor elevated or flood-proofed to or above the base flood level. 


Nonresidential structures may be flood-proofed in lieu of being elevated provided that together with all attendant utilities and sanitary facilities the areas of the structure below the required elevation are water tight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall review and/or develop structural design specifications and plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with acceptable standards of practice for meeting the provisions of this section. Such certification shall be provided to the Building Inspector. 
c. 	New construction or substantial improvements of elevated buildings that include fully enclosed areas formed by foundation and other exterior walls below the base flood elevation shall be designed to preclude finished living space and designed to allow for the entry and exit of flood water to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls. Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect to meet the following minimum criteria: 
1) 	Provide a minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less than one 
(1) square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
2) 	The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot above grade; 
3) 	Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of flood water in both directions; 
4) 	Electrical, plumbing, and other utility connections are prohibited below the base flood level; and 
5) 	Access to the enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to allow for parking of vehicles (garage door) or for the limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises (standard exterior door) or entry to the living area (stairway or elevator). 
d. 	All manufactured homes, including “mobile” homes and recreational vehicles placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer or substantially improved, shall be elevated so that the lowest floor is above the base flood elevation.  This includes a manufactured home located outside a manufactured home park or subdivision, in a new manufactured home park or subdivision, in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, or on a site in an existing park which manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as a result of a flood. 
34 

Griswold Zoning Regulations 	Revised: December 01, 2018 
The manufactured home shall be placed on a permanent foundation which is securely anchored and to which the structure is securely anchored so that it will resist flotation, lateral movement, and hydrostatic and hydrodynamic pressures. Anchoring may include but not be limited to the use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. 
The manufactured home shall be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood damage, providing adequate access and drainage, piling foundations (when used) no more than 10 feet apart, and reinforced of any piers more than six (6) feet above ground level. Recreational vehicles placed on sites within a SFHA shall either be on the site for fewer than 108 consecutive days, and be fully-licensed and ready for highway use, or meet all the general standards of Section 11.4.3 including the elevation and anchoring requirements of this section. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by a quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions; (7/11/11) 
e. 	When base flood elevation data or floodway data are not available, then the Commission shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source in order to administer the provisions of these Regulations. 
11.4.3 	Prior to issuing a Zoning Permit for proposed construction or development within the A or AE Zones, the Zoning Enforcement Officer or the Commission shall review plans for such construction or development and require that: (7/11/11) 
a. 	
All sites shall be reasonably free from flooding; 

b. 	
New construction or substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure. 

c. 	
New construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage; 

d. 	
New construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices than minimize flood damage; 

e. 	
New or replacement water supply systems and/or sanitary sewer systems are designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters; 

f. 	
On-site waste disposal systems are located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding; and 

g. 	
Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning equipment, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding.  (1/1/93) 


11.4.4 	Within the floodway, as designated on the Flood Insurance Rate Map or any other source when no regulatory floodway has been designated, all encroachments including fill, new construction, substantial improvements to existing structures, and other development are prohibited unless certification, with supporting technical date, by a Connecticut registered engineer is provided by the applicant demonstrating, through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice, that such encroachment shall not result in any  
35 

Griswold Zoning Regulations 	Revised: December 01, 2018 
(00.0 feet) increase in flood levels during a 100-year flood.  Fences in the floodway must be aligned with the flow and be of an open design. A permit may be given which allows encroachments resulting in increases in base flood elevations provided the community first obtains a conditional floodway revision by meeting the requirements of the Code of Federal Regulations 44, Chapter 1, Subsection 65.12, as amended. (1/1/93) (7/11/11) 
When base flood elevations have been determined within Zone AE on the community's Flood Insurance Rate Map but a regulatory floodway has not been designated, the Commission must require that no new construction, substantial improvements, repair to structures which have sustained substantial damage or other development, including fill, shall be permitted which will increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one (1) foot at any point within the community when all existing and anticipated development is considered cumulatively with the proposed development. (7/11/11) 
The Commission may request floodway data of an applicant for watercourses with FEMA-published floodways. When such data is provided by an applicant or whenever such data is available for any other source (in response to the municipality's request or not), the community shall adopt a regulatory floodway based on the principle that the floodway must be able to convey the waters of the base flood without increasing the water surface elevation more than one (1) foot at any point within the community. (7/11/11) 
11.4.5 	Applicants for development within the SFHA shall submit with their applications assurances that the flood carrying capacity is maintained within any altered or relocated portion of any watercourses. 
11.4.6 	The Commission shall notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the Water Resources Unit of the Connecticut Department of Energy and Environmental Protection prior to approving any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and shall submit copies of such notices to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
11.4.7 	For all applications for permits within the SFHA, the Commission shall: (a) record the elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved structures, in accordance with Section 11.4.2 above; (b) review permits to assure that the sites are reasonably free from flooding and require that all State and Federal permits are obtained; and (c) maintain all records pertaining to the special flood hazard area provisions of these Regulations.  (1/1/93) 
11.4.8 	Upon completion of the applicable portion of construction, the applicant shall provide the Commission with verification of the as-built lowest floor elevation, defined as the top of the lowest floor (including basement) or, in the case of flood-proofed buildings, the elevation to which the flood proofing is effective. (1/1/93) 
11.4.9 	Variance Procedure. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hear and decide appeals and requests for Variances from these SFHA requirements. Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. Variances shall meet the following criteria:  (1/1/93) 
a. 	Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and in the instances of a historical building, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary as not to destroy the historic character and result in the loss of historic designation of the building; (1/1/93) 
36 

Griswold Zoning Regulations 	Revised: December 01, 2018 
b. 	Variances may only be issued upon (i) a showing of good and sufficient cause, (ii) a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship, and 
(iii) 
a determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances;  (1/1/93) 

c. 	
Any applicant to whom a Variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation to which the structure is to be built and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation up to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance coverage; and  (1/1/93) 

d. 	
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any Variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request.   (1/1/93) 


11.5 	Fences. The yard requirements of this ordinance shall not be deemed to prohibit any wall or fence, provided that no wall or fence shall exceed six feet in height above the existing natural grade for any yard or the finished grade of the yard pursuant to an approved site plan by the Commission or unless otherwise permitted in these regulations subject to the limitations of Section 11.6, below.  (8/10/09) 
11.6 	Corner Visibility. On a corner lot in any Residential, Commercial or Industrial district, no fence, wall, hedge or other structure or planting more than three (3) feet in height shall be erected, placed or maintained within the triangular area formed by the points which are fifty (50) feet distance from the point of intersection, measured along said street center lines.  (8/10/09) 
11.7 	Home Occupation. A Home occupation, as defined in Section 21.16 of these Regulations, may be allowed as an accessory use in all Residential zones subject to the issuance of a Zoning Permit by the Planning and Zoning Commission and compliance with the following terms and conditions. Permits for Home occupations shall not be issued for periods exceeding three (3) years. A renewal application shall be filed a minimum of sixty (60) days prior to the Home occupation expiration date provided that the commission may, for good cause shown, accept an application filed after this deadline. (12/28/00)  (8/10/09) 
11.7.1 	The Home occupation shall be clearly secondary, subordinate, and incidental to the residential use of the property, and it shall not impair the residential character of the premises and neighborhood. Accessory buildings may be used for Home occupations provided that the other requirements of this section are met. There shall be no visible evidence or indication of the operation from the outside of any building or structure used for the Home occupation: for example, there shall be no display windows, outside storage or display of goods, outside work areas, banners, lights, or other devices to attract public attention.  (12/28/00) 
11.7.2 	Residential Occupant: No more than two (2) Home occupations shall be conducted on any premises. Each such Home occupation shall be conducted by the residents of the premises. (12/28/00) 
11.7.3 	Employee: No more than one (1) full-time or part-time person at one time shall be permitted for each Home occupation in addition to the principal resident person conducting the use. (12/28/00) 
11.7.4 	The gross floor area used for the conduct of the Home occupation, including accessory buildings and storage areas related to such use shall not exceed twenty percent (20%) of the gross floor area of the applicant’s principal dwelling unit on the site, nor shall it exceed 600 square feet of gross floor area.   (12/28/00)  (8/10/09) 
37 

Griswold Zoning Regulations 	Revised: December 01, 2018 
11.7.5 	In addition to the two (2) residential parking spaces required for a dwelling, all Home occupations shall provide enough additional parking spaces to alleviate the need to use town roads for customer or employee parking. As a minimum, Home occupations shall provide one (1) additional parking space for each non-resident employee.  (12/28/00) 
11.7.6 	It shall be the responsibility of the operator of the Home occupation to secure all appropriate local, State and Federal licenses and permits prior to the conduct of a Home occupation approved by the Commission. Failure to secure the necessary State and/or Federal permits shall be sufficient cause for the Commission to revoke the Home occupation permit, following notice to the permit holder and the opportunity to be heard. (12/28/00) 
11.7.7 	A detailed written narrative describing all pertinent aspects of the proposed activity and acknowledging the requirements of this section shall be submitted with the application for a Home occupation.  (12/28/00) 
11.7.8 	The proposed shall not create any objectionable noise, odors, vibrations, or unsightly conditions noticeable off the lot.  (12/28/00 
11.7.9 
For Home occupations involving the use of chemicals, solvents and/or electrical equipment, the applicant shall, prior to submitting the Home occupation application, supply the Griswold Fire Marshal with Material Safety Data (MSD) Sheets. In addition, the applicant shall also provide the Fire Marshal with a site map that shows the location of the chemicals, solvents and/or electrical equipment referenced in the MSD record so that the Fire Marshal shall have information to comment by letter to the file suggesting revisions, if necessary, to the home occupation uses proposed. A copy of the MSD Sheet and site map shall be filed with the Home occupation application. (12/28/00)  (8/10/09) 
11.7.10 	An accurately drawn plot plan (to scale) depicting property lines, structure locations, access drives, parking spaces, and any other pertinent features.  (12/28/00) 
11.7.11 	An accurately-drawn floors plan (to scale) depicting the area to be utilized by the proposed Home occupation.  (12/28/00) 
11.8 Landscaping, Screening, Buffer and Architectural Design Requirements. 
11.8.1 	Purpose. The following landscaping, screening, buffer and architectural design standards are designed to improve and enhance the aesthetic appearance of proposed development and protect property values through the preservation of existing vegetation and the establishment of new landscaping materials and architectural standards.  (8/26/99) 
11.8.2 	Uses requiring Special Exceptions, Zoning Permits and/or Site Plan Approval. The following landscaping, screening, buffer and architectural design standards shall apply to all uses requiring Special Exceptions, Zoning Permits, and/or site plan approval.  (8/26/99) 
11.8.2.1 	General. All portions of a building lot or property which are not used for the location of buildings, structures, accessory uses, off-street parking and loading areas, sidewalks or similar purposes shall be landscaped and permanently maintained to improve the appearance of the development and the Town of Griswold as a whole. To the extent possible, existing specimen trees shall be retained and protected and incorporated into the landscape scheme for the proposed development. Where a site is cleared of mature vegetation prior to the filing of an application, the Commission may require their replacement with the largest comparable trees that are commercially available. (8/26/99) 
38 

Griswold Zoning Regulations 	Revised: December 01, 2018 
a. 	
Official Plans. All landscaping plans shall conform to the Town of Griswold Zoning Regulations, as amended.  (8/26/99) 

b. 	
Installation. All plant materials shall be installed according to accepted horticultural standards and methods and planting areas and beds shall be mulched to a minimum depth of two (2) inches. Automatic water systems are encouraged.  (8/26/99) 

c. 	
Maintenance. All plantings shown on an approved site plan shall be maintained in healthy growing condition and all fences and walks shall be maintained in good physical and aesthetic condition throughout the life of the use. Vegetation, fences and walls not so maintained shall be replaced with new materials no later than the beginning of the following growing season.  (8/26/99) 


11.8.2.2 Front Landscaping Areas.  (Type A Species) 
a. 	Location. The required front yard setback, as measured from the property line, except for sidewalks and perpendicular driveways, shall include a minimum thirty (30) foot front landscape area along all streets as shown on the attached “Landscape Design Standards”. Such landscaped area shall be retained and is to be used for no other purpose. Signs, in accordance with Section 14 of the Griswold Zoning Regulations, may be located within the 30-foot setback area if approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission. (8/26/99) 
1) 	In situations where the edge of pavement or curb within a street line right-of-way does not coincide with the front lot line, the applicant shall, in addition, landscape the area between the front lot line and the edge of the street pavement or sidewalk in such a manner as will not obstruct vehicular sight lines. (8/26/99) 
2) 	Prior written approval from the Town of Griswold and/or the Connecticut Department of Transportation (CDOT) may be required in cases as referenced above in item (a)(1) above. (8/26/99) 
b. 	
Standards. All front landscape areas shall have at least one (1) shade tree for each twenty-five (25) feet of front lot width or measured parallel to the street line and shall be set back at least ten (10) feet from the street line. Where property fronts on a state highway, the Commission will accept the CDOT written recommendation for the recommended front setback distance.  (8/26/99) 

c. 	
Front Landscape Area Plants. The purpose of this type of planting is to provide partial visual screening and partial separation from the street line of buildings for the use proposed. Plant materials shall consist of shade trees, flowering trees, and/or low, broad-leafed or needled evergreens planted with ground cover and may include evergreen trees as shown on the attached “Landscape Type Standard”. Trees may be planted in groups; however, the spacing between trees and groups of trees shall not exceed fifty (50) feet. Shade trees shall not be planted under or within fifteen (15) feet of overhead utility lines. Each required shade tree shall be at least two 


(2) inch caliper, as measured six (6) inches above the root crown. Each flowering tree shall be ten (10) feet to twelve (12) feet in height at the time of planting. Street trees shall be high-branched with at least six (6) feet of clearance from the ground to the first branch. Low, broadleaf evergreens shall not exceed thirty-six (36) inches in height. Please refer to the “Landscape Varieties for Specific Location and Purposes List”, Section 
11.8.2.12.a. (8/26/99) (8/1/2017) 
39 

Griswold Zoning Regulations 	Revised: December 01, 2018 
d. 	
Plant materials may be augmented or partially substitute by earthen berms or constructed visual barriers as landscaping features as demonstrated to be appropriate for site conditions. 

e. 	
Sidewalks. Concrete sidewalks at least five (5) feet in width shall be installed within the front landscaped areas, as shown on the attached “Sidewalk Design Standard” unless deemed unnecessary by the Commission. Sidewalks shall provide disability ramps at all driveways and intersections, shall be aligned at the property line, and shall be relocated around poles and fire hydrants.  (8/26/99) 


11.8.2.3 Parking Areas (Type B Species) 
a. 	
Location. On-site parking areas shall be planted with shade trees that are located entirely within the parking field, as shown on the attached “Landscape Design Standards”, except that no more than one required tree shall be located in each field corner.  (8/26/99) 

b. 	
Standards. All parking areas shall have at least one (1) shade tree for each ten (10) required off-street parking spaces. Each tree shall be located in a porous island at least eight (8) feet in diameter. (8/26/99) 

c. 	
Parking Landscape Area Plants. The desired effects of this type of planting are to screen interiors of parking areas and to provide shade for the protection of pedestrians and vehicles. Plant materials shall consist of shade trees planted with ground cover, as shown on the attached “Landscape Type Standards”. The trees shall be evenly distributed throughout the parking lot area and shall be protected from vehicle bumpers and doors. Each required shade tree shall be at least four (4) inch caliper, as measured six (6) inches above the root crown and shall be high-branched with at least six (6) feet of clearance from the ground to the first branch. Please refer to the “Landscape Varieties for Specific Location and Purposes List”, Section ll.8.2.12.b. (8/26/99) 

d. 	
Sidewalks. Sidewalks at least three (3) feet in width shall be installed within the site to provide walkways between parking areas and other principal or accessory uses when deemed necessary for public safety. Sidewalks shall provide disability ramps at all driveway and intersection crossways. (8/26/99) 


11.8.2.4 Buffer Strips (Type C Species) 
a. 	Location. A buffer strip shall be required along and within all nonresidential district boundaries immediately adjacent to a Residential district or residence use and may be required along and within the rear and/or side lot lines on a Special Exception use. Such buffer strip shall comply with at least the following minimum provisions.  (8/26/99) 
1) 	The buffer strip shall be at least twenty-five (25) feet in width and shall be retained as an integral part of the development project and is to be used for no other purposes.  (8/26/99) 
2) 	A berm, hedge, mound, wall or fence of suitable location, height, design and materials as determined by the Planning and Zoning Commission or the Zoning Enforcement Officer, as the case may be, may be required in conjunction with any portion of the required planting and/or buffer strip.  (8/26/99) 
40 

Griswold Zoning Regulations 	Revised: December 01, 2018 
11.8.2.5 
11.8.2.6 
11.8.2.7 
11.8.2.8 
11.8.2.9 
b. 	
Standards. The buffer strip shall consist of a double staggered row and shall include evergreen plantings with at least two trees for each ten (10) feet of buffer length per row as measured parallel to the property line.  (8/26/99) 

c. 	
Buffer Strip Landscape Area Plants. The purpose of this type of planting is to provide complete visual screening of the activity on the lot. The planting shall consist of a double row of evergreen trees at least eight (8) feet in height as shown on the attached “Landscape Type Standards”. Non-evergreen plantings and/or a screening berm, hedge, fence or wall at least five (5) feet in height may be used in conjunction with evergreen trees. The evergreen trees shall be planted at five (5) feet on center. The evergreen trees may be grouped or staggered at intervals, provided that the spacing between groups is filled with a screening hedge, berm, fence or wall at least five (5) feet in height. Please refer to the “Landscape Varieties for Specific Location and Purposes List” Section 11.8.2.12.c. (8/26/99) (8/10/09) 


Protection from Vehicles. When vehicles will be located adjacent to sidewalks, fences, walls, buffer strips, trees, landscaping or similar obstructions, a suitable barrier, curb, wheel stop or similar device shall be provided so that vehicle overhang does not damage said plantings or obstruction.  (8/26/99) 
Site Lines. The minimum required front, parking and buffer landscaped areas shall not obstruct vehicle sight lines and shall be planted with trees, shrubs and other materials of a type and height as required herein.  (8/26/99) 
Quality and Methods. All required plantings shall be of species and varieties as approved by the Commission and shall be installed in accordance with the standards of the American Nurserymen’s Association.  (8/26/99) 
Landscaping of Developed Sites. To the greatest extent possible, the minimum landscape requirements contained in this section shall be adhered to for any site plan application involving the expansion or structural alteration of an existing building and/or a new use or change of use for a developed site.  (8/26/99) 
Landscape Modifications. Existing specimen trees may be used to satisfy the landscape requirements provided they are protected during construction and the area within five (5) feet of the tree trunk consists of porous materials to permit adequate drainage. (8/26/99) 
a. 	
The Planning and Zoning Commission or the Zoning Enforcement Officer, as the case may be, upon written request, may modify the location, number and/or type of plantings required for any front, parking or buffer landscape area where the existing natural topography, existing natural vegetation, and/or proposed alternative method such as a berm, mound, hedge, fence or wall at least five (5) feet in height can be reasonably shown to achieve the applicable landscape objectives as identified in this section.  (8/26/99) 

b. 	
Prior to granting any modification or reduction of these landscaping requirements by the Commission, the applicant shall submit a preliminary standard or parking lot layout with all required landscaped areas in order to substantiate that the proposed project can, in fact, comply with these Regulations prior to any such landscape modification. (8/26/99) 


41 

Griswold Zoning Regulations 	Revised: December 01, 2018 
11.8.2.10 
11.8.2.11 
Other Landscape Plan Elements. Any preliminary or final landscape plan required under these Regulations shall show all required landscape areas plus the following additional elements, as applicable.  (8/26/99) 
a. 	
Exterior lighting fixtures, back lighted signs and security lighting, including location, height, fixture design, materials and illumination. Also provide schedule of hours when lighting types will be illuminated.  (8/26/99) 

b. 	
Freestanding signs, including location, height, design, colors, material and illumination.  (8/26/99) 

c. 	
Refuse collection areas, including dumpsters, screening and vehicle pick­up maneuvering areas. Any refuse collection area shall be located near or adjacent to the building’s loading area and/or service entrance. (8/26/99) 

d. 	
Mailbox clusters, including location, height and design.  (8/26/99) 

e. 	
Ground mounted mechanical units, including cooling towers, air-conditioning units, compressors, above ground and below ground storage tanks, etc., with their locations, heights, capacities and purpose. (8/26/99) 

f. 	
Other similar site improvements such as stone walls, fences, fire hydrants, utility poles, walkways, etc. (8/26/99) 


Architectural Design The architectural design, scale and mass of buildings and other structures including, among other elements, the exterior building materials, color, roof-line, and building elevations shall be of such character as to harmonize and be compatible with the other buildings in the district so as to preserve and improve the appearance and beauty of the community. (8/26/99) 
a. 	
Buildings designed to achieve a small scale and residential appearance shall be encouraged.  (8/26/99) 

b. 	
Pitched roof buildings shall be encouraged.  (8/26/99) 

c. 	
Rooftop mechanical equipment, other than solar panels, shall be concealed from all sides.  (8/26/99) 

d. 	
Buildings shall be designed and located on the site so as to retain the existing topography and natural features of the land to the greatest extent possible.  (8/26/99) 

e. 	
Commercial buildings, office buildings, restaurant buildings (including fast food) shall be designed to reflect a New England Colonial, Early American or Traditional type of architecture, in keeping with the surrounding architecture. (8/26/99 

f. 	
Existing stone walls shall be incorporated into the design and layout of the proposed development. Stonewalls shall be characterized, depicted and categorized on the site plan (both existing and proposed) in three types: Abandoned, Heritage, and Recent/Rebuilt Walls. See the definitions in Section 21 of these Regulations.  If the stone walls are required to be removed due to curb cuts, sight line problems or building(s) placement or improvement(s) placement, said wall(s) shall be reconstructed on the property with their position noted on the final site plan and construction detail and cross-section included as a portion of the site plan detail sheets. Existing stone walls that do not require relocation shall be rebuilt if their current condition warrants it. (8/26/99) (8/10/09) 


42 

Griswold Zoning Regulations 	Revised: December 01, 2018 
g. 	Building Color/Façade: Building color and materials are important to the aesthetics and character of the development and its impact on the surrounding community. The following standards have been incorporated to encourage the use of quality materials to complement surrounding residential neighborhoods:   (8/26/99) 
1) 	Predominant exterior building materials must be of high quality, including brick, wood, stone and tinted/textured concrete masonry units. Smooth-faced concrete blocks, tilt-up concrete panels, and prefabricated steel panels are prohibited unless the applicant can show that said materials conform to the architectural requirements of Section 11.8.2.11.e, g., g.2, and g.4. (8/31/01) 
2) 	Façade colors must be low reflecting, subtle, and neutral or earth tone. The use of metallic colors and black or fluorescent colors are prohibited; and the excessive use of high-intensity colors or black is prohibited.  (8/26/99) 
3) 	Building trim may feature brighter colors, but neon tubing is not allowed as an accent material.  (8/26/99) 
4) 	All facades of a building that are visible from adjoining properties or public streets should contribute to the scale features of the building and encourage community integration by featuring characteristics similar to a front façade.  (8/26/99) 
The Planning and Zoning Commission may, at its discretion, provide waivers or modifications of specific landscaping, screening, and buffer requirements of this Section 11.8. (2/1/08) 
Upon written request of the applicant accompanied by a written explanation of what portion(s) of Section 11.8 are desired to be waived or modified and an explanation of why existing or proposed site conditions pose special difficulty, over and above mere increases in cost, to achieve the goals of this Section 11.8 and are not necessary to the design of a reasonable, safe, and attractive project in context of both present or permitted future development nearby. Conditions of waiver or modification may include, but are not limited to: (2/1/08) 
a. Situations where a site has been designed and submitted to the Commission as a single, unified planned development and its designated to be subdivided into phases or components and sold independently, subject to cross easements or other perpetual restrictions for shared parking, access, landscaped areas, amenities, and provisions for the maintenance thereof. (2/1/08) 
43 

Griswold Zoning Regulations 	Revised: December 01, 2018 
11.8.2.12.2 	A vote of at least 2/3 of the total members of the Commission shall be required for waivers granted under this section. (2/1/08) 
11.8.2.13 Landscape Varieties for Specific Locations and Purposes List. (8/26/99) 
a. Type A Species – Front Area Landscape Requirements. (8/26/99) 
These types of trees are tall shade variety and flowering deciduous variety: (8/26/99) 
• 
Maple 	• Crab Apple 

• 
Oak 	• Flowering Cherry 

• 
Sycamore 	• White Ash 

• 
Dogwood 	• Bradford Pear 


Also permitted within the front yard landscape areas, parking areas and buffer areas are various types of flowering plants and spreading evergreens:  (8/26/99) 
• 	Azalea 
• 	
Rhododendron 

• 	
Juniper • Arrowwood 

• 	
Yews • Mapleleaf Viburnum 

• 	
Holly 


b. 	Type B Species – Parking Area Landscape Requirements. (8/26/99) These types of trees are tall shade variety:  (8/26/99) 
• 	
Maple • Gingko 

• 	
Oak • Sweet Gum 

• 	
Sycamore • American Holly 


44 
Griswold Zoning Regulations 	Revised: December 01, 2018 
Parking lot drainage outlet structures that flow water onto grass swales or into wetland areas shall use one or more of the following salt tolerant plants within the receiving swale:  (8/26/99) 
• 
Flat Pea (Lathco) 

• 
Switch Grass (Blackwell) 

• 
Tall Fescue (Kentucky 31) 

• 
Crown Vetch (Chemung, Penngift) 


c. Type C Species – Buffer Area Landscape Requirements. (8/26/99) 
These types of trees are tall evergreen variety.  (8/26/99) 
• 
Arborvitae • American Holly 

• 
Blue Spruce • Juniper 

• 
White Pine • Eastern Red Cedar 

• 
Hemlock • Japanese Yew 


45 
Griswold Zoning Regulations Revised: December 01, 2018 

46 
Griswold Zoning Regulations Revised: December 01, 2018 

47 

Griswold Zoning Regulations Revised: December 01, 2018 
11.9 	Mobile Homes. No mobile home shall be parked or occupied for residence purposes off the public highways in the Town of Griswold for a period exceeding five (5) days without a permit issued by the Commission.  (4/9/98) 
11.9.1 	No such permit shall be issued by the Commission until written approval of the Town Health Officer, certifying compliance with State sanitary regulations, and that the presence of such vehicle will not imperil the public health, has been filed with the Commission in respect to the proposed site to be occupied by such vehicle and in respect to the sanitary facilities of such vehicle. The Commission shall consult the First Selectman before issuing such permit to determine compliance with all municipal ordinances. 
11.9.2 	No such permit shall be issued for an initial period exceeding thirty (30) days and such permit shall be renewable for a period not exceeding an additional thirty (30) days. The permit shall state the location of the vehicle and the maximum number of persons occupying such vehicle. 
11.9.3 	No mobile home shall be parked or occupied within fifty (50) feet of a public highway unless concealed from view from such highway.  (4/9/98) 
11.9.4 	Nothing in these Regulations shall apply to any mobile home parked and occupied for residence purposes off the public highway in the Town of Griswold prior to May 17, 1966, when the mobile parks and trailer ordinance was adopted, or to the replacement of such mobile home on the same lot. 
11.9.5 	No mobile home or trailer shall be used as a building or structure for any residential, commercial or industrial use or any commercial or industrial accessory use other than a mobile home or trailer used in connection with a bona fide construction job for which a valid Zoning Permit has been obtained. A construction mobile home-trailer permit shall be issued for an initial period of six (6) months and may be renewable for additional six (6) month period up to the date of the issuance of a Certificate of Zoning Compliance. The mobile home or trailer shall be removed within ten (10) days after the issuance of the Certificate of Zoning Compliance. (4/9/98) 
11.9.6 	In the event that a dwelling unit is destroyed by fire or other casualty, the Commission may, by Special Exception, permit a mobile home to be parked and occupied by one family on a lot or residence purposes for an initial period of six (6) months. Such permit may be renewed for one additional six-month period provided the applicant is able to demonstrate good cause for such extension. The Commission shall not grant approval until the mobile home’s sanitary facilities have been approved by the Town Sanitarian and the mobile home’s utility service hookups have been approved by the Town Building Official.  (12/30/91) 
11.10 	Corner Lot. On any corner lot, there shall be on all streets, a building setback line equal in depth to the applicable front yard requirements. 
11.11 	Animals. Large animals such as cows, horses, and sheep may be kept solely for domestic purposes on non-farm property in R-40, R-60 and R-80 zones provided that (a) the lot contains at least three (3) acres of land; (b) no more than two (2) such animals over six months of age are kept on the lot; except that one additional animal may be kept for each additional half (1/2) acre up to the five (5) acre farm classification. 
Poultry such as chickens, ducks, and guinea fowl may be kept for personal use in the R-40, R-60, and R-80 zones up to the five (5) acre farm classification provided that the number of poultry does not exceed 12. Proper coops and fenced enclosures must be provided at all times. (8/10/09) 08/01/10) (01/01/14) 
48 
Griswold Zoning Regulations 	Revised: December 01, 2018 
11.12 	Refuse Disposal. Except for an officially designated municipal refuse disposal operation for the Town of Griswold, no property shall be used for the outside storage, keeping or abandonment of worn out, cast off, or discarded articles, garbage, or materials ready for destruction. 
11.13 	Package Stores. A package store shall not be located within 1,500 feet of a library, public school, church or other place of worship. 
11.14 	Antique Shops. Goods for sale shall not be stored out-of-doors unless located to the rear of the building line. 
11.15 	Wind Energy Conversion Systems (WECS). A WECS is any mechanism designed for the purpose of converting wind into mechanical or electrical power intended for use on the premises. WECS will be approved by the Commission only if, after review of a site plan for the proposed WECS, the Commission is satisfied that it will not pose a threat to the health, safety and general welfare of people living and working in the vicinity. The following minimum requirements shall be met by all proposed WECS: 
11.15.1 	No WECS shall be permitted on a lot containing less than 40,000 square feet. 
11.15.2 	The maximum height of any support tower for a WECS shall be 100 feet. Any protruding rotor blades shall not extend closer than fifteen (15) feet to the ground surface. 
11.15.3 	The support tower for a WECS shall be set back from all property lines a distance equal to the sum of the tower height plus the rotor blade length. 
11.15.4 	The supporting structure for any WECS with a designed output of 250 watts or greater shall not be attached to any structure containing a dwelling unit. 
11.15.5 	Each WECS shall be equipped with a braking device or governor that will prevent the rotor blades from turning faster than a rate produced by a forty mile per hour wind or the design speed as specified by the manufacturer or design engineer. 
11.15.6 	A WECS shall not cause interference with radio or television reception. If such interference is detected and is proven to be caused by a WECS, the property owner shall be required to take whatever measures are necessary to end the interference, including relocation or removal of the WECS. 
11.15.7 	The maximum permitted noise level of a WECS shall be 60 decibels, as measured on the DBA scale, and as detected at any point on the property line. Measures for easy disconnect when speeds go above 25 miles per hour to avoid acoustic noise caused by the turbine blade shall be incorporated into the design and construction of the WECS. (01/1512) 
11.15.8 	Climbing access to the WECS support tower shall not begin lower than twelve (12) feet above the ground. 
11.15.9 	The support tower for a WECS shall be designed and used solely for supporting the WECS and shall be removed when the tower ceases to be used for such purposes. 
11.15.10 	It is the responsibility of the applicant to have the plans reviewed and found to be satisfactory by the public utility responsible for providing conventional electrical power to the property. This utility review may take place concurrently with the zoning review 
49 
Griswold Zoning Regulations 	Revised: December 01, 2018 
11.16 	Earth Station-Dish Antennae. Earth station-dish antennae are permitted in all zoning districts subject to the following conditions: 
11.16.1 	Any earth station-dish antenna large than two (2) feet in diameter shall be ground-mounted. A ground-mounted antenna shall be any antenna with its base mounted directly in the ground, even if such antenna is supported or attached to the wall of a building. 
11.16.2 	Any ground-mounted antenna shall be regarded as an accessory use, shall meet the requirements of Section 10, and shall be erected to the rear of the principal structure 
11.16.3 	Not more than one (1) ground-mounted antenna shall be permitted on each lot. 
11.16.4 	A ground-mounted antenna shall not exceed forty-five (45) feet in height measured vertically from the highest point of the antenna or dish, when positioned for operation, to the bottom of the base which supports the antenna. 
11.16.5 	All antennae shall comply with Sections 426 and 427 of the State Building Code. 
11.16.6 	Any earth station-dish antenna shall not block solar access to adjoining properties. 
11.17 	Unregistered Motor Vehicles. In any R-20, R-40, R-60 or R-80 zones, no more than two (2) unregistered motor vehicles or part of no more than two vehicles may be stored outside a garage or building on a lot as a use accessory to a dwelling. Additional vehicles may be located on a lot provided that the vehicles or parts are stored in a garage or other fully enclosed accessory building with functional doors. Portable car shelters, car ports, tarpaulins or similar, temporary, portable or open structures shall not be considered acceptable accessory buildings for the purposes of this Section. If the two or less unregistered vehicles are located outside a building, such parking shall be restricted to the rear yard and vehicle(s) shall not be visible off the lot. This provision shall not apply to vehicles used for a bona fide farm.  (8/26/99) 
11.18 	Accessory Apartments. The purpose of this section is to provide an arrangement within a single-family dwelling for a set of rooms to be used as a separate living facility where family members related by blood and/or marriage can reside in privacy and independence while still being close to relatives for assistance when needed.  (6/26/92) 
11.18.1 	An accessory apartment may permitted by the Zoning Enforcement Officer when the following conditions are met:  (6/26/92) 
a. 	
Only one accessory apartment shall be created within a single-family dwelling or an addition to a single-family dwelling. 

b. 	
The minimum floor area of an accessory apartment shall be 450 square feet and shall not exceed forty percent (40%) of the total floor area of the single-family dwelling 

c. 	
The owner(s) of the single-family dwelling in which an accessory apartment is created shall occupy at least one of the dwelling units except for bona fide temporary absences. 

d. 	
The design of the accessory apartment shall conform to all applicable standards of the State of Connecticut health, building and fire codes. 

e. 	
Required off-street parking shall be 1-1/2 spaces for the single-family dwelling and 1-1/2 spaces for the accessory apartment. 


50 
Griswold Zoning Regulations 	Revised: December 01, 2018 
11.18.2 	Application for an accessory apartment shall be made in a form prescribed by the Zoning Enforcement Officer and shall be accompanied by the following:  (6/26/92) 
a. 	
A letter signed by the applicant, confirming that he or she is the owner-occupant of the primary, single-family dwelling and indicating the name(s) and relationship(s) of the intended occupant(s) of the accessory apartment. 

b. 	
A floor plan of the building indicating the dimensions and areas of all rooms and clearly showing the locations, accesses and interconnections (if any) of the primary dwelling and the accessory apartment. 

c. 	
A report from the Griswold Sanitarian indicating that the existing and/or proposed water supply and sewage disposal systems will adequately serve the proposed use. Evaluation of the sewage disposal system shall be according to Section 19-13-B100, as well as any other appropriate sections of the Public Health Code of the Connecticut Department of Health Services. 


11.18.3 	The effective period of a permit shall be five years. At the end of this time period, renewal shall be granted by the Zoning Enforcement Officer upon certification from the owner that all of the conditions met at the time of the original application remain unchanged. It shall be the responsibility of the owner-occupant to renew the permit.  (6/26/92) 
11.18.4 	Purchasers of homes that have had permits for accessory apartments who want to continue the use must obtain an approval from the Zoning Enforcement Officer by demonstrating that all conditions prerequisite to obtaining the original permit will continue to be met.  (6/26/92) 
11.19 Wireless Communications Facilities. 
11.19.1 	Intent. The purpose of this section is to provide for the establishment and expansion of wireless communications services in accordance with the 1996 Federal Communications Act while protecting neighborhoods and minimizing adverse visual and operational effects of wireless communications facilities through careful design, siting, and screening in order to accomplish the following:   (1/15/99) 
a. 	Preserve the character and appearance of the Town of Griswold while allowing adequate communications services to be developed.  (1/15/99) 
51 
Griswold Zoning Regulations 	Revised: December 01, 2018 
b. 	
Protect the scenic, historic, and environmental resources of the Town of Griswold. (1/15/99) 

c. 	
Provide standards and requirements for the regulation, placement, design and construction of wireless communications facilities. (1/15/99) 

d. 	
Establish a review process that ensures action within a reasonable period of time for requests to place, construct, operate, or modify a wireless communications facility. (1/15/99) 

e. 	
Minimize the total number and height of towers throughout the Town of Griswold by requiring tower sharing and clustering of wireless communications facilities. (1/15/99) 

f. 	
Provide screening and landscaping to minimize the visual impact of ground facilities; and (1/15/99) 

g. 	
Prevent potential damage to adjacent properties from tower failure.  (1/15/99) 


These regulations are intended to be consistent with the Telecommunications Act of 1996 in that:  (1/15/99) 
a. 	
They do not prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the provision of wireless communications services.  (1/15/99) 

b. 	
They are not intended to unreasonably discriminate among wireless providers; and (1/15/99) 

c. 	
They do not regulate wireless telecommunications services on the basis of the environmental effects of radio frequency emission to the extent that the regulated services and facilities comply with the FCC’s regulations concerning such emissions. (1/15/99) 


11.19.2 Definitions: (1/15/99) 
a. 	
Antenna: Device used to receive or transmit electromagnetic waves. Examples include, but are not limited to, whip, panel or dish antennas.  (1/15/99) 

b. 	
Co-Location: Locating wireless communications equipment of more than one (1) provider on a single tower.  (1/15/99) 

c. 	
Monopole: A circular, self-supporting vertical pole with no guy wire anchors.  (1/15/99) 

d. 	
Premises: That area of land dedicated for the principle use of siting a WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY, whether dedicated for that purpose by lease, fee, simple ownership, easement, or otherwise. ANTENNAS accessory to and mounted upon an existing building shall not be deemed to be “PREMISES” as defined herein. PREMISES shall not exceed one quarter (1/4) of an acre.  (1/15/99) 

e. 	
Propagation Analysis: An analytical technique used to determine and delineate the location of areas and strength in which electromagnetic communications can be conducted.  (1/15/99) 


52 
Griswold Zoning Regulations 	Revised: December 01, 2018 
f. 	
Tower: A structure, whether freestanding or attached to another structure that is used to support equipment used to receive or transmit electromagnetic/radio waves. Examples include monopoles, self-supporting lattice, and guyed towers.  (1/15/99) 

g. 	
Wireless Communications: Commercial wireless and telecommunication systems that include but are not limited to cellular, personal communications services (PCS), specialized mobile radio (SMR), enhanced specialized mobile radio (ESMR), paging and related systems.  (1/15/99) 

h. 	
Wireless Communications Facilities: All ground and roof-mounted TOWERS or ANTENNAS, ancillary equipment and other structures associated with the transmission and reception of wireless communications.  (1/15/99) 


11.19.3 General. Wireless communications facilities shall be permitted in all zones, subject to the following requirements, in addition to any applicable provisions of these Regulations: (1/15/99) 
a. 	
All wireless communications sites shall comply with the rules and regulations as set forth by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC). Towers not requiring Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) paintings or markings shall be painted a non-contrasting blue, gray or other neutral color.  (1/15/99) 

b. 	
Co-Location Encouraged. Co-location is encouraged and preferred to the construction of a new tower. The applicant shall commit to allow co-location in accordance with this section. Applicants shall provide a description of existing towers or other suitable antenna mounting locations in the service area and documentation indicating why their antennas cannot be mounted on these towers. Such documentation shall include demonstration that the shared use is not technically, legally, or environmentally feasible; or for towers constructed prior to the effective date of the section, that shared use is not economically feasible or that the owner of such facility/facilities has refused permission for the shared use. The owner of any tower approved under this section shall be required to make space available for at least four (4) additional antennas, including competitors. Such availability shall be made under commercially reasonable terms and conditions. Failure of an owner to share use of a tower approved hereunder shall constitute a violation of any permit issued to such owner and shall be grounds for the Commission, upon public hearing and notice to the owner, to revoke such permit.  (1/15/99) 


In the event that co-location is found to be infeasible by the applicant, the Commission may retain a technical expert to verify if co-location at the site is feasible or not feasible. The cost for such a technical expert will be at the expense of the applicant and such cost shall be reimbursed prior to the decision on any pending application. Failure to reimburse the Commission for such costs shall be grounds for denial of the application without prejudice.  (1/15/99) 
c. 	
All towers shall be a monopole design unless otherwise approved by the Commission. (1/15/99) 

d. 	
The maximum height of a tower proposed under these Regulations shall be 190 feet. (1/15/99) 

e. 	
No lights shall be mounted on proposed towers unless otherwise approved by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA). (1/15/99) 


53 
Griswold Zoning Regulations 	Revised: December 01, 2018 
f. 	
The design of the wireless communications facility shall comply with the standards promulgated by the FCC for non-ionizing electromagnetic emissions.  (1/15/99) 

g. 	
The minimum lot area of the lot on which the wireless communications facility premises is located shall be that of the zone in which it is located, and the lot shall meet both the buildable land requirements of the lot and the requirements of item h below.  (1/15/99) 

h. 	
No portion of a wireless communications facility premises shall be located within 200 feet of a residence, residential accessory building, or property line, whichever is closer. (1/15/99) 

i. 	
Generators, air conditioners, compressors, or any other machinery installed shall comply with state and local noise regulations.  (1/15/99) 

j. 	
A chain link fence with a height of eight (8) feet shall be required around the wireless communications facility premises. A minimum setback distance of ten (10) feet shall be maintained between equipment cabinets, equipment buildings, and the fence enclosure. (1/15/99) 

k. 	
Landscaping shall be required around the fence. At a minimum, the landscaping shall consist of a row of evergreen trees planted not more than five (5) feet on center. The evergreen trees shall be a minimum of six (6) feet in height at planting. All landscaping shall be properly maintained to ensure screening effectiveness.  (1/15/99) 

l. 	
Antennas or accessory buildings or equipment mounted to or on an existing structure or building shall, to the greatest extent possible, blend with the color and design of the underlying structure. 

m. 	
Roof mounted antennas shall not exceed more that fifteen (15) feet above the highest part of the building or structure and shall be set back from the roof edge a minimum of ten (10) feet.  (1/15/99) 

n. 	
Buildings shall be designed to be in harmony with the surrounding neighborhood properties, i.e., buildings must have characteristics such as roof lines, siding, etc., which are compatible with residential structures in the immediate area such as determined by the Commission. Buildings shall be limited to one (1) story, not exceeding fourteen (14) feet in height. 


Building dimensions shall not exceed ten feet by twenty feet (10 ft. x 20 ft.). Flat roof structures are prohibited unless an exception is granted by the Commission.  (1/5/99) 
o. 	
Commercial advertising shall not be allowed on any antenna, tower, or accessory building or equipment.  (1/15/99) 

p. 	
No wireless communications facility shall be designed, located or operated as to interfere with existing public safety communications.  (1/15/99) 

q. 	
Plans for the wireless communications facility shall be prepared and signed and sealed by a professional engineer licensed in the State of Connecticut. (1/15/99) 

r. 	
All applications shall comply with any applicable requirements of the Floodplain Management Ordinance and the Inland Wetlands & Watercourse Conservation Commission Regulations. (1/15/99) 

s. 	
All equipment cabinets and equipment buildings shall be maintained in good appearance. 


54 
Griswold Zoning Regulations 	Revised: December 01, 2018 
t. 	
The Planning and Zoning Commission shall determine whether or not the facilities are maintained in good appearance.  (1/15/99) 

u. 	
Antennas shall be permitted on existing sign pylons, telephone poles and other freestanding structures.  (1/15/99) 

v. 	
Unpaved driveways leading to the wireless communications facility premises shall not exceed ten percent (10%) in grade. Grades exceeding ten percent (10%) shall be paved with bituminous concrete. No driveway, whether paved or unpaved, shall exceed fifteen percent (15%) in grade.  (1/15/99) 

w. 	
Appropriate safety signage shall be affixed to the perimeter chain link fence equipment cabinets and equipment buildings.  1/15/99) 


11.19.4 	Application Requirements: New Towers under Subsection A shall be by Special Exception under Section 12 of these Regulations. New Antennas on existing structures shall require site plan review under Section 13 of these Regulations. In addition to the requirements under Section 12 and 13 of these Regulations, applications pursuant to this section shall be accompanied by the following:  (1/15/99) 
a. 	New Towers: 
1) 	A survey meeting A-2 standards of the wireless communications premises sit at a scale of 1 inch to 40 feet with topography drawn at a minimum of five (5) feet contour intervals. The survey shall show existing utilities, property lines, existing buildings or structures, stone wall or fence lines, and wooded areas within 200 feet of the site area and shall show the boundary of any wetlands, floodplains or watercourses within 200 feet of the site area. (1/15/99) 
2) 	A description of the slopes, wetlands, watercourses, other environmental characteristics of the site, and any historically designated areas of the site, and the impact that the tower will have on these resources.  (1/15/99) 
3) 	A design drawing, including a cross section and elevation of the proposed tower. A description of the tower’s capacity as well as the proposed location of all mounting positions for co-located antennas and the minimum separating distances between antennas. The design shall also illustrate how the tower will collapse upon itself without encroaching upon any adjoining property.  (1/15/99) 
4) 	A propagation analysis that illustrates the predicted propagation for the location of the proposed wireless communications site.  (1/15/99) 
5) 	A map depicting the extent of the service area of the proposed wireless communications site, along with a map indicating the search radius for the proposed site.  (1/15/99) 
6) 	The applicant must certify that existing towers within 1,500 feet of the proposed new tower do not meet the applicant’s technical requirements or lack the structural capacity to accept additional antennas. Furthermore, the applicant must demonstrate that it has examined all wireless telecommunications sites or existing structures over fifty (50) feet in height within a two-mile radius to determine whether existing facilities can be used to provide adequate coverage and/or capacity as part of the applicant’s system. The Commission may require the investigation of alternative sites by the applicant and demonstration of a good faith effort to co-locate with other carriers. Such good faith effort shall include contact with all other licensed carriers licensed to operate a wireless communications facility in the Town 
55 

Griswold Zoning Regulations 	Revised: December 01, 2018 
b. 
of Griswold. In the event the applicant finds alternate sites to be infeasible, the Commission may retain a technical expert to verify if the alternate site is feasible or not. The cost for such technical expert shall be at the expense of the applicant, and such cost shall be reimbursed prior to the decision on any pending application. Failure to reimburse the Commission for such costs shall be grounds for denial of the application without prejudice.  (1/15/99) 
7) 	An elevation drawing to scale of all proposed equipment buildings or ancillary equipment.  (1/15/99) 
8) 	Details including dimensions and appearance of all proposed antennas and associated equipment.  (1/15/99) 
9) 	Proposed utilities, including distance from source of power, size of service available and required, and locations of proposed utility lines, whether underground or above ground. (1/15/99) 
10) 	Plans indicating locations and specifics of proposed screening, landscaping, fencing and lighting.  (1/15/99) 
11) 	Erosion and sedimentation plan for construction phase and as a permanent measure. (1/15/99) 
12) 	A graphic representation of the proposed installation in relation to the site and its vicinity in order to ascertain the visual impacts associated with the proposal. Examples of such representation include photo simulations or architectural drawings or renderings.  (1/15/99) 
13) 	Show longitude and latitude values of the tower location. (1/15/99) 
New Antennas: 
1) 	Detail design plan including dimensions and appearance of all proposed antennas and associated equipment. (1/15/99) 
2) 	An elevation drawing of all proposed equipment, buildings or ancillary equipment, and host structure.  (1/15/99) 
3) 	Proposed utilities, including distance from source of power, sizes of service available, required locations of proposed utility lines, and whether underground or above ground.  (1/15/99) 
4) 	A graphic representation of the proposed installation in relation to the site and its vicinity in order to ascertain the visual impacts associated with the proposal. Examples of such representation include photo simulations or architectural drawings or renderings.  (1/15/99) 
5) 	An A-2 survey of the property may be required, at the discretion of the Commission. (1/15/99 
6) 	Earth Station Dish type antennae, for uses other than commercial wireless and telecommunications systems that include, but are not limited to, cellular, personal communication services (PCS), specialized mobile radio (SMR), enhanced specialized mobile radio (ESMR), paging and related systems are governed by Section 11.16 of the Griswold Zoning Regulations.  (1/15/99) 
56 

Griswold Zoning Regulations 	Revised: December 01, 2018 11.19.5 Review and Decision. In its review and decision on the application for a wireless 
communications tower, antennas, and/or facilities, the Commission shall: (1/15/99) 
a. 	
Act on the application in accordance with the schedule set forth in Sections 8-3c and 8-7d of the Connecticut General Statutes,   (1/15/99) 

b. 	
Find conformance with all applicable criteria of these Regulations, including Sections 12 and 13, as the case may be,   (1/15/99) 

c. 	
Find that the planned equipment cannot be accommodated on an existing tower as documented by a licensed professional engineer registered in the State of Connecticut, (1/15/99) 

d. 	
Find that the equipment would not cause unacceptable interference with the operation of the other existing or planned equipment of an existing structure, and  (1/15/99) 

e. 	
Find that the existing or planned equipment would not cause unacceptable interference with the equipment proposed by the applicant and that interference cannot be prevented or eliminated at a reasonable cost.  (1/15/99) 


11.19.6 	Abandonment. Upon abandonment of use, the carrier shall physically remove the wireless communications facility within 90 days from the date of abandonment. “Abandonment” shall be evidence by loss of any necessary license from the Federal Communications Commission, voluntary abandonment by the operator, or other evidence indicating intent to permanently discontinue the use. A finding of abandonment shall not be made except following a public hearing with notice to the property owner and operator of record. “Physically remove” shall include, but not be limited to removal of antennas, base equipment, and security barriers from the subject property, and restoring the location of the wireless communications facility to its natural condition, except that any landscaping and grading shall remain in the after-condition. (1/15/99) 
If an owner or operator fails to remove a wireless telecommunications facility in accordance with this section, the Town of Griswold shall have the authority to enter the subject property and physically remove the facility. Costs for the removal of the wireless communications facility shall be charged to the landowner in the event the Town of Griswold must remove the facility, and the cost thereof may be deducted from any bond posted by the carrier.  (1/15/99) 
11.19.7 	Site Bond. The owner of the telecommunications tower shall post a cash bond with the Treasurer of the Town of Griswold in an amount satisfactory to remove all physical improvements to the telecommunications facility premises. The amount of the cash bond shall be based on five percent (5%) of the total cost of the construction of the site, including the cost of the tower or the cost of dismantling the tower, whichever is greater. The applicant shall submit, with the application to construct a telecommunications tower, an itemized cost estimate, prepared by a Connecticut registered engineer to erect the proposed tower and all associated site improvements. In addition, the engineer shall also submit an itemized estimate for the dismantling of the tower and all associated site improvements necessary to return the premises to its original state. The cash bond shall remain with the Treasurer of the Town of Griswold and shall be in full force and effect for the life of the wireless telecommunications facility. Failure to maintain any bond shall result in an immediate Cease and Desist Order by the Commission’s Enforcement Officer. (1/15/99) 
57 

Griswold Zoning Regulations 	Revised: December 01, 2018 
11.20 	Storage Containers. The location and use of a storage container(s) for the temporary storage of products or building materials as an accessory use to the principal use on the property located within Commercial and Industrial zones, or associated with a residential or multi-family construction project, shall be subject to approval by the Griswold Planning and Zoning Commission. The intent of this section to limit the number of and the use of storage containers to a fixed time period based on the specific needs of the applicant. (12/28/00) 
11.20.1 	Storage container(s) shall be located to the rear or side of the principal building, and shall not occupy or obstruct required parking spaces or loading areas. Storage containers shall satisfy all applicable Zoning Regulations as deemed applicable by the Zoning Enforcement Officer. Each container shall contain a lockable door. Commercial advertising of any kind shall not be permitted on any storage container. Storage containers containing hazardous materials/dangerous goods shall satisfy the signage requirements of the local Fire Marshal. 
11.20.2 	Storage container(s) shall be maintained in a neat and orderly condition. 
11.20.3 	The maximum time period for any individual permit issued by the Zoning Enforcement Officer shall not exceed three (3) months: however, the Zoning Enforcement Officer may allow the continued use of a storage container(s) for bona fide construction projects for an additional three (3) month period upon the receipt of a new permit application and fee. However, the Zoning Enforcement Officer may reissue permits every three (3) months for a period of twelve 
(12) months. Any request beyond the twelve (12) month period shall be submitted as a new application to the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
11.20.4 	The application fee for a storage container permit shall be $100.00 per storage container for a three (3) month period. 
11.20.5 Violations of these Regulations shall be grounds for the revocation of an existing storage container permit and/or denial of an application renewal. 
58 

Griswold Zoning Regulations 	Revised: December 01, 2018 
SECTION 12:  SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS 
12.1 	Definition. A Special Exception is a use which may be permitted in a specified district provided it meets the special conditions of this section, and any other requirements for such use set forth in these Regulations. 
12.2 	Hearing and Amendments. A public hearing shall be held on the application in accordance with the provisions of Section 8-3c of the General Statutes, as amended. No public hearing shall be required for amendments to the site plan filed in support of a Special Exception where such amendments conform to the requirements of Section 13.8 and where such amendment does not entail a substantial change to the current Special Exception approval, as determined by the Commission. (9/26/02) (8/10/09) 
12.3 	General Evaluation Criteria. In evaluating an application for a Special Exception, the Commission shall determine that the proposed use shall be in harmony with the appropriate and orderly development of the neighborhood and will not hinder or discourage the development of adjacent property nor impair the value thereof. The site plan submitted with a Special Exception application shall be reviewed against the standards listed in Section 13 of these Regulations. 
The Commission shall also determine the following, where appropriate: 
12.3.1 	The proximity of the same or similar uses which would unduly concentrate types of uses in a particular zone or vicinity in a zone or district. 
12.3.2 	The proximity of dwellings, emergency facilities, churches, schools, public buildings and other places of public gathering to the proposed site. 
12.3.3 	Water supply, sewage disposal facilities, drainage and erosion controls. 
12.3.4 	The effect of the proposed use and its appurtenances on sources of public water supply, including reservoirs and aquifers. 
12.3.5 	The effect of the proposed use on the purpose and intent of these Regulations and the Comprehensive Plan. 
12.3.6 	The size and intensity of the proposed use. 
12.3.7 	The location, height, arrangement, design and nature of any existing and/or proposed building and appurtenance. 
12.4 	Excavation. Excavations, as defined in Section 21 of these Regulations, may be permitted by the Commission by Special Exception provided the detrimental effects of the proposed activity are minimized and provided the future usefulness of the property is assured when the excavation activity is completed. Permits for excavations shall not be issued for periods exceeding two (2) years. Excavation beyond the exterior limits of the existing or previously approved operation shall be considered a new operation requiring a permit subject to the conditions contained herein. The Commission may renew permits for excavations only if it can be shown that the activity is being conducted in conformance with the conditions of the previously issued permit and in accordance with the approved site plan. 
12.4.1 	The site plan shall be prepared in accordance with Section 13 of these Regulations and shall show the exterior limits of excavation, the sequence of excavation, existing and proposed contours at two-foot intervals, the interior access roads, equipment parking areas, and temporary stockpiling areas for topsoil and other excavated materials. 
12.4.2 
The application shall be accompanied by a written narrative of the proposed operation, including an estimate of the number of cubic yards of material to be excavated, the proposed vehicular access to and from the site to the nearest major state highway, and an estimate of the number, types, and hours of operation of trucks and other machinery to be used on site. 
59 
Griswold Zoning Regulations 	Revised: December 01,2018 
12.4.3 	The minimum lot size shall be 120,000 square feet. 
12.4.4 	The exterior limits of the proposed activity shall not exceed a total of eight (8) acres open to excavation at any one time (8/10/09) 
12.4.5 	All excavations shall be limited to the hours of 7:00 am to 7:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday. No work shall be permitted on legal holidays recognized by the State of Connecticut. The Commission may allow additional hours and days of operation under extraordinary circumstances or in special cases. 
12.4.6 	No excavation, access or equipment shall be located within twenty (20) feet of a property line or within 100 feet of a residence on an adjoining property under separate ownership. All site plans for excavations shall include a soil erosion and sedimentation control plan which shall be reviewed and endorsed by the District Conservationist of the New London County Soil and Water Conservation District. 
12.4.7 	The excavation shall not result in sharp declivities, pits or depressions, soil erosion, improper drainage or other conditions which would impair reasonable reuse and development of the property or which would impair or damage the use of adjacent or neighboring properties or which would cause public health or safety hazards. 
12.4.8 	Where any disturbed area shall have a depth of ten (10) feet or more or creates a temporary slope in excess of one (1) foot of vertical rise to two (2) feet of horizontal distance, there shall be a fence of at least six (6) feet in height with suitable gates or an earthen berm at least three (3) feet in height. Such fence or berm shall be located at least fifteen (15) feet from the edge of the disturbed area. 
12.4.9 	No excavation shall be conducted below the water table unless otherwise permitted by the Commission. If so permitted, no excavation below the water table shall result in ponding or stagnant water on site. Excavation below the water table shall be consistent with the proposed and final drainage of the site. 
12.4.10 	No excavation or related filling and regrading shall result in excessive flying of rock or dust. Proper measures, including the watering of disturbed areas, shall be taken to control the flying rock and dust along access roads and within disturbed areas. 
12.4.11 	Dry screening of on-site material is allowed in Commercial and Industrial districts. Washing, crushing or other forms of processing of excavated material is allowed only in industrial districts. 
12.4.12 	At the conclusion of the work authorized, the area of the excavation shall be restored as follows:  no bank shall exceed a slope of one (1) foot vertical rise to two (2) feet horizontal distance; the disturbed area shall be evenly graded and covered with not less than four (4) inches of topsoil or loam and seeded with suitable cover crop; and all debris and loose boulders not incorporated into the improvement of the lot shall be buried at a depth of three (3) feet below the finished grade or removed from the lot. 
12.4.13 	The applicant shall post a bond with the Treasurer of the Town of Griswold in an amount sufficient to guarantee conformity with the provisions of these Regulations. 
12.5 Multi-family Dwellings. Removed In Its Entirety and Intentionally Left  Blank 
60 

Griswold Zoning Regulations 	Revised: December 01,2018 
12.6 	Recreational Campground. Such facilities are permitted in R-80, R-60, and R-40 Districts provided they meet the requirements of the Connecticut Public Health Code and the Connecticut Basic Building Code and the following conditions. 
12.6.1 	Where an area abuts any use except a state forest or a lake, the Commission may require that a treed buffer strip be provided at least fifty (50) feet wide. Notwithstanding the above, no campsite shall be situated closer than 100 feet to any dwelling on adjoining property. Where a landscaped buffer strip is required, such a strip shall consist of an inter-planting of evergreen and deciduous trees and shrubs suitable, in the judgment of the Commission, to provide in a reasonable time a visual barrier between different land uses. 
12.6.2 	No more than fifteen (15) campsites shall be provided for each gross acre of overall site area. The gross acreage shall include buffer areas, recreational facilities, rental sites, community areas, and emergency overflow areas, and supporting facilities. 
12.6.3 Campsites may be occupied by a tent or camper unit, but not by any permanent type of building or mobile manufactured home. 
12.6.4 	The owner of the campground may operate a supply store on the premises as an accessory use. Items for sale shall be limited to groceries, beer, and camping supplies and shall not include the sale of camper units, tents, or other major items of camping equipment. Such store shall be intended to serve only the patrons of the campground. 
12.6.5 	No campsite shall be occupied for more than thirty (30) days between October 1 and the next following May 1 except each recreation campground of ten (10) or more developed sites may have a year-round caretaker(s) according to the following schedule: 
Number of Developed Number of Caretaker Sites Sites Allowed. 
10 to 50 1 51 to 100 2 101 to 200 3 
201 and over 	4 
Such caretaker site(s) shall be permitted only after the adequacy of the proposed water supply and sewage disposal system is reviewed and approved by the Griswold Sanitarian.  (6/26/92) 
12.6.6 	The registration records required by the Connecticut Public Health Code and the Basic Building Code shall be made available to the Zoning Enforcement Officer to assist in the enforcement of these Regulations. 
12.7 	Alcoholic Beverages. The purpose of this section is to permit, by Special Exception, the on-premises consumption of alcoholic beverages as an accessory use to a restaurant, where said uses are incidental and subordinate to the principal use.   (4/30/98 
12.7.1 	The sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises shall be a permitted accessory use for restaurants in the C Zone, including restaurants which are themselves accessory to hotels, motels, recreational uses, and other uses to which restaurants are customarily accessory.  (4/30/98) 
12.7.2 
The sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises shall be a permitted accessory use for restaurants in all zones only where such restaurants are themselves accessory to permitted recreational uses or such other uses permitted in the subject zone to which restaurants are customarily accessory, such a golf courses and clubs.  (4/30/98) 
61 
Griswold Zoning Regulations 	Revised: December 01,2018 
12.7.3 	The sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises shall be a permitted principal use in the C Zone provided no such use shall be established on a lot, any part of which is within 1,000 feet of a building housing a library, school, church, or other place of worship. Said 1,000 foot distance shall be measured along the street lines between the closest portions of the lot upon which alcohol is served and any lot containing any library, school or place of worship buildings.  (4/30/98) 
12.8 	Kennels. Special Exception approval for kennels shall require that all dogs or cats be kept in buildings or enclosures, and such buildings and enclosures shall be located no closer than 200 feet from the nearest property line, except that the distance may be reduced to 100 feet where the adjacent property is not likely to be used for residential purposes because of state ownership or some other condition. (See also Section 12.20 Non-Profit Small  Animal Shelters) 
12.8.1 	Lots containing kennels shall contain at least 120,000 square feet 
. 

12.9 	Hotels and Motels. Minimum lot size shall be 120,000 square feet 
12.10 	Commercial Recreation Facilities. Minimum lot size shall be 120,000 square feet. 
12.11 	Convalescent facilities and/or nursing homes, rehabilitation facilities, assisted living facilities and continuing care facilities. In R-40, R-60 and R-80 Districts, lots used for such purposes shall contain a minimum of ten acres. 
12.12 Private Aircraft Landing Facilities. Only private restricted landing areas, as defined by state and federal aeronautical regulations, are permitted, provided they meet the appropriate state and federal regulations and the following conditions: 
12.12.1 	A level area at least 2,000 feet long and 200 feet wide shall be available for use as a runway. 
12.12.2 	No part of the runway or aircraft parking space shall be closer than 100 feet from any property line. 
12.12.3 	No runway shall be established that would result in an existing church, school, library or other place of public assembly being located within an area 500 feet wide and extending 1,000 feet beyond the ends of the runway 
12.12.4 	Medical evacuation helicopters may be stationed in locations approved by the Commission provided the activity is deemed consistent with Section 12.3 of these Regulations, and need not comply with Section 12.12.1 and 12.12.3, above. 
12.13 	Amusement Game Arcades. Amusement game arcades shall be permitted by Special Exception under the following conditions: 
12.13.1 	Adequate space shall be provided for each machine so as to allow its use without overcrowding. A minimum width of two (2) feet shall be provided per machine where the machine is designed for use by one player and three and one-half (3-1/2) feet where the machine is designed for use by two players. The depth of the space in front of the machine shall be at least five (5) feet, and there shall be a minimum aisle width beyond this five (5) feet of an additional three (3) feet. 
12.13.2 	An arcade shall not be located closer than 1,000 feet from the property boundary lines of a church, school or public building. 
62 
Griswold Zoning Regulations 	Revised: December 01,2018 
12.13.3 	The Commission may permit an arcade as an accessory use to an existing commercial use, provided that safeguards are taken to assure that the use will be compatible with the existing neighborhood. 
12.13.4 	Off-street parking shall be adequate to assure that no patron or employee vehicles park on a public or private street. 
12.13.5 	Except where permitted under subsection 12.7 above, no consumption of alcoholic beverages shall be permitted on the premises. (8/10/09) 
12.13.6 	Readily visible signs shall be installed, with their location, size and text shown in the plans submitted to the Commission, indicating that the use of machines by persons under sixteen years of age shall not be permitted during normal school hours. 
12.13.7 	The amusement game arcade shall be located in a separate room separated from other uses on the premises and from pedestrian circulation to and from other uses. The room shall be arranged so that there is a management attendant at all times within the room, or such that management attendants outside the room can, at all times, easily see and supervise the interior of the room. 
12.14 	Banquet Halls and Banquet Facilities. The Commission may permit by Special Exception banquet halls and banquet facilities in Commercial and Industrial districts and Business Park district subject to the following conditions: (12/30/91) (8/10/09) 
12.14.1 	If the food is to be prepared on site or catered, such facility shall meet all of the applicable requirements of the Public Health Code.  (12/30/91) 
12.14.2 	The applicant shall demonstrate to the Commission’s satisfaction that the facility has adequate on-site parking for employees and patrons.  (12/30/91) 
12.14.3 	Such facility is designed to accommodate more than one event at a time, parking areas shall be designed and maintained so that the majority of the parking is not generally visible from the street.  (12/30/91) (8/10/09) 
12.14.4 	Such facility shall have a minimum of one hundred (100) feet of frontage on one of the following highways: CT Route 12, CT Route 138, CT Route 164, CT Route 165, and CT Route 
201. The Commission may approve frontage to the facility on a Town Road if the applicant is able to demonstrate that such frontage will provide safe and adequate access to the site. Access to the site shall be restricted and limited to the approved frontage.  (12/30/91) 
Such use shall be permitted in C -Commercial and I zones subject to obtaining a Special Exception from the Planning and Zoning Commission.   (12/30/91) 
12.15 	Bed & Breakfast Facilities. The Commission may permit by Special Exception bed and breakfast facilities in all Residential and Commercial zones subject to the following conditions:  (2/28/92) 
12.15.1 	The facility shall be located on a lot having a land area of at least 40,000 square feet and shall be owner occupied.  (2/28/92) 
12.15.2 	The facility shall meet all of the applicable Building, Fire, and Public Health Code requirements. (2/28/92) 
63 
Griswold Zoning Regulations 	Revised: December 01,2018 
12.15.3 	No accessory building shall be used for the letting of rooms or the furnishing of board to patrons or employees.  (2/28/92) 
12.15.4 	If the facility is located in a Residential zone, patron and employee parking shall be suitably screened so as not to be generally visible from the street or any adjoining residence. (2/28/92) 
Such use shall be permitted in R-20, R-40, R-60, R-80, C – Commercial zone subject to obtaining a Special Exception from the Planning and Zoning Commission.  (2/28/92) 
12.16 	Gasoline Stations with or without Convenience Stores. The Commission may permit by Special Exception gasoline stations with or without convenience stores and/or with or without food service drive through windows in Commercial districts subject to the following conditions:  (12/30/91) (8/10/09) 
12.16.1 	The facility shall be on a lot having a land area of at least 60,000 square feet. (12/30/91) 
12.16.2 	All gasoline pump islands and gasoline pump canopies shall be located at least twenty-five (25) feet from all lot lines.  (12/30/91) 
12.16.3 	All curb cuts shall be clearly defined with a permanent marking of concrete, bituminous concrete, or granite curbing. (12/30/91) 
12.16.4 	Only one-side of the gasoline pump canopy shall display a sign or logo, the size of which shall not exceed five percent (5%) of the area of that side of the canopy.  (12/30/91) 
12.16.5 	Parking, in accordance with Section 14 of these Regulations, shall be provided and clearly marked for the patrons of the convenience store.  (12/30/91) 
12.16.6 	There shall be not more than two curb cuts for any such facility. No curb cut shall be greater than thirty (30) feet in width. Such curb cuts shall be at least forty (40) feet apart.  (12/30/91) 
Such use shall be permitted in C -Commercial zone subject to obtaining a Special Exception from the Planning and Zoning Commission. (12/30/91) 
12.17 	Hotels and Conference Centers. The Commission may permit by Special Exception hotel and conference centers in Commercial or Business Park districts are subject to the following conditions:  (12/30/91) (8/10/09) 
12.17.1 	Thirty percent (30%) of the lot or lots on which the facility is located shall be developed as landscaped areas.  (12/30/91) 
12.17.2 	Such facility may include restaurants, retail stores, and recreational facilities. (12/30/91) 
12.17.3 	Such facility shall have a minimum of one hundred (100) feet of frontage on one of the following State highways: CT Route 12, CT Route 138, CT Route 164, CT Route 165, and CT Route 201. The Commission may approve frontage to the facility on a Town Road if the applicant is able to demonstrate that such frontage will provide safe and adequate access to the site. Access to the site shall be restricted and limited to the approved frontage.  (12/30/91) 
Such use shall be permitted in Business Park, C -Commercial zone subject to obtaining a Special Exception from the Planning and Zoning Commission. (8/10/09) 
64 
Griswold Zoning Regulations 	Revised: December 01,2018 
12.18 	Warehousing, Wholesaling, and Wholesale Distribution Centers. Warehouses, wholesaling and wholesale distribution centers may be permitted by the Commission by Special Exception subject to the following conditions:  (12/30/91) 
12.18.1 	Such facility shall be on a lot having a land area of at least 120,000 square feet. (12/30/91) 
12.18.2 	A maximum of twenty-five percent (25%) of the finished floor area may be used for the retail sale of goods and products that are stored on site in connection with the principal use. (12/30/91) 
12.18.3 	Parking requirements for the combination of wholesale and retail sales shall be met in connection with such facility.  (12/30/91) 
Such use shall be permitted in Business Park, C -Commercial zone subject to obtaining a Special Exception from the Planning and Zoning Commission. (12/30/91) (8/10/09) 
12.19 	Country Inn and Banquet Facilities. Country Inns shall be permitted in all Commercial, and Residential zones subject to obtaining a Special Exception from the Planning and Zoning Commission. The Commission may permit Country Inns with or without banquet facilities in all Residential zones and all Commercial zones subject to the following conditions:  (4/13/98) 
12.19.1 	The facility shall have, if located in a Residential Zone, a minimum lot area of five (5) acres. The facility shall have, if located in a Commercial zone, a minimum of 60,000 square feet. 
12.19.2 	The facility shall meet all of the applicable Building, Fire, and Public Health Code requirements. 
12.19.3 	The facility shall have a minimum of seventy-five (75) feet of frontage on one of the following State highways: CT Route 138, CT Route 164, CT Route 12, CT Route 165, and CT Route 201. The Commission may approve frontage to the facility on a town road if the applicant is able to demonstrate that such frontage will provide safe and adequate access to the site. Access to the site shall be restricted and limited to the approved frontage. Country Inns shall be located a minimum of 1,000 feet from a highway, road or street serving the facility. 
12.19.4 	If the facility is located in a Residential zone, patron and employee parking shall be suitably screened so as not to be generally visible from the street or any adjoining residence. 
12.19.5 	Facilities located in Residential zones shall be limited to thirty (30) lodging rooms. Facilities located in Commercial zones shall be regulated as to total lodging rooms in the same manner as hotels and motels, which are referenced in these Regulations. 
12.19.6 	Such facility may include a restaurant, banquet and recreational facilities. Restaurants, as accessory uses to a Country Inn located in a Residential zone, shall be limited to four (4) seats per lodging room. Banquet facilities are allowed as part of a Country Inn in both Residential and Commercial zones and must meet Sections 12.14.1, 12.14.2, 12.14.3 and 12.14.4 of these Regulations. 
12.19.7 	Thirty-five percent (35%) of the developed lot area on which the facility is located shall be improved as landscaped areas. 
12.19.8 	Retail stores are allowed as an accessory use to a Country Inn only in a Commercial zone. 
65 
Griswold Zoning Regulations 	Revised: December 01,2018 
12.19.9 	Alcoholic beverages are allowed as an accessory use to a Country Inn provided they meet Sections 12.7 of these Regulations. If alcoholic beverages are served in a Residential zone, the hours of operation shall be limited to between 12:00 pm. (Noon) and 10:00 p.m.  Following notice to the permit holder and property owner of record and the opportunity to be heard, the Commission may revoke the ability to sell alcoholic beverages in a Residential zone at any time that said Commission has reason to believe that alcoholic beverages have caused a nuisance or a threat to surrounding property owners by a vote of two-thirds (2/3) majority of the Commission. 
12.19.10 	Country Inns shall not be located on a parcel of land that is part of an approved plotted and developed subdivision as approved by the Town of Griswold since March 1971 (date of Subdivision Regulations taking effect in Griswold). 
12.19.11 	A Country Inn facility, located in a Residential zone, shall maintain a 500-foot separating distance from any adjoining residential property line. 
12.20 	Non-Profit Small Domestic Animal Shelters. (2/1/08) 
12.20.1 	The Commission may, by Special Exception, permit Non-Profit Small Domestic Animal Shelters only for smaller domestic animals such as dogs, cats, and exotic pet birds and on residential lots over 80,000 square feet in R-60 and R-80 Districts only; farm animals or animals raised for food or fur such as goats, llamas, horses as well as snakes and reptiles are not permitted under this section, but shall be governed by the provisions of the Regulations for farms. 
12.20.2 	All Shelter animals shall be contained within heated, weather-protected permanent buildings each of which is no larger than 4,000 square feet gross floor area; there shall be no more than two buildings having a total aggregate of 4,000 square feet of gross floor area used by the non-Profit Small Domestic Animal Shelter. 
12.20.3 	Appropriately fenced or covered outside exercise or run areas shall be the minimum size necessary referring to Connecticut Humane Society guidelines. 
12.20.4 	All small domestic sheltered animals capable of creating nuisance noise shall be contained within the building to minimize off-site noise between the hours of 8 p.m. and 8 a.m. 
12.20.5 	Sufficient sound barrier or reduction features shall be installed within the building to minimize the noise disturbance to residential neighbors; 
12.20.6 	The applicant shall submit an Operational Plan which covers aspects of day-to-day operation and presents specific management plans for proper sanitation and odor control; and shall specify the types of animals to be housed on the property; the maximum number of each type of animal at any given time; and the space, both indoor and outdoor, allocated for each type of animal to be housed on the property. 
12.21 	Over 55 Neighborhood Housing Communities and/or 55 Plus Active Adult Neighborhood Housing Communities (8/10/09) 
12.21.1 	Intent: The intent of this section is to provide for housing suited to the unique needs of elderly persons that is consistent with the overall intent of these Regulations; namely to preserve the essentially rural, low–density residential character or the village commercial areas of the Town of Griswold, while permitting variations in bulk, density and residential use types which would not otherwise be possible in order to meet the special needs of elderly persons; to permit flexible site design so that the development may be constructed in harmony with, and to preserve, natural, scenic and historic site design features, and to provide incentives and opportunities for the creation of affordable housing and the reservation of open space lands in many diverse zoning districts. 
66 
Griswold Zoning Regulations 	Revised: December 01,2018 
12.21.2 	Required Approvals: A Special Exception shall be required for any proposed Over 55 Neighborhood Housing Communities and/or 55 Plus Active Adult Neighborhood Housing Communities. The Special Exception may be issued only by the Griswold Planning and Zoning Commission only after a public hearing and shall be issued only in conformity to the provisions of Sections 2, 12, and 13 of these regulations. 
12.21.3 	Definitions (8/10/09) 
1. 	Over 55 Neighborhood Housing Communities and/or 55 Plus Active Adult Neighborhood Housing Communities:  A building or group of buildings that are located on a single parcel of land or adjacent neighborhood retirement lots, that share common management, with in–unit and yard area uses and owner agreements included in a common interest ownership document and enforced primarily through the common interest ownership association and wherein each single family unit is occupied by: 
a. 	
A person 55 years of age or older as occupant 

b. 	
A cohabitant of an occupant pursuant to (a) above. 

c. 	
A cohabitant pursuant to (b) above who survives the occupant who is 55 years of age or older. 

d. 	
A cohabitant pursuant to (b) above where the occupant who is 55 years of age or older and has entered into a long–term continuing care facility. In (c) and (d) above, cohabitants under 55 years of age who are continuing residents or survivors of the occupant must meet all occupancy requirements as described in the common interest ownership documentation of the Over 55 Neighborhood Housing Communities and/or 55 Plus Active Adult Neighborhood Housing Communities or vacate the housing unit within one year. 

e. 	
One (1) child 21 years of age or older may reside with his or her parent(s) or one (1) caregiver 21 years of age or older may reside with the occupant. 

f. 	
In no event may a dwelling unit be occupied by more than three residents. 


2. 	
Over 55 Neighborhood Housing Communities and/or 55 Plus Active Adult Neighborhood Housing Communities:  All buildings and structures located on the neighborhood retirement housing lot or multiple adjacent neighborhood retirement lots and including dedicated open space land and improvements owned and managed by an association in accordance with the Connecticut Common Interest Ownership Act. 

3. 	
Over 55 Neighborhood Housing Communities and/or 55 Plus Active Adult Neighborhood Housing Communities Lot: A lot created within a Neighborhood Retirement Complex complying with Section 12.21.13 of these regulations and meeting the standards for size and bulk in accordance with Section 12.21.13 that may have its sole access and frontage on a private road managed by an association in accordance with the Connecticut Common Interest Ownership Act. Individual lots may be created only when providing water or septic presents unusual difficulties due to soil conditions and subject to approval in accordance with Griswold Subdivision Regulations. 

4. 	
Dedicated Open Space:  Land, the future use of which is legally restricted to conservation, recreation or agriculture in perpetuity utilizing restrictions approved by the Town Attorney. 


67 
Griswold Zoning Regulations 	Revised: December 01,2018 
5. 	
Impervious Surface: The area(s) of an Over 55 Neighborhood Housing Communities and/or 55 Plus Active Adult Neighborhood Housing Communities lot that have been improved in such a way as to be impenetrable by surface water. Such surfaces include, but are not limited to roofs, paved areas (roads, driveways, parking lots, sidewalks, patios, etc.) and swimming pools. 

6. 	
Single–Family Dwelling Unit: A single unit providing complete, independent living facilities for qualified occupants including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation. 

7. 	
Unbuildable area: The area, expressed in square feet, within a tract that is comprised of wetlands and watercourses as defined in the Griswold Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations; exposed ledge; shallow depth–to–bedrock soils; Flood Hazard Area A per FEMA maps; ledge (either exposed or within three feet of the existing surface of the ground); slopes greater than 20 percent; easements for above–ground public utility transmission lines; and lands with existing legal restrictions precluding use for building. 


12.21.4 	Application for Over 55 Neighborhood Housing Communities and/or 55 Plus Active Adult Neighborhood Housing Communities: 
1. 	
Approvals: A special exception is required under the provisions of Section 12.21. 

2. 	
Information Required: 

a. 	
Letter of application signed by the owner and agent, if any, stating the ownership of the property to be developed and summarizing the development proposal. 

b. 	
An approval of the septic system design by the Connecticut Department of Health Services and the local Health Director and/or the Department of Energy and Environmental Protection, as applicable. 

c. 	
A Phase 1A Certificate of Public Convenience and Necessity ("Certificate") from the Department of Public Utility Commission and/or an approval from the State Health Department for a water supply system for the Over 55 Neighborhood Housing Communities and/or 55 Plus Active Adult Neighborhood Housing Communities if such certificate and/or approval is required.  See Section 12.21.5.9. 

d. 	
Key map of the neighborhood on a scale of 1" = 400' showing the relation of the proposed development to abutting properties and to existing and proposed streets. 

e. 	
Certified A–2 base map on a scale of 1" = 40' showing the following: 




1) 	Location of benchmarks 
2) 	parcel size 
3) 	Two–foot contours extending fifty (50 feet beyond site boundaries. Contour information shall be collected by an actual field survey or by means of photogrammetry (aerial topography). 
68 
Griswold Zoning Regulations 	Revised: December 01,2018 
4) Location of separate subsurface sewage disposal area for each parcel, and site testing locations for the same. 5) Location of separate water supply for each parcel; or location of any buried fuel tanks. 6) Location, dimension and basement floor elevation of all buildings. 7) Location of driveways, parking areas, and parking spaces. 8) Location of accessory buildings, structures and facilities. 9) Foundation drains and gutter drains, drainage plan of entire site including all disturbed areas, sidewalks, parking and driveway areas. 10) Location of any ponds, brooks, or inland wetland areas as certified by a soil scientist. 
11) 	Location of unbuildable area including wetland soils, areas of exposed ledge or shallow depth to bedrock and slopes over 20 percent from the horizontal. Notes should reflect total area (in square feet) of buildable and unbuildable areas on the lt. 
12) 	Location of proposed dedicated open space. 
f. 	
Appropriate and accurate elevations, to scale, depicting height, bulk, construction materials and other massing, architectural, and design features of the buildings and structures in proposed development. 

g. 	
Landscaping plan, incorporated as part of the Site Plan referenced in Section 13 showing: 1) Planting schedules – type, number, minimum size of trees and/or shrubs and other plans. 2) Treatment of seeding and sodding. 


3) Pavement types of vehicular and pedestrian movement. 4) Type, height and density of any proposed screening or fencing. 
h. 
An erosion and sedimentation control plan prepared in accordance with Section 13.4 of the Town of Griswold Zoning Regulations. 

i. 	
A legal document suitable to the Commission and the Commission's legal counsel to ensure the proposed use or limitations in the use of the dedicated open space is preserved and maintained in perpetuity. 


12.21.5 	Standards: Any application for a special exception under the provisions of Section 12.21 shall meet the following requirements. 
69 
Griswold Zoning Regulations 	Revised: December 01,2018 
12.21.5.1 
12.21.5.2 
12.21.5.3 
12.21.5.4 
12.21.5.5 
12.21.5.6 
12.21.5.7 
Tract Size and Location: No tract of land shall be approved for Over 55 Neighborhood Housing Communities and/or 55 Plus Active Adult Neighborhood Housing Communities that is less than ten (10) acres if located in a R–40, R–60, or R–80 district and shall have a minimum lot width at the frontage of fifty (50) feet.  Minimum lot area for C–1 district shall be six (6) acres and shall have a minimum lot width at the front boundary of fifty (50) feet. 
Density of Dwelling Units: For one–family or attached dwelling units per acre, no Over 55 Neighborhood Housing Communities and/or 55 Plus Active Adult Neighborhood Housing Communities shall exceed two (2) dwelling units per 40,000 square feet on the average, excluding "unbuildable area" as designed in Section 12.21.3.7 if no public water or sewer are available. No more than three 
(3) dwelling unit per 40,000 square feet on the average, excluding "unbuildable area" as defined in Section 12.21.3.7 shall be approved for a parcel with only public water or pubic sewer, not both. No more than four (4) dwelling units per 40,000 square feet shall be approved for a parcel served by both public water and public sewer. 
For no more than fifty percent (50%) of the total units on a parcel, multiple attached dwelling units may be permitted consisting of as many as four dwelling units in a single multi-family building with common walls, provided that the equivalent front of each dwelling unit is visually isolated from other attached dwelling units, and that the dwelling units are each two bedroom and no larger than 1200 square feet of Attached dwelling units shall be no closer than 100 feet and one–family units shall be no closer than 50 feet from the limits of the Over 55 Neighborhood Housing Communities and/or 55 Plus Active Adult Neighborhood Housing Communities. 
Each single-family dwelling unit shall contain a minimum of 900 square feet and not more than 2200 square feet of livable area. No dwelling unit shall contain more than three (3) bedrooms and no more than one–third of the total number of single-family dwelling units on the tract shall contain three (3) bedrooms. 
Community buildings, recreational facilities and open spaces designed for and used principally by the residents of the Over 55 Neighborhood Housing Communities and/or 55 Plus Active Adult Neighborhood Housing Communities are permitted as accessory uses. 
Building Height: Maximum height of twenty–eight (28) feet, if one–story and thirty–five (35) feet if two–story. 
Separating distance between buildings and between buildings and streets: Minimum separating distances shall be not less than thirty–five (35) feet for one–story buildings and fifty (50) feet for two–story buildings. 
Distance from dwelling units from side and rear limits of the Neighborhood Retirement Complex:  side and rear yards shall be a minimum of fifty (50) feet 
70 
Griswold Zoning Regulations Revised: December 01,2018 
12.21.5.8 
12.21.5.9 
12.21.5.10 
Sewage Disposal: Each single–family dwelling shall be connected to an approved sewage disposal system. An approval of the permit for the subsurface sewage disposal system must be obtained from the Department of Health Services and/or the Department of Energy and Environmental Protection prior to final approval of the Special Exception by the Commission. If the applicant proposed to utilize a community sewage system, as defined in Connecticut General Statutes Section 7–245, a report from the said Water Pollution Control Authority indicating that all requirements of Connecticut General Statutes Section 7–246f have been satisfied shall be provided. 
Water Supply: 
12.5.5.9.1 	Water Supply facilities must meet the requirements of the State Health Code. In accordance with Section 8–25a of the Connecticut General Statutes as amended by Public Act 84– 330, any development providing water by means of a "water company" as that term is defined in Connecticut General Statutes Section 16–262m (a), shall provide to the Commission a certified copy of a Phase 1A Certificate of Public Convenience and necessity issued for the development by the Connecticut Department of Public Utility Control. No application for special exception involving such water company in the event that the company is at any time unable or unwilling to provide adequate service to its consumers. 
12.21.5.9.2 	Individual water supply wells, if proposed, must be drilled and tested at the expense of the owner and/or developer and found to meet the required standards for potability and yield prior to the issuance of a building permit on any Neighborhood Retirement Housing lot. The Director of Health or his representatives shall issue a notice to the Zoning Enforcement Official following the receipt of the well completion report, the results of the yield testing and the potability analysis by a certified laboratory indicating that the well meets the minimum standards for yield and potability as set forth by the State of Connecticut. 
Parking, driveways and streets: The following standards shall apply to parking, driveways and streets. 
a) 	Parking and driveway surfaces shall be bituminous concrete. Internal private streets shall be held in common interest by the Over 55 Neighborhood Housing Communities and/or 55 Plus Active Adult Neighborhood Housing Communities homeowners association and shall be at least 22 feet in width. All internal private streets shall be constructed in accordance with the Standards for a Local Street specified in the Town of Griswold Subdivision Regulations and Ordinance 202. 
b) 	Driveways for each unit shall be constructed in conformance with Section 
10.8 of these regulations. 
71 
Griswold Zoning Regulations 	Revised: December 01,2018 
c) 	There shall be at least two parking spaces provided for each one-family dwelling unit. For attached dwelling units, at least two parking spaces for each two bedrooms shall be provided. At least one of these parking spaces shall be provided within an attached garage. All unit driveways shall be a minimum of 40 feet in length. 
d) 	Driveways, parking areas, utilities, water, sewage, streets, landscaped areas, open spaces, accessory buildings, structures and facilities under common ownership by the Over 55 Neighborhood Housing Communities and/or 55 Plus Active Adult Neighborhood Housing Communities shall be owned and maintained by a common interest ownership association pursuant to the Connecticut Common Interest Ownership Act of the Connecticut. 
The Association Constituent Documents shall be reviewed and approved in draft before Commission approval and prior to the formation of the Common Interest Association for content by the Commissions legal counsel. No Special Exception Permit shall be effective until after such review and approval has been granted and the constituent documents have been filed in the Town Clerk's office. 
12.21.5.11 	All utility transmission and service lines shall be underground, except when waived by the Commission due to circumstances such as severe soil limitations. 
12.21.5.12 	All garages shall have automatic door openers. 
12.21.5.13 	Height, Area and Yard requirements for a Over 55 Neighborhood Housing Communities and/or 55 Plus Active Adult Neighborhood Housing Communities lot: 
Minimum Lot Area: 20,000 square feet Minimum Front yard Setback: 30 feet Minimum Side yard Setback: 15 feet Minimum Rear yard Setback: 50 feet Minimum Lot Width: 100 feet Maximum Building Height: 28 feet – one–story 
35 feet – two–story Maximum Impervious Surface 30 percent of lot. 
12.21.6 	Architectural considerations: All one–family dwellings or attached units shall share a common exterior architectural theme and compatibility. Architecture shall also be compatible with architecture in the surrounding neighborhood. Proposed rendering shall be reviewed by a consultant licensed Architect to the Commission. Each unit shall contain a basement, attic or other designated area within the individual Over 55 Neighborhood Housing Communities and/or 55 Plus Active Adult Neighborhood Housing Communities for storage. 
12.21.6.1 	Home office uses shall be allowed in conformance with Section 11.7 of these Regulations. 
72 
Griswold Zoning Regulations 	Revised: December 01,2018 
12.21.6.2 	Adequate street lighting using full cut–off fixtures and poles of such height that stray light towards the buildings or off-site is minimized. 
12.21.6.3 	Appropriate signage shall identify the entrance to the complex, intersections, directions, and patterns of vehicular movement. One sign identifying the Over 55 Neighborhood Housing Communities and/or 55 Plus Active Adult Neighborhood Housing Communities complex may be placed on each such complex. The sign shall be subject to approval by the Planning and Zoning Commission so that it will fit the character of R–40, R–60, R–80, C–1 districts. The sign shall not exceed sixteen (16) square feet in area. The location and height of the sign shall conform to the requirements of Section 15. 
12.21.6.4 	A minimum of 40% of the parcel area in the R–40, R–60 and R–80 districts shall be preserved in perpetuity as dedicated open space. A minimum of 25% of the parcel area shall be preserved in perpetuity as dedicated open space for parcels in the C– 1 districts. Such open space shall be located so that it is an integral part of the residential area, readily accessible to residents of the parcel and to necessary maintenance equipment except where such accessibility would interfere with a stated conservation purpose or agricultural use. 
12.21.7 	Evaluation Criteria: In considering the proposed application, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be guided by the following in addition to the Standards of Section 12 of these Regulations. 
12.21.7.1 	The existing and future character of the neighborhood in which the use is to be located. 
12.21.7.2 	The location of principal and accessory buildings in relation to one another. 
12.21.7.3 	The height, bulk, and density of buildings in relation to one another, and their architectural character. 
12.21.7.4 	Traffic circulation within the site; amount, location, and access to parking; traffic load or possible circulation problems on existing streets; pedestrian safety throughout the site and in the immediate neighborhood; and the quality of the landscaping in terms of its buffering values, quantity, and enhancement of the visual beauty of the development. 
12.21.8 The Commission may provide for bonding of all required common improvements and for soil and erosion control to conform to the specifications set forth in Section 13.4 of these Regulations. The responsibility for the maintenance of common improvements and for maintaining the provisions of the approved special exception within the Over 55 Neighborhood Housing Communities and/or 55 Plus Active Adult Neighborhood Housing Communities shall be vested in the Homeowners Association pursuant to the Common Interest Ownership Act. 
12.22 	Convalescent and/or Nursing Homes, Rehabilitation Facilities, Assisted Living Facilities, Continuing Care Facilities, Elder Care Facilities, Adult Day Care Facilities. (7/27/12) 
12.22.1 	Minimum lot size for this use shall be 2.0 acres. 
73 
Griswold Zoning Regulations 	Revised: December 01,2018 
12.22.2 	Parking requirements in addition loading area shall be one space for each three (3) units, one space for each employee in the largest shift of the day. 
12.22.3 	Additional holiday parking spaces are encouraged that are designed as Low Impact Development features such as pervious concrete and structural grass overflow parking and does not contribute to the impervious area of the lot 
12.23 	Child Day Care Centers may be permitted by Special Exception in C -Commercial and BP districts as long as: (7/27/12) 
12.23.1 	Minimum lot size shall be 1.5 acres. 
12.23.2 	Parking requirement in addition to loading area shall be one space for each employee in the larges shift of the day and one visitor parking space for each five (5) children in the day care facility. 
12.24 	Permanent Year-Round Commercial Farm Stores 
12.24.1 	The farm store shall be located a minimum of 50 feet from any street intersection. Front yard, side yard, and rear yard setback requirements shall be maintained for the zoning district in which it is located in accordance with section 10 of these regulations. 
12.24.2 	To ensure public safety, farm stores are required to provide off street parking with adequate ingress and egress in accordance with section 14 of these regulations. 
12.24.3 	A minimum of 75 percent (75%) of gross sales shall be from farm agricultural products grown, raised or produced on the owner's farm. Farm related products grown or raised from other farms may be sold 
12.24.4 	Seasonal limited events that are incidental to agricultural uses including events such as corn mazes, harvest festivals, educational demonstrations, hay rides, petting zoos or other similar uses are allowed as long as provisions are made to facilitate public safety including but not limited to off-street temporary parking, temporary signage and temporary portable bathroom facilities 
12.24.5 	A site plan shall be prepared in accordance with section 13 of these regulations 
74 
Griswold Zoning Regulations 	Revised: December 01,2018 
SECTION 13:  SITE PLAN REQUIREMENTS 
13.1 	Purpose. A site plan is intended to provide the Commission with information that will enable it to determine that the proposed buildings and uses shall be arranged in a manner that enhances the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Griswold and shall be of such character as to harmonize with the neighborhood, to accomplish a transition in character between areas of unlike character, to protect property values in the neighborhood, to preserve and protect natural resources and the appearance and beauty of the community and to avoid undue traffic congestion. 
13.2 	Procedure. A site plan shall be submitted with any application for a Zoning Permit involving uses other than single-family and two-family dwellings and accessory buildings or expansions of or additions to such buildings. Such plan shall conform to Class A-2 standards for accuracy in accordance with the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies, Connecticut General Statutes Section 20-300b-1 through 20-300b-20 or as amended.  (8/10/09) 
13.2.1 	Approval of a site plan shall be presumed unless a decision to deny or modify it is rendered by the Commission within 65 days after the date of receipt, except that such time period may be extended for not more than one (1) additional period of 65 days, with the consent of the applicant. 
13.2.2 	A copy of any decision by the Commission on a site plan shall be sent by certified mail to the applicant within fifteen (15) days after such decision is rendered. 
13.3 	Site Plan Requirements. Site plans shall be drawn at a scale of at least one inch equals fifty feet (1” = 50’) and shall be on sheets either 36 x 24 inches or 18 x 12 inches and shall clearly show, to the satisfaction of the Commission, the following information:  8/10/09 
13.3.1 	Name and address of applicant, 
13.3.2 	Address of property and name of owner of record, 
13.3.3 	Scale, north arrow, date of drawing or its revision, and name of person preparing the site plan, 
13.3.4 	Property boundaries, dimensions and area, 
13.3.5 	Locations of all existing and proposed buildings and uses including but not limited to signs, sidewalks, driveways, parking and loading areas, and abutting streets; poles, hydrants, and other utility appurtenances; areas to be used for exterior storage and the type of screening to be provided. 
13.3.6 	Dimensions of all yards, as required by these Regulations. 
13.3.7 	Locations and descriptions of water supply and sewage disposal facilities. 
13.3.8 	Contour lines at intervals determined by the Commission to be sufficient to clearly show natural drainage; if grading is proposed, the existing and proposed contours will be shown. 
13.3.9 	Existing and proposed drainage structures on the property and those off the property that may be affected by the proposed building or use, and 
13.3.10 	Proposed landscaping, including the type, size and location of proposed plantings. 
75 
Griswold Zoning Regulations 	Revised: December 01, 2018 
13.3.11 	Location and Configuration of all Driveways, Common or Loop Driveways.  See Section 10.9 of these Regulations.  (8/10/09) 
13.3.12 	Location and stonewall type for boundary stonewalls and stonewalls on the road frontage including the proposed existing/new location, construction details, and typical cross-sectional dimensions of any stonewalls that are to be rebuilt or relocated. (8/10/09) 
13.4. 	Erosion and Sediment Control Plan. A soil erosion and sediment control plan shall be submitted with any application for development when the disturbed area of such development is cumulatively more than one-half (1/2) acre. The soil erosion and sediment control plan shall contain proper provisions to adequately control storm water runoff on the proposed site based on the best available technology. Such principles, methods and practices necessary for certification are found in the “Connecticut Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control” (1985) as amended, available from the Natural Resources Center of the Connecticut Department of Energy and Environmental Protection. Alternative principles, methods, and practices may be used with prior approval of the Commission. 
13.4.1 	The Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Plan shall include the following: 
A. A narrative describing: 
1) 	The development, 
2) 	The schedule for grading and construction activities including: 
a) 	Start and completion dates, 
b) 	Sequence of grading and construction activities, 
c) 	Sequence for installation and/or application of soil erosion and sediment control measures, and 
d) 	Sequence for final stabilization of project site. 
3) 	The design criteria for proposed soil erosion and sediment control measures and storm water management facilities. 
4) 	The construction details and the installation and/or application procedures for proposed soil erosion and sediment control measures and storm water management facilities, and 
5) 	The operations and maintenance program for proposed soil erosion and sediment control measures and storm water management facilities; 
B. A map of at least one inch equals fifty feet (1”= 50’) showing: 
1) 	The location of the proposed development and adjacent properties, 
2) 	The existing and proposed topography including soil types, wetlands, watercourses and water bodies, 
3) 	The existing structures on the project site, if any, 
4) 	The proposed area alterations including cleared, excavated, filled or graded areas and proposed structures, utilities, roads and, if applicable, new property lines, 
5) 	The location of and design details for all proposed soil erosion and sediment control measures and storm water management facilities, 
76 

Griswold Zoning Regulations 	Revised: December 01, 2018 
6) 	The sequence of grading and construction activities, 
7) 	The sequence for installation and/or application of soil erosion and sediment control measures, 
8) 	The sequence for final stabilization of the development site, and 
9) 	The words “Certified by the Griswold Planning and Zoning Commission” with designated space for the date and signature of the Chairman or Secretary of the Commission; 
C. 	The narrative required in Section 13.4.1 a) may be included on the map of Section 13.4.1. b) if room allows it without affecting the readability of the map. The items required to be mapped in Section 13.4.1 b) may be depicted on the site plan map required in Section 13.3 if the readability of the site plan is not affected. 
13.4.2 	After review of the Erosion and Sediment Control Plan by the Commission or its designated agent, the Commission shall vote to certify, modify and certify, or deny that the soil erosion and sediment control plan complies with these Regulations A vote of the Commission to approve a site plan shall mean certification of the erosion and sediment control plan as well. Prior to certification, any plan submitted to the Commission may be reviewed by the New London County Soil and Water Conservation District which may make recommendations concerning such plan, provided such review shall be completed within thirty (30) days of the receipt of such plan by the New London County Soil and Water Conservation District. 
13.4.3 	The estimated costs of measures required to control soil erosion and sedimentation, as specified in the certified plan, may be covered in the performance bond or other assurance acceptable to the Commission in accordance with the provisions specified under Section 13.7 of these Regulations. 
13.4.4 	The Commission or its designated agent shall periodically conduct inspections to verify compliance with the certified plan and that control measures are properly performed or installed and maintained. The Commission may require the applicant to submit progress reports which show that soil erosion and sediment control measures and facilities have been performed or installed according to the certified plan and are being correctly operated and maintained. 
13.5 	Waivers. The Commission may, upon written request by the applicant, waive one or more of the site plan ingredient requirements if the applicant can show to the satisfaction of the Commission that the information is not needed to reach a decision on the application. 
13.6 	Site Plan Evaluation. The Commission shall determine the following in its review of a site plan. 
13.6.1 	Any proposed building or structure shall be so designed, and located on the site so that there will be adequate access for emergency vehicles. 
13.6.2 	The streets serving the proposed use shall be adequate to safely carry the vehicular traffic generated by the proposed activity, and there will be provision for entrance and exit points which will not create a traffic hazard or undue traffic congestion. 
13.6.3 	All proposed traffic access ways are adequate but not excessive in number; adequate in width, grade, alignment and visibility; not located too near street corners or other places of public assembly; and other similar safety considerations 
77 

Griswold Zoning Regulations 	Revised: December 01, 2018 
13.6.4 	Adequate off-street parking and loading spaces are provided to prevent parking in public streets of vehicles of any persons connected with or visiting the use and the interior circulation system is adequate to provide safe accessibility to all required off-street parking. 
13.6.5 	All playground, parking and service areas are reasonably screened at all seasons of the year from the view of adjacent residential lots and streets and the general landscaping of the site is in character with that generally prevailing in the neighborhood. Preservation of existing trees over twelve (12) inches in diameter to the maximum extent possible shall be encouraged. 
13.6.6 	Lighting from the installation of outdoor flood or spot lighting and illuminated signs will be properly shielded so that such lighting will not adversely affect any abutting property or public street. 
13.6.7 	The character and appearance of the proposed use, buildings, and/or outdoor signs will be in general harmony with the character and appearance of the surrounding neighborhood and that of the Town of Griswold and will not adversely affect the general welfare of the inhabitants of the Town. 
13.7 	Performance Guarantee. Timing of Filing. Before site plan approval is granted, the applicant shall file a cash bond or irrevocable letter of credit in a form reviewed and approved by the Town Attorney with the Commission and in an amount approved by the Commission to assure the installation and maintenance of any erosion and sedimentation control plan approved in accordance with Section 2.12 of these Regulations and any measures to be taken to control soil erosion and sedimentation likely to occur from the proposed site plan; and, prior to the commencement of construction, a cash bond or irrevocable letter of credit in a form reviewed and approved by the Town Attorney with the Commission and in an amount approved by the Commission as sufficient to guarantee the timely and adequate completion of those items to be conveyed to or controlled by the Town and in conformity with the provisions of these Regulations or any amendments thereto in force at the time of filing. A copy of the site plan shall be part of the performance guarantee. Such performance guarantee shall not be released by the Commission until written certification has been received from the Zoning Enforcement Officer that all of the requirements of these Regulations have been fully satisfied. To facilitate this certification, the Zoning Enforcement Officer may require an as-built site plan be submitted which reflects the actual field location of all items as required by Section 13.3. (6/2009) (3/21/2013) 
13.7.1 	Performance Guarantee Requirement at Time of Occupancy. In the event that certain improvements may not be installed to the reasonable satisfaction of the Commission or the Zoning Enforcement Officer, as the case may be, at the time of occupancy of a site or building due to weather conditions or other factors beyond the control of the applicant, the Zoning Enforcement Officer shall not issue a Certificate of Zoning Compliance; provided, however, that, upon request of the property owner, the Zoning Enforcement Officer may issue a temporary Certificate of Zoning Compliance at the time of the application for a Certificate of Occupancy, provided that the applicant shall post a performance guarantee in the form of cash bond, or an irrevocable letter of credit from a Connecticut banking institution in an amount necessary to cover one hundred ten percent (110%) of the anticipated actual construction cost, as estimated at the time of projected completion, to insure the completion of such improvements not more than six (6) months following such occupancy. Said construction estimate shall be reviewed and approved by the Consulting Town Engineer prior to the issuance of a temporary Certificate of Occupancy. All public health and safety-related components of a project must be completed prior to occupancy or use of any parcel of land, building, or structure and shall be bonded. (12/28/00) (6/2009) (3/21/2013) 
78 

Griswold Zoning Regulations 	Revised: December 01, 2018 
13.7.1.1 	Performance guarantees may be required by the Commission to insure that landscaping material which has been improperly planted or cared for will be replaced; that public improvements have been properly installed; and that other defects which do not appear immediately after completion of construction will be repaired or utilized, as the case may be, not more than one (1) year following completion of all improvements, as evidenced by the issuance of a Certificate of Zoning Compliance, or the release of the bond as described above.  (12/28/00) (8/10/09) 
13.7.1.2 	Where the Commission or the Zoning Enforcement Officer, as the case may be, have reason to believe at the time of occupancy that landscaping may not survive to the end of the next full calendar year, performance guarantees may be required by the Commission or the Zoning Enforcement Officer to insure that landscaping material which has been improperly planted or cared for will be replaced; that public improvements have been properly installed; and that other defects which do not appear immediately after completion of construction will be repaired or utilized, as the case may be, not more than one (1) year following completion of all improvements, as evidenced by the issuance of a Certificate of Zoning Compliance, or the release of the bond as described above.  (12/28/00) (6/2009) (3/21/2013) 
13.7.1.1 	All performance guarantees posted in accordance with these Regulations shall be effective at least until the completion of the activity or development which they serve to guarantee. No such bond shall require the Town or any agency thereof to incur any expense or enter into any contract prior to payment of the obligation which such bonds secure. All bonds shall be in such form as the Town Attorney shall require. (12/28/00) (8/10/09) (3/21/13) 
13.7.1.2 	The Commission shall, upon written request from the developer and after consultation with the Board of Selectmen, approve the release of portions of a performance guarantee in the form of a cash bond or irrevocable letter of credit after clearly definable portions of the improvements have been completed in accordance with the approved subdivision plan. Such written request shall be accompanied by a certification of completion of these items in a statement signed by a professional engineer licensed to practice in Connecticut and by the Board of Selectmen. Not later than sixty-five days after receiving such written request, the Commission shall (A) release or authorize the release of any such performance guarantee or portion thereof, provided the commission or its agent is reasonably satisfied that the improvements for which such performance guarantee or portion thereof was posted have been completed, or (B) provide the person posting such performance guarantee with a written explanation as to the additional improvements that must be completed before such performance guarantee or portion thereof may be released. (3/21/2013) 
13.8 	Amendments to Approved Site Plan filed or Approved Special Exception Site Plan pursuant to Sections 12 or 13. The Town Planner, Zoning Enforcement Officer or other agent designated by resolution of the Commission may approve a one (1) time administrative approval of the original Special Exception or Site Plan previously approved by the Commission, without public hearing, any proposed expansion, reduction of or enlargement of an existing building or the addition of a building or buildings that is/are necessary to the principal building and use provided:  (9/26/02) (8/10/09) 
13.8.1 	Such reduction of or enlargement of accessory building or buildings, individually or cumulatively, do not exceed twenty percent (20%) of the area of the principal building’s approved footprint, or 5,000 square feet, whichever is less. (9/26/02) (8/10/09) 
79 

Griswold Zoning Regulations 	Revised: December 01, 2018 
13.8.2 	Any proposed reduction of or expansion or enlargement of an existing building or the addition of an accessory building or buildings shall conform to all of the requirements of the zoning district in which the property is located.  (9/26/02) (8/10/09) 
13.8.3 No site work is required. “Site work” shall include additional parking spaces, storm drainage, or site disturbance of more than one quarter (1/4) of an acre, but shall not include the excavation or grading necessary and incidental to the construction of the new or expanded building or structure itself.  (9/26/02) 
13.8.4 	Whether filed as a single application or as multiple applications, the reduction of or expansion or enlargement of an existing building or the addition of an accessory building or buildings which exceed, individually or cumulatively, the limitations of this administrative permit procedure shall require Special Exception or site plan review by the Commission in accordance with Section 12 or 13 of these Regulations, as the case may be.  (9/26/02) (8/10/09 
13.8.5 	The applicant shall file a detailed site plan and narrative explaining the proposed building reduction or expansion or proposed accessory building addition with the Commission’s designated agent for review. The agent shall determine whether or not the proposed reduction or expansion satisfies the criteria to be permitted administratively or whether the expansion requires formal Special Exception or site plan review by the Commission.  No such amendment shall be approved that substantially alters the uses, density, building coverage, or other elements of an approved Special Exception. (9/26/02)  (8/10/09) 
13.9 	Minor Site Plan Amendments to Previously Approved Zoning Permits or Special Exceptions. An applicant may submit an application for a minor site plan amendment of an existing approved site plan as a Zoning Permit Application subject to land use review fees (Ordinances Section 144 as Appendix A) before the Commission. The Commission will review the proposed changes compared to the original approval and determine whether the scope of these changes would require a new permitting procedure including but not limited to application fees, new site plan documents and new public hearing.  If the proposed changes in site plan are deemed by the Commission to be minor or allowable within the original scope of the permit, then the modifications may be made by administrative letter to file, reviewed by the Town Planner and signed by the Chairman on behalf of the entire Commission. (8/10/09 
80 

Griswold Zoning Regulations 	Revised: December 01, 2018 
SECTION 14:  PARKING REQUIREMENTS 
14.1 	General. A parking space shall have a minimum rectangular dimension sufficient to provide 171 square feet of parking area exclusive of driveways. The length of any parking space shall be at least 18 feet and the width at least 9.5 feet as measured on an axis parallel with the vehicle after it is parked. The dimensions of the parking spaces shall be consistent for all contiguous spaces and shall provide for the most efficient design for vehicular and pedestrian circulation. Interior drives shall be adequate width to serve a particular design arrangement of parking spaces, the following being the minimum width permitted. Ninety degree (90o) parking shall be used unless there is a positive control of traffic directions 
90o parking – Twenty-six (26) feet 45o parking – Thirteen (13) feet 60o parking – Eighteen (18) feet 30o parking – Eleven (11) feet 
Entrance and exit drives to parking facilities shall consist of a minimum fifteen (15) foot wide lanes one way and thirty (30) foot wide lanes for two way movement and said entrance or exit to any off-street parking area shall be located a safe distance (minimum 50 feet) away from any street intersection unless otherwise authorized by the Commission. No such entrance or exit may exceed a grade in excess of six percent (6%) with 25 feet of any street line or ten percent (10%) at any other point. All points of ingress or egress shall be appropriately signed unless such signage is considered unnecessary. (2/1/08) 
The applicant may provide a limited number of small car spaces in accordance with the following standards: 
Up to twenty-five percent (25%) of the minimum number of required parking spaces may be allocated for small cars and correspondingly reduced in size subject to the approval of a small car parking layout plan. A small car space (stall) shall not be less than eight (8) feet in width and sixteen (16) feet in stall length. The small car spaces shall be laid out in groups and marked with “Small Car Only” freestanding or wall signs not to exceed one (1) square foot each. 
Further, the State of Connecticut Building Code shall determine the number of spaces which shall be set aside for disabled drivers. All spaces shall be clearly marked. 
Off-street parking areas shall be adequately illuminated for convenience and safety, but no lighting for parking areas shall cause glare on adjoining property. 
All off-street parking areas shall be paved with bituminous concrete except for one and two-family dwellings and farm buildings. The Commission may allow an acceptable, alternative parking surface if the use is a low volume traffic generator and the Commission is satisfied with its maintenance provisions. 
The parking required herein is in addition to space which is required for the storage of trucks or other vehicles used in connection with a business, commercial or industrial use. 
Where fractional spaces result, the parking spaces required shall be construed to be the next highest whole number. 
The parking space requirements for a use not specifically listed in this section shall be the same as for a listed use of similar characteristics of parking demand generation, as determined by the Commission. 
81 

Griswold Zoning Regulations 	Revised: December 01, 2018 
In the case of mixed uses, uses with different parking requirements occupying the same building or premises, the parking spaces required shall equal the sum of the requirements of the various uses computed separately, except in the case of public, parochial or private schools. 
Parking lots in C districts shall be designed so that adjoining lots may be interconnected and made continuous to promote internal traffic flow, provide access management, and limit the number of required road access cuts. It is the intent of the C – Commercial district to encourage “common use” or shared parking and common shared curb cuts as long as it has been demonstrated to provide adequate parking at all times or operation at the site and has been documented in a reciprocal agreement binding the owners and/or operators at the site. In the case of gasoline stations, car washes, or travel centers, parking spaces at the pumps or under the gas canopy, or within the washing stall(s), or the like shall not be counted as parking spaces to meet minimum parking requirements. (2/1/08) 
14.1.1 	Parking lots in Commercial and Industrial districts shall have at least twenty (20) square feet of green space, seeded to grass and planted with trees and shrubs, within the parking lot for each parking space in addition to required landscaped buffer strips in accordance with Section 11.8 of these Regulations. (8/26/99) 
14.2 Requirements. The following parking space requirements shall be met: 
14.2.1 	Dwelling – 1-1/2 spaces per family unit. For a single-family residence, the area of a driveway may be counted toward meeting parking space requirements. 
14.2.2 	Tourist home, hotel, motel – one (1) space per guest sleeping room. 
14.2.3 	Boarding house and rooming house – one space for every two (2) guest accommodations. 
14.2.4 	Restaurant, eating establishment or tavern – one space per each fifty (50) square feet or portion thereof, of public floor space. For a drive-in eating establishment, a minimum of ten 
(10) parking spaces shall be required. 
14.2.5 	Personal patron service shops, e.g., barber shops, beauty salons – Three (3) spaces per station. 
14.2.6 	Retail Stores – one (1) space per 150 square feet of floor space used for sale or display of merchandise. 
14.2.7 	Theater, auditorium, church or place of public assembly – one space per each seven (7) seats. 
14.2.8 	Finance, insurance or real estate establishment – one space per each 200 square feet of office space. 
14.2.9 	Wholesale establishment one space for every three (3) employees. 
14.2.10 	Hospital, convalescent homes, nursing homes – one space per three (3) beds and one space per three (3) employees 
14.2.11 	Industrial use – one space for each two (2) employees on the largest shift. 
14.2.12 	Shopping center – one space per 350 square feet of floor area. 
82 

Griswold Zoning Regulations 	Revised: December 01, 2018 
14.2.13 	Off-street loading – every commercial, industrial, wholesale and hospital use, or addition thereto, must maintain at least one (1) paved off-street loading space of not less than ten (10) feet in width, thirty (30) feet in length, and fourteen (14) feet vertical clearance. For wholesale and industrial buildings, there shall be one such off-street loading space for every 40,000 square feet of floor area or portion thereof, excluding basements. For other uses not specifically listed, the same requirement as for the most similar use shall apply. 
14.2.14 	Non-Profit Small Domestic Animal Shelters-One space per 500 square feet of shelter area over and above any residential requirements. (8/10/09) 
14.2.15 	Multifamily Housing Units Two outside spaces for each unit up to three bedrooms. Spaces internal to a garage, accessory structure, or carport shall not count toward this parking requirement. 
14.2.16 	Gasoline Stations/Convenience Stores One outside parking space for each 150 square feet of inside display area.  Spaces under a gasoline canopy, carport or other accessory structure shall not count toward this parking requirement. (8/10/09) 
83 

Griswold Zoning Regulations 	Revised: December 01, 2018 
SECTION 15:  SIGNS 
15.1 	General Requirements. The following general sign requirements shall apply throughout the Town of Griswold with the provision that any site plan which includes reference to a sign but does not provide specific details regarding the type of sign, size of sign, type of technology, with day and night brightness for lighting of the sign, graphics in sign design, hours of operation and specifics regarding the static versus cycling nature of sign message shall not include any sign approvals as part of the site plan approval regardless of whether that exclusion is stated at the time of that approval.  (02/11) 
15.1.1 	No sign shall be designed or located in a manner that confuses or obstructs the view of official traffic signs or signals nor shall an illuminated sign or lighting device be so directed to permit the beams and illumination to be directed or beamed upon a public street, highway, sidewalk, or adjacent lot such that it causes glare or reflection constituting a traffic hazard or nuisance. 
15.1.2 	No sign or advertising device shall be erected or maintained at the intersection of streets in such a manner as to obstruct free and clear vision of the intersection. 
15.1.3 	All signs shall be constructed of sound materials, firmly supported and maintained in good condition and repair. It is the responsibility of the applicant to check with the building inspector to determine if a building permit is required. 
15.1.4 	Except for a thirty day time limit, no sign or part thereof shall contain or consist of banners, posters, pennants, ribbon streamers, spinners, or other similar parts. No sign shall be equipped with flashing lights or movable parts in all zoning districts; except that time and temperature signs, message boards, and community and/or school activity signs, which may include moving messages, shall not be prohibited by this section as long as the sign meets 
15.1.5 herein. (8/10/09 
Ground signs, including supports, shall not exceed a height of twelve (12) feet in a Residential 
15.1.5 
district or twenty-four (24) feet in a Commercial or Industrial district above the surface of the ground on which it is located. 
15.1.6 	A religious, governmental or institutional use shall have not more than one sign, not exceeding twenty (20) square feet. Business directory/welcoming signs erected by or on behalf of a governmental body serving a public information purpose may exceed this number and size, but shall be professionally designed and reviewed by the Commission. (7/5/94 
15.1.7 	Temporary signs, not over six (6) square feet in area, and advertising the sale, rental, building contractor or special features of the building or lot on which they are located, may be erected in Residential districts. In non-residential districts, temporary signs, not over thirty-two (32) square feet in area, advertising the sale, rental, or special features of the building or lot on which they are located, may be erected. Temporary sign(s) shall be removed in accordance with the following:  (12/1/95) 
a. 	
Temporary sign(s) relating to the construction of a residence shall be removed immediately upon the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy by the Building Official. 

b. 	
Temporary sign(s) relating to the sale of a residence or residential property shall be removed within five (5) working days of the transfer of title of the property. 

c. 	
Temporary sign(s) relating to the repair or remodeling of a residence shall be removed immediately upon completion of the work as permitted by the permit issued. (Permit shall include any permit issued by the Town of Griswold, i.e., Building, Health, Planning and Zoning, Conservation Commission, Board of Selectmen.) 


84 

Griswold Zoning Regulations 	Revised: December 01, 2018 
d. 	
Signs for temporary public or non-profit events, such as blood drives, fundraising events, elections, or other political purposes shall be allowed provided that such signs, banners, or posters shall be displayed not more than thirty (30) days before the event and removed not more than seven (7) days following the event. 

e. 	
Temporary sign(s) shall not be placed in the right-of-way line of any public or private street. The sign(s) shall be placed within the property line of the property. 


15.1.8 	No sign shall advertise a product, service, or activity or other than that which is produced, provided or conducted on the premises except that a maximum of two (2) directional signs each not more than four (4) square feet in area and conforming to the other provisions of these Regulations shall be permitted off the premises; and governmental business directory/welcoming signs shall be permitted according to Section 4.1.7 above.  (7/5/94) 
15.2 	Signs in Residential Districts. The following signs are permitted in Residential districts. 
15.2.1 	One sign giving the name and address of the property and/or the occupant. Such signs shall not exceed four (4) square feet. 
15.2.2 	One sign identifying a permitted profession or home occupation, not exceeding four (4) square feet. 
15.2.3 	One sign identifying an approved Special Exception use, not exceeding thirty-two (32) square feet. 
15.2.4 	One sign offering more than one vacant lot for sale in an approved subdivision, such sign not to exceed thirty-two (32) square feet. Two such signs are permitted where the number of lots for sale is ten (10) or more. The sign(s) may be displayed for the duration of the approval of the subdivision and shall be removed immediately when all lots have been sold or conveyed. Said sign(s) shall be maintained in good appearance. Said sign(s) shall be located in the right of way of the street line and placed so that it does not create a sight-line problem and shall conform to Section 11.6 of these Regulations.  (12/1/95) 
15.2.5 	No sign, other than one identifying the occupant of a residence, shall be located closer than twenty (20) feet from any property line in a Residential district, except that signs permitted in accordance with Sections 15.1.7 and 15.2.6 may be permitted within the 20-foot setback area. (12/1/95) 
15.2.6 	A Zoning Permit shall be obtained for a permanent sign that identifies a development or subdivision. The sign face shall not exceed six (6) square feet in area or four (4) feet in height above the existing grade of the sign location. The sign shall be constructed of permanent materials and shall be placed in the right-of-way of the street line and shall be placed so that it does not create a sight line problem. The placement of the sign shall conform to Section 11.6 of these Regulations. (12/1/95) 
15.3 	Signs in Commercial and Industrial Districts. Every place of business may erect plain or illuminated signs upon the property on which the business is conducted which indicate the name of the owner or proprietor, the character of the business, the name of the business, and/or the products made or sold on the site, subject to the following regulations: 
85 
Griswold Zoning Regulations 	Revised: December 01, 2018 
15.3.1 	Each individual commercial building located on a separate lot and in a separate building from other uses may have a non-movable, freestanding sign not exceeding thirty-two (32) square feet in area. 
15.3.1.1 	Each individual commercial building located on a separate lot and in a separate building from other uses may have a maximum of two (2) portable, movable signs, each not more than eight (8) square feet in area. Such signs shall not be located within or on a street, right-of-way, sidewalk, or driveway. 
15.3.2 	Where two or more commercial uses are grouped in a single building or in one or more buildings on a single lot, as in a shopping center, one sign not exceeding 100 square feet shall be permitted. For a commercial building with frontage on two streets, two such signs are permitted. 
15.3.3 	Each commercial or professional use may be permitted one sign, not exceeding four (4) square feet in size, attached to the building on which it is located, unless such use is located in a separate building on a separate lot and has no freestanding sign, in which case the sign may be increased to eight (8) square feet. 
15.3.4 	The total area of all signs for each unit of occupancy of a building shall not exceed two (2) square feet for each front foot of building occupied by such use and shall be located at least ten (10) feet back of the street line, except that for each five (5) feet of additional setback beyond the required setback line, an additional five percent (5%) of sign area shall be permitted, but in no case shall the square footage of such sign exceed Thirty (30) percent of each building wall area from ground level to fifteen (15) feet. 
15.3.5 	A Zoning Permit shall be obtained for any sign exceeding thirty-two (32) square feet in size, unless the design and location of such sign is shown on a site development plan approved by the Commission. 
15.3.6 	For a Special Exception with a Hotel of over 70 rooms or a commercial use with one shopping center of more than 200,000 square feet of floor space and more than 1200 parking spaces, one identification sign for the entire development of up to 40 feet in height and 400 square feet in size may be permitted at the discretion of the Commission at the time of site plan review, and said sign shall be located, and shown in detail on the project plan sheet; and it shall be a fixed non-moving sign, and with no flashing lights or graphics. In addition, up to one sign of 100 feet in height above grade and 500 square feet in size, which can be increased at the time of application review, may be granted remote to the use but located on the same parcel specifically for visibility and advance warning of interstate highway exits. 
15.3.7 	A Message Board Sign Panel for Banks and/or Financial Institutions in Commercial and Industrial Zones may be added as one component of the single permitted free-standing sign permitted under Section 15.3.1 or 15.3.5 provided there shall be no increase in the total sign area; that no more than 25% of the total sign area is devoted to recurring lighted advertising or public service messages, provided that the message signs advertises goods or services available from the bank or financial institution or for public service/municipal related messages only, and provided that the duration of each message, transition time between messages, and brightness has been demonstrated to follow Federal Highway Administration Guidelines on Changeable Message Signs in Memorandum HEPR-20 dated September 25, 2007 and as subsequently revised.  Additionally, the message board shall not be active between 
10:00 P.M. and 6:00 A.M. local time with the exception of time and temperature or an emergency alert. (11/09/2010) 
86 
Griswold Zoning Regulations 	Revised: December 01, 2018 
15.4 	Signs on Town-owned Property for all Zoning Districts. Special purpose identification and sponsor advertising signs may be permitted on certain properties owned by the Town of Griswold subject to the following regulations. (11/09/2010) 
15.4.1 	Identification and Public Service Signs or Message Boards: (11/09/2010) 
15.4.1.1 	One free-standing identification sign or lighted message board at the Pachaug Town Hall or Municipal School Campus is permitted with as many as two-faces, each face up to a maximum of 32 square feet in area and up to six feet high overall may be located  after review by the Zoning Enforcement  Officer. (11/09/2010) 
15.4.1.2 	Signs shall be located no closer than ten (10) feet from the front boundary line of the parcel or any internal access way on the lot. Sign should be readable from the road or access way curb. (11/09/2010) 
15.4.1.3 	Sign or message boards (if at Pachaug Town Hall or Municipal School Campus) may be lighted by external fixtures on the ground or within a valance. Alternatively the sign may be internally lighted.  Message boards may be lighted with LEDs whose intensity is programmed and monitored by sensors so brightness is not excessive for prevailing ambient conditions and whose message may be changed with time frequency designed not to distract motorists following Federal Highway Administration Guidelines on Changeable Message Signs in Memorandum HEPR­20 dated September 25, 2007 and subsequently revised. (11/09/2010) 
15.4.1.4 	Message boards at Pachaug Town Hall or Municipal School Campus shall be set to function only from 6:00 A.M. to 10:00 P.M. local time. (11/09/2010) 
15.4.2 	Sponsor Signs attached to existing structures or fences located on Town-owned public recreational areas, ball fields, or parks are permitted as long as any one sponsor sign is thirty-two (32) square feet or less. (11/09/2010) 
87 
Griswold Zoning Regulations 	Revised: December 01, 2018 
SECTION 16:  NON-CONFORMING BUILDINGS AND USES 
16.1 	General. Any building or use which does not conform to the use, dimensional or supplemental requirements of these Regulations shall be considered a non-conforming building or use. 
16.1.1 	Any non-conforming use of a building or lot lawfully existing at the effective date of these Regulations may be continued. 
16.1.2 	Nothing in these Regulations shall prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any portion of a building or structure declared unsafe by a proper authority. 
16.1.3 	Nothing herein contained shall require any change in plans, construction or designated use of a building for which a building permit has been issued, except as provided for in Section 2.8 of these Regulations. 
16.2 	Change of Use. A non-conforming use may, by permission of the Commission, be changed to another non­conforming use when the proposed use is equally appropriate or more appropriate to the district than the existing use. A non-conforming use, once changed to a conforming use, shall not be changed back again into a non-conforming use. 
16.3 	Enlargements. No building which does not conform to the requirements of these Regulations regarding area and width of lot, percentage of lot coverage and required yards shall be enlarged unless such enlarged portion conforms to the regulations applying to the applicable district. 
16.4 	Alterations. Structural alterations of any non-conforming building may be permitted, provided they do not materially alter the exterior appearance of the building and the total costs of such alterations do not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the currently-assessed valuation of such building. 
16.5 	Reconstruction. When a building which, prior thereto had been a non-conforming building is damaged by fire, collapse, explosion, neglect, casualty, act of nature or is demolished, it may be reconstructed, repaired or rebuilt only to, or in substantial conformity to its previous floor area and cubical content. (6/01/90) (8/10/09) 
16.6 	Abandonment. When a non-conforming use is abandoned, it shall thereafter be used in conformity with the regulations for the district in which it is located; or at the sole discretion of the Commission, for a less non–conforming use, in the judgment of the commission through a site plan review. If an abandoned, non­conforming use is changed to a conforming use, it shall thereafter be used in conformity with the regulations for the district in which it is located. (8/10/09) 
88 
Griswold Zoning Regulations 	Revised: December 01, 2018 
SECTION 17:  APPEALS AND VARIANCES 
17.1 	Appeals. Any person may appeal to the Zoning Board of Appeals when it is alleged that there is an error in any order, requirement, or decision made by the Zoning Enforcement Officer related to the enforcement of these Regulations. The board may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement or decision appealed from, and shall make such order, requirement or decision as in its opinion ought to be made in the premises, and shall have the powers of the officer from whose order, requirement or decision the appeal was taken. The concurring votes of four (4) members of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, or decision of the Zoning Enforcement Officer.  (5/2/94) 
17.2 	Variances. Any person seeking a Variance from the literal enforcement of these Regulations may apply to the Zoning Board of Appeals for a Variance. Said Board may, after consideration of a Variance application in accordance with Sections 8-6 and 8-7 of the General Statutes, approve or deny a Variance, except that no Variance may be approved for uses in districts in which such uses are not otherwise permitted by these Regulations. 
17.3 	Variance Notification. The applicant shall, no later than ten (10) days prior to the hearing for the Variance; send notices to all abutting property owners by First Class Mail, and proof of such mailing shall be evidenced by a certificate of mailing. Such ownership shall be as indicated on the most recent Grand List. Said notices shall contain the following information:  (8/10/09) 
1. 	
The zoning regulation(s) that is(are) the subject of the Variance application. Detailed, written narrative explanation of the proposed Variance application. 

2. 	
Copy of any plan or sketch that shows the location of the variance(s) as described in the Variance application. 

3. 	
The date, time and place of the Zoning Board of Appeals hearing. 


The applicant shall present evidence of mailing to the Zoning Board of Appeals at the scheduled hearing. (8/10/09) 
SECTION 18:  AMENDMENTS 
18.1 	Amendments. Amendment of these Regulations, including the Zoning Map, may be petitioned by any resident of Griswold or person having a vested interest in property that would be affected by such amendment, or may be made by the Griswold Planning and Zoning Commission or the Griswold Economic Development Commission. Amendments may be adopted by a majority vote of all the members of the Commission after public notice and hearing in accordance with Section 8-3 of the General Statutes. If a protest against a proposed change is filed at or before the hearing with the Commission, signed by the owners of twenty percent (20%) or more of the area of lots included in such proposed change or of the lots within 500 feet in all directions of the property included in the proposed change, such change shall not be adopted except by vote of two-thirds of all the members of the Commission. The Commission is not required to hear any petition or petitions relating to the same changes or substantially the same changes more than once in a period of twelve (12) months.  (12/28/00) (8/10/09) 
89 
Griswold Zoning Regulations 	Revised: December 01, 2018 
18.1.1 	If the amendment request is for a change in the Zoning Map boundaries, the applicant shall prepare and submit, along with his application, a map drawn to scale showing the boundaries and owners of all properties located within the area to be re-zoned and within five hundred 
(500) feet from the boundaries of the area to be re-zoned. The applicant shall also prepare and submit a list of the names and addresses of the owners of all properties located within the area to be re-zoned as shown on the records of the Griswold Tax Assessor. The applicant shall mail a copy of the public hearing notice to the owners of record of such properties at least ten 
(10) days before the date set for the public hearing. The applicant shall present written proof in the form of U.S. Post Office certificates of mailing to the Zoning Enforcement Officer at least five (5) days before the public hearing that this notification requirement has been met. Failure to comply with the requirements of this section shall invalidate the zoning map change procedure. 
The requirements of this section 18.1.1 shall not apply to amendments initiated by the Griswold Planning and Zoning Commission or the Griswold Economic Development Commission. (12/28/00) (8/10/09) 
SECTION 19:  SEPARABILITY 
19.1 	Separability. Should any section or provision of these Regulations be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of these Regulations as a whole, or any part thereof other than the part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. 
SECTION 20: EFFECTIVE DATE 
20.1 	Effective Date. These Regulations amend and supersede Regulations adopted by the Commission in July 1973, and subsequently amended. These amended Regulations shall take effect on August 10, 2009. 
90 
Griswold Zoning Regulations 	Revised: December 01, 2018 
SECTION 21:  DEFINITIONS 
21.1 	General. Certain words and terms used in these Regulations shall have the meanings presented in this section. All words used in the present tense include the future tense. Words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. The word “shall” is always mandatory: a “building” includes a “structure”; a “building” or “structure:” includes any part thereof; “used” or “occupied” shall be deemed to include “designed, intended, or arranged to be used or occupied”. Words and phrases undefined shall be determined to have commonly accepted definitions. See other definitions in Section 12.21.3 (8/10/09) 
Abutting: 	Separated by no intervening private property; properties separated by a public or private street shall be deemed to be abutting.  (3/9/94) 
Accessory Use or Building: 	A subordinate use or building or structure customarily incidental to the principal use of land or buildings and on the same lot. 
Amusement Game Arcade: 	Three or more amusement game machines in the same place, location or premises. 
Amusement Game A coin-operated machine or device which, whether mechanical, electrical or 
Machine: 	electronic, shall be ready for play by the insertion of a coin, and may be operated by the public for use as a game, entertainment or amusement, the object of which is to achieve either a high or low score, which by comparison to the score of other players, whether playing concurrently or not, demonstrates relative skill or competence, or indicates in any other way competitive advantage of one player or team over another, regardless of skill or competence. It shall include devices such as pinball machines or any device which utilizes a video tube to reproduce symbolic figures and lines intended to be representative or real games or activities. 
Buildings: 	Any combination of materials forming any construction which requires location on the ground or attachment to something having location on the ground. The term “building” shall include the term “structure” as well as signs, swimming pools, patios, porches, wind energy conversion systems, ground-mounted antennae, and similar structures, but excluding utility poles, flag poles, and antennae attached to and extending not more than twenty (20) feet above the highest point of the building. 
Camper Unit: 	A self-propelled or portable unit, such as a camper bus, travel trailer, truck-mounted camper or other similar unit, originally designed and constructed or redesigned and reconstructed for recreation or other shelter for one or more persons. 
Commercial Farm Store 	Any permanent building located on a farm used for the year round sale of products grown or raised on the premises, or from other farms, and not necessarily processed on said premises. (2/15/2014) 
Commuter Parking Lots, Parking lots designed for the temporary storage of registered motor vehicles. Motor Vehicle Storage Lots (12/8/97) or Similar Uses: 
County Soil and Water The New London County Soil and Water Conservation District established Conservation District: under subsection (a) of Section 22a-315 of the General Statutes. 
Disturbed Area: 	An area where the ground cover is destroyed or removed leaving the land subject to accelerated erosion. 
91 


Griswold Zoning Regulations 	Revised: December 01, 2018 
Driveway:  A Any access from a public highway used, designed, or intended to be used for vehicular ingress and egress to any building, structure, use or lot. See Section 10.9.  
Driveway, Common:  A driveway serving more than one (1) residential lot.  See Section 10.9.  
Driveway, Loop  A driveway intersecting the street at two (2) or more points and serving more than one (1) residential lot.  See Section 10.9.  
Dwelling Unit:  One room or rooms connected together, constituting a separate, independent housekeeping establishment for owner or renter occupancy, and containing independent cooking and sleeping facilities, and toilet facilities.  
Dwelling, Single-Family:  A residential dwelling unit other than a mobile home, designed for occupancy by one family only.  
Dwelling, Two-Family:  A residential building containing two dwelling units, designed for occupancy by not more than two families.  
Dwelling, Multiple-Family:  A residential building designed for occupancy by three or more families, with the number of families in residence not exceeding the number of dwelling units provided.  
Earth Station-Dish Antenna:  Earth station-dish antenna shall mean a combination of (1) Antenna or dish antenna whose purpose is to receive communication or other signals from orbiting satellites and other sources; (2) A low noise amplifier which is situated at the focal point of the receiving component and whose purpose is to magnify and transfer signals; and (3) A coaxial cable whose purpose is to carry signals to a receiver.  
Erosion:  The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by water, wind, ice or gravity.  
Excavation:  The removal from any land premises within the Town of Griswold of earth, sand, gravel, clay, quarry stone or other natural earth products in excess of 300 cubic yards in a single twelve (12) month period, except as surplus material resulting from:  
a. A bona fide construction project for which a Building Permit, Zoning Permit, or Special Exception has been issued, provided that no more than a total of 5,000 cubic yards of material are removed.  (8/28/03)  
b. A subdivision or re-subdivision approved by the Commission, provided that no more than a total of 5,000 cubic yards of material are removed, (8/28/03)  
c. A septic system installation and/or repair approved by the Town Sanitarian provided that no more than a total of 5,000 cubic yards of material are removed,  (8/28/03) or  
d. Farming conducted on the same property or property under the same ownership as a bona fide farm, provided that no more than a total of 5,000 cubic yards of material are removed.  8/28/03  

92 
Griswold Zoning Regulations Revised: December 01, 2018 
Family: 
Farm: 
Floor Area, Gross: 
Floor Area, Livable: 
Home Occupation: 
Housing Unit: 
One or more persons occupying a single dwelling unit, provided that unless all members are related by blood, civil union, or marriage, no such family shall contain over five (5) persons; therefore more than five (5) unrelated persons in one dwelling shall not be considered a family under these regulations. (8/10/09) 
A tract of land containing five (5) acres or more, used in whole or in part for agricultural purposes, which may include the raising and keeping of domestic and other animals. 
The sum of the gross area (horizontal) of every floor of a building, as measured by the exterior faces of the walls or from the centerline of party or common walls separating two buildings, dwellings, or distinct and separate non­residential uses having no common exterior access.  "Floor Area, Gross" shall include: (a) basement space; (b) attic space whether or not a floor has been laid, over which there is structural headroom of 7 1/2 feet or more; (c) floor space used for mechanical equipment with structural headroom of 7 1/2 feet or more; (d) roofed porches, breezeways, interior balconies and mezzanines; 
(e) any roofed-over space not located in a basement such as a garage or carport for off-street parking accessory to a dwelling. "Floor Area, Gross" shall not include:  (a) cellar space; except that any such space used for a non­residential use shall be included for the purpose of calculating the required off-street parking spaces for such use; (b) elevator shafts and stairwells, accessory water tanks and cooling towers; and (c) patios, terraces, unroofed open porches/decks, and outside uncovered steps. (8/10/09) 
That portion of the Gross Floor Area on a Dwelling which is adequately provided with heat, light and ventilation so as to be suitable for residential use and occupancy. "Floor Area, Livable" shall include: Finished basement or attic spaces and enclosed porches; but shall exclude: Garage space; cellar space; terraces/patios, unroofed open porches, steps, and similar unenclosed or unfinished spaces; and stairways and halls serving more than one (1) dwelling unit. (8/10/09) 
Accessory uses conducted for compensation by the occupant(s) of a residential building or lot, which complies with the provisions of Section 11.7 of these Regulations. Home Occupations shall not include restaurants, tea rooms or other eating or drinking places; dog kennels, animal hospitals; barber shops or beauty salons having more than one (1) sink with one (1) chair; doctors, dentists or lawyers; or automotive service, supply, sales or repairs except for vehicles registered in the name of family members residing in the dwelling. 
Crafts actually prepared on the subject premises, such as sewing, painting, wood carving, cabinet making, ceramics, writing, sculpture, ornamental glass and metal working; the workshops of skilled craftsmen such as watchmakers, plumbers, electricians, carpenters, house painters, paperhangers, and radio and television repairmen; and the offices of architects, accountants, engineers, psychotherapists, real estate and insurance agents, and other recognized professional groups.  (12/28/00) 
A house, apartment, group of rooms, or single room occupied or intended for occupancy as separate living quarters. (08/01/2017) 
93 
Griswold Zoning Regulations Revised: December 01, 2018 
Impervious Surfaces: 
Junk Yard: 
Kennel: 
Lot: 
Lot Frontage: 

Lot Coverage, Maximum: 
Mobile Food Vending Vehicle 
Mobile Home: 
Mobile Home Park: 
Multi-family Dwelling: 
Non-Farm Road Side Stand 
Non-Profit Small Domestic Animal Shelter: 
Constructed surfaces that are impenetrable by water or stormwater including but not limited to roofs of structures, decks and accessory buildings, paved driveways, parking lots, internal access roads, paved sidewalks, concrete or stone patios or slabs, and other such constructed or landscaped features. (8/10/09) 
An area of land, with or without buildings, used either as a principal or accessory use or occupied by the outdoor storage of used or discarded materials such as wastepaper, rags, scrap metal, building materials, house furnishings, machinery, vehicles or parts thereof, with or without dismantling, processing salvage, sale or other use of disposition of the same. A deposit or the outdoor storage on a lot of more than two (2) unregistered vehicles, or vehicles otherwise not in a condition for legal use on public highways, or parts of more than two (2) such vehicles shall be deemed a junk yard. (1/15/99) (7/20/99) 
Any lot on which six (6) or more dogs or cats, six months old or older, are kept for commercial purposes. 
One or more adjacent parcels of land under single ownership or control to be used, developed, or built upon as a unit. 
The continuous lineal measurement of the lot boundary that abuts the street. 
The maximum percent of the total parcel covered by impervious surface to include but not be limited to buildings, structures, parking areas, decks, landscaped patios, and other features which significantly restrict stormwater infiltration into the soil on a specific site. (8/10/09) 
Mobile Food Vending Vehicle shall mean any portable device including but not limited to pushcarts, trailers, trucks, knockdown concessions, frozen food carts, catering type trucks, mobile cookers, Barbeque trailers, and any similar device from which food products are prepared for sale to the general public. 
A structure originally designed and constructed or redesigned and reconstructed for year-round occupancy for one or more persons and equipped with or designed to be equipped with wheels for movement of the structure from place-to-place. 
A tract or parcel of land on which one or more mobile homes are placed, whether occupied or not, and regardless of whether or not a change is made for such placement. 
A single building which includes more than two family dwelling units. 
Is a simple structure consisting of a table or similar portable device with or without an umbrella for the sale of home grown vegetables by home owner on their premises. Said device shall be removed from the roadside daily. The use of an enclosed structure with sides and a roof is not permitted. (Non – Farm Road Side Stand Definition effective date December 01, 2018 Application ZP 01-19) 
Any building existing or proposed as an accessory use to a residential property used by individuals and or groups that are recognized by Federal authorities as non-profit (IRS Section 501 c 3) and are dedicated to rescuing abandoned, abused and unwanted small domestic animals such as dogs cats or exotic birds. These small animals are temporarily sheltered until they can be brought back to health, spayed or neutered and permanent homes found for them. (2/1/08) 
94 
Griswold Zoning Regulations Revised: December 01, 2018 
Over 55 Neighborhood Housing Communities and/or 55 Plus Active Adult Neighborhood Housing Communities 
A building or group of buildings that are located on a single parcel of land or adjacent neighborhood retirement lots that share common management, with in–unit and yard area uses and owner agreements included in a common interest ownership document and enforced primarily through the common interest ownership association. (8/10/09) 
95 

Griswold Zoning Regulations Revised: December 01, 2018 
Parking Lots 
Poultry 
Principal Use: 
Rear Lot: 
Recreation Campground: 

Sediment: Shopping Center: 
Signs: 
Commuter parking lots, motor vehicle storage lots or similar uses are parking lots designed for the temporary storage of registered motor vehicles. (12/8/97) 
Domesticated fowl collectively, especially those valued for their meat and eggs, as, chickens, turkeys, ducks, geese, and guinea fowl. 
The primary purpose or function for which a premises is used, designed, or intended to be used. 
A lot without the minimum required road frontage for the zoning district. Also known as an interior lot. (8/10/09) 
A parcel of land used for the parking of camper units or the establishment of overnight living quarters, such as tents or other temporary shelters, and primarily occupied by family groups engaged in travel, recreation or vacation. Such recreation campgrounds shall meet all applicable building and health code requirements before it is open to public use.  See Section 12.6. 
Solid material, either mineral or organic that is in suspension, is transported or has been moved from its site of origin by erosion. 
A group of five or more commercial establishments, under one roof or interconnected by walls, roofs, enclosed malls, parking lots, or walkways located on one lot, or on a group of contiguous lots under unified ownership or control, having an area of not less than four (4) acres, providing adjoining off-street parking facilities for at least 100 cars, and designed and developed as a coherent group. 
Any material, structure, device or part thereof for visual communication which is used for the purpose of bringing the subject thereof to the attention of the public. Furthermore, the word “sign” shall include any billboard, model, banner, lettering, insignia, or representation used as, or which in the nature of announcement, declaration, display, illustration, advertisement or attraction but does not include flags or insignias of any governmental, educational, charitable, or religious or historical units. 
OR 
Any structure, or part thereof, or any device attached to a building or structure or painted or represented thereon which displays or includes letters, words, symbols, trademarks or any other graphic representation which is in the nature of an announcement, direction, advertisement or other device used to attract the attention of the public for commercial purposes or otherwise; similarly, any natural object, such as a tree, stone, or the earth itself, which is painted or arranged so as to represent or display any of the aforesaid graphic representations; any building feature, including roof or other special illumination, special colors or effects, or building or roof lines which serve to identify the use or occupancy of any building or site through a recognized motif or symbol.  The term "sign" shall include sculptures and similar works of art designed or intended to attract the attention of the general public to commercial or industrial premises.  See, Section 15 
96 
Griswold Zoning Regulations Revised: December 01, 2018 
Sign Area: 
Soil: 
Soil Erosion and Sediment 
Control Plan: 
Stonewall Types: 

Storage Container: 
Story: 
Street: 
Street Line: Swimming Pool: 
Telecommunications 
Facilities: 
Towers, Communications: 
Use: 

Warehouse: 
The area of a sign shall be considered to be that of the smallest rectangle or triangle which encompasses all lettering, wording, design or symbols. If attached to or located on a wall, the area of the sign shall include any background different from the balance of the wall if such background is designed as an integral part of and is obviously related to the sign. The supports which affix a sign to the ground or to a building shall not be included in the area of the sign unless such supports are obviously designed to be part of the sign. 
Any unconsolidated mineral or organic material of any origin. 
A scheme that minimizes soil erosion and sedimentation and includes, but is not limited to, a map and narrative. 
For the purposes of these Regulations, there are three general types of stonewalls.  First, abandoned stonewalls are old farmstead or woodland walls that have since tumbled and become unkempt.  Second, heritage or historic stonewalls which are moderately well built, are maintained, and may surround known buildings or land tracts.  Third, recent and rebuilt stonewalls are those that have been rebuilt fairly recently by landowners from old, tumbled down walls or rebuilt as relocated stonewalls using residues from earlier walls with source on site or off-site. (8/10/09) 
Any portable structure which has been or can be mounted on wheels, or any shipping type container, regardless of the material of which it is constructed. (12/28/00) 
For the purposes of these regulations, a story shall be ten (10) feet in vertical height. (8/10/09) 
An improved right-of-way accepted for public use by lawful procedure and suitable for vehicular travel; or a proposed street shown on a subdivision plan approved by the Commission. 
The line separating a street from the abutting non-public property. 
A structure designed or intended to hold water for swimming purposes with a surface area of 100 square feet or more and a depth in excess of two (2) feet. 
See Section 11.19 of these Regulations. 
See Section 11.19 of these Regulations. 
Purpose for which land or a building is arranged, or intended, or for which either land or building is or may be occupied or maintained. 
A building or structure and/or storage area primarily utilized for the interim storage or sorting of retail goods and materials for reshipment. The term warehouse as used in these Regulations shall not include a rail, truck terminal, or freight transfer depot owned, leased or operated by a common carrier or other carrier for hire, and shall not include on-site sales at retail or wholesale. “Warehouse” does not include “Wholesale or Wholesale Distribution Center”. (8/18/05) 
97 
Griswold Zoning Regulations Revised: December 01, 2018 
Wholesale or Wholesale A building or structure primarily utilized for the interim storage or sorting of Distribution Center. wholesale goods and materials for reshipment, and may include on-site wholesale sales, but not retail sales. The terms Wholesale or Wholesale Distribution Center shall not include a rail, truck terminal, or freight transfer depot owned, leased or operated by a common carrier or other carrier for hire, nor shall it include the term “Warehouse”.  (8/18/05) 
Yard: 	A required ground area of a lot, unoccupied and unobstructed by any buildings, extending between the property line and any building for the distance specified in these Regulations. 
Yard, front: 	Required unoccupied space between the building line of the principal building and the street line, extending the full width of the lot. The street line shall be considered to be no closer than twenty–five (25) feet from the center line of the roadway. 
Yard, rear: 	Required open space between the building line and the rear line of the lot, extending the full width of the lot. 
Yard, side: 	Required unoccupied space situated between the building line and the side line of the lot and extending from the front yard to the rear yard or to a side yard. 
98 
Griswold Zoning Regulations 	Revised: December 01, 2018 
APPENDIX A 
APPLICATION FEES 
TOWN ORDINANCE OF FEES FOR LAND USE APPLICATION PROCESSING AND REVIEW 

Land Use Ordinance 144 of the Town of Griswold pertaining to Land Use Application Processing and Review Fees, adopted 9/23/08 and made effective on 10/11/08. 144.030 Fee Schedule (02/15/14) 
§144.010 Fees Established. 
Pursuant to Section 8-1c of the Connecticut General Statutes there is established a schedule of fees for the processing of land use applications received by the Planning and Zoning Commission, Zoning Board of Appeals and Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Conservation Commission.  The schedule of fees established shall supersede those fees presently charged by the land use commissions and boards as previously established in Section 143 and pursuant to any provision of the General Statutes or any Special Act. These fees are intended to cover a portion of the Town’s costs for processing and administrative handling of land use applications, including, but not limited to: legal advertisements regarding public hearings, decisions of a commission, and other matters requiring publication in a newspaper; other notifications or referrals required or authorized by applicable law; recording and transcribing, where necessary, of public hearings and meetings, the preparation of minutes and other documentation applicable to the application, and other clerical expenses; staff salaries and overhead expenses for staff to the commission, including officials of the Town for whom land use application review is only a part of his/her duties, such as the sanitarian, fire chief, etc.; Town Attorney fees in direct connection with legal advice, review of documents, and attendance at meeting, where deemed desirable, in connection with the application; inspection of construction and other work to insure compliance with approved permits and applicable regulations; keeping and updating of files and other documentation relative to the application; such other expenses as may be incidental to the processing of land use applications or subsequent research or review relating to land status requested by outside parties but involving documents or procedures within the Town of Griswold. 
§144.020 Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply: 
“Commission(s)” means one or all of the land use regulatory agencies of the Town of Griswold known as the Planning and Zoning Commission, Zoning Board of Appeals and Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Conservation Commission. 
“Processing of land use application(s)” means the actions of a commission, supported by staff employed by the Town of Griswold, independent contractors, or consultants, in receiving, reviewing and acting upon an application to conduct an activity regulated by said commission and including both pre-action reviews and post-approval supervision of work and inspection of activities permitted. 
“Improved land area” means any portion(s) of a development site not covered by buildings, but covered by parking, driveways, outdoor storage or loading areas, lawns, formal landscaped areas, or any other area not in its natural state. 
“Fixed Application Fees” shall mean those set forth in Section 144.030, subsection A of this Chapter. 
“Additional Expenses” shall mean those reimbursements set forth in Section 144.030, subsection C of this Chapter. 
Any other term not defined in this Ordinance shall have the meaning set forth in the “definitions” section of any applicable regulations (e.g., the zoning regulations for zoning applications, the subdivision regulations for subdivision or re-subdivision applications, etc.). 
99 

Griswold Zoning Regulations Revised: December 01, 2018 
§144.030 Fee schedule. 
A. 	Fixed Application Fees. Commissions shall charge Fixed Application Fees for the processing of land use applications in accordance with the following schedule: 
Planning & Zoning Commission 	Completed application forms along with the required fee are to be submitted to the Planning and Community Development Department no later than ten (10) Business days prior to the meeting. Meetings are held on the second Monday of each month. 
Application Fee State Fee Total 
Zone Changes 

Text Amendment Flat Fee $375 + $60.00 = $435.00 Map Amendment Flat Fee $400 1 to 14 acres + $60.00 = Variable Map Amendment* $600 15 acres or more + $60.00 = Variable *PZC Commission may reduce the map amendment fee to the Flat Fee if the requested zone change is for a less intensive 
zone usage. 
Zoning Permits 
Residential $150 / unit + $60.00 = Variable Basic Review of Site Plan $250 + $60.00 = $310.00 Minor Change in Use or Site Plan for Existing 
$300 	+ $60.00 = $360.00 
Commercial /Industrial 
New Commercial/Industrial or Site Plan $400 + $25 / 1,000 sq. ft.** 

+ $60.00 = Variable Amendment of Existing Commercial /Industrial 
Home Occupation 	$250 + $60.00 = $310.00 
Food Vending Permits Weekend – Maximum of  3 days $25 N/A = $25.00 Seasonal – Maximum of  6 weeks $75 N/A = $75.00 Annual $250 N/A = $250.00 
Seasonal Tent Zoning Permit $200 	$200.00 
Special Exceptions 
Residential (multifamily) $200 / unit + $60.00 = Variable New Commercial or Industrial $600 + $25 / 1,000 sq. ft.** + $60.00 = Variable Existing Buildings/Modifications $350 + $25 / 1,000 sq. ft. ** + $60.00 = Variable 
** Charge per 1000 sq. ft. of buildings and outside active area proposed CGS Section 8-30 Zoning Appeals $500 + $50.00/unit + $60.00 = Variable Subdivisions $300 / lot + $50 per lot + $60.00 = Variable Re-Subdivisions $350 / lot + $50 per lot + $60.00 = Variable 
Minimum $400 
Zoning Board of Appeals 	Completed application forms along with the required fee are to be submitted to the 
Planning and Community Development Department no later than three Thursdays prior to 
the meeting. Meetings are held on the first Wednesday of each month. 

Application Fee 	State Fee Total 
Variance $150.00 + $60.00 = $210.00 
Appeal of Zoning Enforcement Officer Order $150.00 + $60.00 = $210.00 
Automotive Location $150.00 + $60.00 = $210.00 

100 
Griswold Zoning Regulations 	Revised: December 01, 2018 
Inland Wetlands & Watercourses Completed application forms along with the required fee shall be submitted to the Conservation Commission Planning & Community Development Department no later than 15 days prior to the meeting. Meetings are held on the third Thursday of each month. 
Basic Fee Application Fee State Fee Total 1-family & 2-family residences or Administrative Approval $100.00 + $60.00 = $160.00 Commercial multi-family residence per dwelling unit + Basic Fee & 
$ 50.00 	= Variable 
State Fee If Applicable add: Basic Fee & 
Public Hearing 	$175.00 + = Variable 
State Fee Basic Fee & 
Wetlands Jurisdiction Review 	$ 75.00 + = Variable 
State Fee Basic Fee & 
Regulation Amendment 	$175.00 + = Variable 
State Fee 
Subdivision: For each lot with wetlands or watercourses 
Basic Fee & 
and/or in which activity is proposed in a wetland/ regulated $ 50.00/lot + 	= Variable 
State Fee 
area 
Basic Fee & 
Commercial Activity 	$300.00 + = Variable 
State Fee 
Total Variable 
B. Maximum Fee; Calculation of Fee. Except as provided in Paragraph C below, no application fee calculated in accordance with the preceding formulae shall exceed $20,000.00. Each applicant for any permit shall provide, at the time of application, the necessary data to permit the calculation of the application fee (such as square footage of buildings or outside storage or active display area requested, the proposed number of lots, or acreage involved in a zone change), and such information shall, where appropriate, be certified by a licensed land surveyor, professional engineer, or registered architect.  Failure to file any application fee set forth in this ordinance shall be grounds for denial, without prejudice, of such application. 
C. 	Additional Reimbursable Costs. 
a. 	
In addition to the fixed fees set forth in subsection A of this section, the commissions may collect payment for direct costs of materials and review services performed by other than town employees, including but not limited to specialized inspections; 

b. 	
third party reviews with professional certifications; 

c. 	
reviews by consultant Town Attorneys; 

d. 	
reviews by consultant Town Professional Engineers; 

e. 	
reviews by licensed Landscape Architects; 

f. 	
reviews by licensed Architects; 

g. 	
reviews by archeologist/cultural resource consultants; 

h. 	
reviews by certified soil scientists, wildlife biologists, or ecologists; 

i. 	
reviews by Licensed Environmental Professionals; 

j. 	
reviews by certified professional in stormwater quality; 

k. 	
legal, stenographic and transcription services associated with any type of land use application. 


The Commission may require an applicant to provide certifications, inspections or professional consultant reports at the applicant’s expense. It is intended that the fixed fees set forth in subsection A do not cover such costs for additional expenses resulting from non-town staff reviews necessitated by land use applications. These additional expenses will be required where applicable for any permit application before any land use Board or Commission, regardless of whether a public hearing is required.  This section is also applicable to all expenses incurred after an approval is issued in the event that action is needed to enforce compliance with specific conditions of approval or violation of regulations. 
101 

Griswold Zoning Regulations 	Revised: December 01, 2018 
D. Fees Not in Lieu of Bonds. 	The payment of fees shall not prohibit commissions from requiring performance or forfeiture bonds to ensure the successful completion of all work as may be prescribed in the respective land use regulations. 
§144.040 Exemptions 
All boards and agencies of the Town of Griswold, including the use of fire company properties for fire protection purposes, shall be exempt from the payment of fees established pursuant to this chapter. Each board may in whole or in part exempt an application from the payment of any or all fees if said application is for low and moderate income housing or special needs housing.  In addition, each commission shall be authorized, by majority vote, to reduce or waive application fees where (1) the application does not appear, upon initial examination, to require intensive staff review and (2) the applicant is a non-profit entity which qualifies for tax deductible charitable contributions under Regulations of the U.S. Internal Revenue Service. The commission may also credit all or a portion of application fees from previous application(s) which were denied or withdrawn, where the review work performed on the previous application(s) may be of benefit in reviewing the new application. Any commission exempting an application from payment of a fee, in whole or in part, shall state in the minutes of the meeting at which the plan was received the fee type exempted, the percentage exempt and reasons for granting the exemption.  This exemption shall not prohibit a commission from requiring consultant reports, professional certification or conducting inspection to ensure conformance with land-use regulations. 
§144.050 Payment of fees 
A. Other Fees. The payment of a fee established in accordance with the provision of this chapter shall not relieve the applicant, owner or their agent from the payment of other fees that may be prescribed for a different type of land use application, or by another ordinance of the Town of Griswold. 
B. 	Fees Nonrefundable. All fees received by a commission as part of a land use application submission shall be nonrefundable. 
C. 	Method and Timing of Payment, Failure to Pay.  All Fixed Application Fees shall be paid by cash, check or money order made payable to the Town of Griswold. Fees shall be paid at the time of application submission. The applicant shall be provided with invoices or other evidence of any Additional Expense(s), and reimbursement to the Town shall be made within thirty (30) days after presentation of such invoices or other evidence. Failure to comply with this subsection shall be grounds for denial of any application without prejudice, or revocation of any permit previously issued.  Reimbursement of the Town under this subsection shall be a condition for the endorsement of any plan, the issuance of any final permit, or the issuance of any certificate of zoning compliance for an approved application, or the renewal of any periodic or temporary approval, as the case may be. 
D. 	Post Approval Notices and Fees.   The Town is authorized to place a notice of non-payment of review fees on the land records if any fees from pre-approval or post-approval non-staff reviews are not paid for a period of 90 days. 
§144.060 Periodic Updates of Fee Schedule 
The foregoing fees schedules are based upon an analysis of the expenses incurred, on average, in the processing of land use applications as of the date of passage of this Chapter.  The First Selectman shall periodically examine the expenses incurred by the Town in the processing of land use applications, and shall make recommendations based on input from land use boards and commissions to the Board of Selectmen for adjustments to the foregoing fee schedules based upon current staffing, regulatory requirements, and other relevant factors. 
102 

Griswold Zoning Regulations 	Revised: December 01, 2018 

103 


104 
Z
O
N
I
N
G 
R
E
G
U
L
A
T
I
O
N
S 

F
O
R 
T
H
E 
B
O
R
O
U
G
H 
O
F 
J
E
W
E
T
T 
C
I
T
Y
, 
C
O
N
N
E
C
T
I
C
U
T 


ADOPTED BY THE 
BOROUGH ZONING COMMISSION ON SEPTEMBER 15, 1975 
AND AUTHORITY TRANSFERRED TO THE TOWN OF GRISWOLD 
PLANNING & ZONING COMMISSION 
ON JANUARY 1, 1996 

EFFECTIVE DATE: SEPTEMBER 18, 1975 

REVISED TO: August 1, 2017 
ZONING REGULATIONS 
BOROUGH OF JEWETT CITY, CONNECTICUT 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 

SECTION 1 TITLE, AUTHORITY AND PURPOSE........................................................................................1 

SECTION 2 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS ................................................................................................... 1 


2 .1 Classification of Uses ........................................................................................................... 1 

2.2 Zoning Permit ...................................................................................................................... 1 

2.3 Zoning Map ......................................................................................................................... 2 

2.4 Building on Existing Lots ...................................................................................................... 3 

2.5 Unspecified Uses ................................................................................................................. 3 

2.6 Maintenance Not Affected .................................................................................................. 3 

2.7 Administrative Procedures .................................................................................................. 3 
SECTION 3 ZONING DISTRICT ................................................................................................................ 3 

3.1 Names of Zoning Districts .................................................................................................... 3 
SECTION 4 R-RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS ................................................................................................... 4 

4.1 Permitted Uses .................................................................................................................... 4 

4.2 Special Exceptions ............................................................................................................... 4 
SECTION 5 RM – RESIDENTIAL/ MULTI-FAMILY DISTRICTS .................................................................... 4 

5.1 Permitted Uses .................................................................................................................... 4 

5.2 Special Exceptions ............................................................................................................... 5 
SECTION 6 RC – RESIDENTIAL/COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS........................................................................5 

6.1 Permitted Uses .................................................................................................................... 5 

6.2 Special Exceptions ............................................................................................................... 5 
SECTION 7 C-COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS .................................................................................................. 6 

7.1 Permitted Uses .................................................................................................................... 6 

7.2 Special Exceptions ............................................................................................................... 6 
SECTION 8 I– INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS....................................................................................................6 

8.1 Permitted Uses .................................................................................................................... 6 

8.2 
Special Exceptions ............................................................................................................... 7 
SECTION 9 DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS ........................................................................................... 9 

9.1 
Minimum Lot Size and StreetFrontage................................................................................9 

9.2 
Minimum Setback from Street Centerline ........................................................................... 9 

9.3 
Maximum Lot Coverage by Buildings ................................................................................. 10 

9.4 
Maximum Side Yards ......................................................................................................... 10 

9.5 
Minimum Rear Yard........................................................................................................... 10 

9.6 
Maximum Building Height ................................................................................................. 10 

i 
9.7 
Minimum Floor Area for Residences..................................................................................10 

9.8 
Maximum Density Allowance ............................................................................................ 10 
SECTION 10 SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS ....................................................................................... 11 

10.1 
Conversion of Older Residences ........................................................................................ 11 

10.2 
Camper Units.....................................................................................................................11 

10.3 
Assessory Buildings............................................................................................................ 11 

10.4 
Height Limits...................................................................................................................... 11 

10.5 Junk Yards Prohibited in all Zones ..................................................................................... 11 

10.6 Home Occupation..............................................................................................................11 

10.7 Storage Containers ............................................................................................................ 12 

10.8 Multiple Buildings.............................................................................................................. 13 

10.9 Elderly Housing and Assisted Living Facilities..................................................................... 13 

10.10 Animals.............................................................................................................................. 13 
SECTION 11 PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS..........................................................................13 

11.1 General..............................................................................................................................13 

11.2 Off-Street Parking Requirements.......................................................................................13 

11.3 Circulation Patterns and Public Safety ............................................................................... 14 
SECTION 12 SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS ......................................................................................................... 14 

12.1 General.............................................................................................................................. 14 

12.2 Application Procedure ....................................................................................................... 15 

12.3 Planning & Zoning Commission on Action.......................................................................... 15 

12.4 General Requirements for Approval .................................................................................. 15 

12.5 Elderly Housing and Assisted Living Facilities..................................................................... 15 

12.6 Mulit-Family Dwelling........................................................................................................ 15 

12.7 Membership Clubs............................................................................................................. 15 

12.8 Automotive Service Stations.............................................................................................. 16 

12.9 Automotive Service and Repair Garages............................................................................16 

12.10 Drive-in Restaurants .......................................................................................................... 16 

12.11 New or Used Automotive Sales and Service....................................................................... 16 

12.12 Wireless Communication Facilities .................................................................................... 16 

12.13 Definitions ......................................................................................................................... 17 

12.14 General..............................................................................................................................18 

12.15 Application Requirements ................................................................................................. 19 

ii 
SECTION 13 SITE PLAN REQUIREMENTS ................................................................................................ 22 

13.1 
General Requirements....................................................................................................... 22 

13.2 
Site Plan Ingredients..........................................................................................................22 

13.3 
Site Plan Evaluation ........................................................................................................... 23 

13.4 
Waivers ............................................................................................................................. 24 

13.5 
Technical Review ............................................................................................................... 24 

13.6 
Landscaping, Screening, Buffer, and Architectural Design Requirements........................... 24 

Landscape Design Standards for Parking Lots 
and Sidewalks Map ................................................................................................ 32 

13.7 General Sign Requirements ............................................................................................... 33 

13.8 Bond Requirement ............................................................................................................ 36 

13.9 SoilErosion and Sedimentation Control Plan.....................................................................37 
SECTION 14 NON-CONFORMING BUILDINGS AND USES........................................................................38 

14.1 Non-Conforming Buildings and Use ................................................................................... 39 

14.2 Changes ............................................................................................................................. 39 

14.3 Abandonment ................................................................................................................... 39 
SECTION 15 FEES, PENALTIES ................................................................................................................ 39 

15.1 Fees ................................................................................................................................... 39 

15.2 Penalties............................................................................................................................39 
SECTION 16 APPEALS ............................................................................................................................ 39 

16.1 Appeals.............................................................................................................................. 39 

16.2 Variances...........................................................................................................................40 
SECTION 17 AMENDMENTS................................................................................................................... 40 

17.1 General.............................................................................................................................. 40 

17.2 Variance Notification.........................................................................................................40 
SECTION 18 SEPARABILITY .................................................................................................................... 40 
SECTION 19 EFFECTIVE DATE.................................................................................................................40 
SECTION 20 DEFINITIONS ...................................................................................................................... 41 

20.1 
General.................................................................................................................................. APPENDIX A FEES FOR LAND USE APPLICATION PROCESSING AND REVIEWS ............................................................. 44 APPENDIX B ZONING MAP ......................................................................................................................................... 49 
i 
ZONING REGULATIONS 
BOROUGH OF JEWETT CITY, CONNECTICUT 

SECTION 1.  TITLE, AUTHORITY AND PURPOSE 

1.1 	These regulations shall be known and may be cited as the “Zoning Regulations, Borough of Jewett City, Connecticut”, which herein are called “these Regulations”, and have been prepared and adopted in accordance with the provision of Chapter 124 of the Connecticut General Statutes. 
1.2 	The purpose of these Regulations is to protect the public health, safety, convenience and property values; to lessen congestion in the streets; secure safety from fire, panic, flood and other dangers; to promote health and the general welfare; to provide adequate light and air; to prevent the overcrowding of land; to avoid undue concentration of population and to facilitate the adequate provision for transportation, water, sewage, schools, parks and other public requirements. 
SECTION 2.  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 
2.1 	Classification of Uses. Uses of land or buildings are classified and regulated by these Regulations as either PERMITTED USES or as SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS. 
2.1.1 	Permitted uses are those which are allowed by right in a zoning district. Applications for permitted uses are submitted to the Zoning Enforcement Officer and are approved by him or by the Planning & Zoning Commission, depending upon the nature of the proposed use. 
2.1.2 	Special Exceptions shall be permitted only after meeting the special provisions of Section 12 of these Regulations. Applications for Special Exceptions shall be submitted to the Planning & Community Development Department and are approved by the Planning & Zoning Commission. 
2.2 	Zoning Permit. No building shall be erected, moved, structurally enlarged or changed to another use or shall any use be established or changed in any area of the Borough of Jewett City without a Zoning Permit therefore from the Zoning Enforcement Officer, issued in conformance with the provisions of these Regulations, except that a written order from the Zoning Board of Appeals in the form of an administrative review or variance shall constitute a Zoning Permit. Uses of land or buildings not clearly permitted in the various zoning districts are prohibited. 
2.2.1 	The Zoning Enforcement Officer is empowered to cause any building or land to be inspected and to order in writing any violation of these Regulations to be corrected or terminated. 
2.2.2 	Application for a Zoning Permit shall be made on a form provided for that purpose and obtainable from either the office of the Zoning Enforcement Officer or the Planning & Community Development Department. 
2.2.3 	Applications for permitted single-family and two-family dwellings and accessory buildings or expansions or additions to such buildings on residential lots may be approved by the Zoning Enforcement Officer provided they meet the requirements of these Regulations. Applications for all other uses and building shall be reviewed by the Planning & Zoning Commission and shall be submitted together with a site plan as prescribed in Section 13 of these Regulations, to the Planning & Community Development Department at least ten (10) business days prior to a Regular Meeting of the Commission. The Commission shall approve such applications after finding that all aspects of the proposed uses conform to the spirit as well as the letter of these Regulations. 
2.2.4 	It shall be unlawful for any newly erected structure or addition for which a Zoning Permit has been issued to be occupied or used, or for any building or premises or part thereof to be converted or changed from one type of use or occupancy to another until a Certificate of Occupancy has been issued by the Zoning Enforcement Officer, stating that the building or premises complies with the provisions of these Regulations. Such certificate shall be issued within ten (10) days after notification from the Permittee that the premises are ready for occupancy if inspection carried out by the Zoning Enforcement Officer subsequent to this notification indicates that approval of the application is warranted. 
2.2.5 	After the effective date of these Regulations, the Zoning Enforcement Officer will issue, without charge, upon request of the owner or occupant, a Certificate of Zoning Compliance for any legal, non­conforming building existing on the effective date of these Regulations. 
2.2.6 	All Zoning Permits, Special Exceptions and Variances Shall expire two (2) years after approval unless actual construction shall have started. Special Exceptions shall not expire as long as a document describing the  project that has been signed and filed on the land records of the Town Clerk after any reasonable conditions of approval have been satisfied within 270 days of the approval of this Special Exception.  Those Special Exceptions where this document has not been so filed within the 270 days after approval shall be automatically null and void. Variances granted by Zoning Board of Appeals are associated with the specific land parcel and do not expire if the variance document has been filed on the land records of the Town Clerk. 
2.2.7 	A Certificate of Occupancy shall remain valid only so long as the building, the use thereof, or the use of the land remains in full conformity with these Regulations or of an amendment thereto. 
2.2.8 	Nothing in these Regulations shall require any change in plans, construction or designated use of any building on which construction was begun under a permit issued prior to the effective date of these Regulations. Actual construction is the (a) excavation of a basement, cellar or foundation; (b) actual placing of construction materials in their permanent position fastened in a permanent manner; (c) substantial beginning of demolition and removal of an existing building preparatory to rebuilding; provided, however, in each circumstance that the actual construction shall be diligently carried on until the completion of the building involved. 
2.2.9 	No lot shall be occupied by more than one permitted principle building or use, or group of permitted buildings, such as an apartment project or commercial complex, under the same ownership or sponsorship. 
2.2.10 	All lots shall have frontage on and direct access to a street. 
2.3 	Zoning Map. The map entitled, “Zoning Map, Borough of Jewett City, Connecticut”, is a part of these Regulations. The Zoning Map shows the boundaries and zoning designation for each district of the Borough. Use and dimensional requirements for each district are found in these Regulations. 
2.3.1 	All district boundaries shown on said Zoning Map follow the outside boundary lines of the land parcel at the effective date of the most current zoning map. 
2.3.2 	Where a district boundary divides a lot of record at the time such boundary line is adopted, the regulations for the less restricted portion of any such lot may extend into the more restricted portion provided that the lot has frontage on a street in the less restricted district. 
2.3.3 	Where any uncertainty exists as to the correct location of any zoning district boundary shown on the Zoning Map, it shall be the duty of the Planning & Zoning Commission to establish correct location thereof according to the intent of these Regulations. 
2.4 	Building on Existing Lots. Nothing in these Regulations shall prevent construction of a permitted building or the establishment of a permitted use in the relevant zoning district on a lot which, on the effective date of these Regulations and continuously thereafter, was owned separately from an adjoining lot as evidenced by deed recorded in the Land Records of the Borough of Jewett City provided, however, that all requirements regarding height, yards, setbacks, and parking for the appropriate district in which such lot is situated shall be met. 
2.5 	Unspecified Uses. In any case where a use is alleged to be similar to a specified use permitted by these Regulations, its status shall be determined by the Planning & Zoning Commission by reference to the most clearly similar use or uses permitted by these Regulations, or it shall be declared that the use is not similar. When the status of a use has been so determined, such determination shall thereafter have general applicability to all uses of the same type. 
2.6 	Maintenance Not Affected. Nothing in these Regulations shall prohibit the normal maintenance, repair and upkeep of property in any zoning district. 
2.7 	Administrative Procedures. Whenever an application is filed with the Planning & Zoning Commission that requires a public hearing per the Borough of Jewett City Zoning Regulations, or whenever the Commission deems it necessary to hold a public hearing for an application, the applicant shall, no later than ten (10) days prior to the date of the scheduled public hearing send notices to all abutting property owners by First Class Mail, and proof of such mailing shall be evidenced by a certificate of mailing. Such notices shall contain the following information: (03/30/09) 
1. 	
A copy of the zoning application filed with the Commission. 

2. 	
A copy of the site plan. If the site plan contains multiple sheets, the sheet that best describes the proposed project shall be forwarded. The copy may be reduced as long as the document is readable. 

3. 	
A narrative describing the proposed development. 

4. 	
A copy of the legal notice giving the date, time and place of the public hearing. 


SECTION 3.  ZONING DISTRICT 
3.1 	The Borough of Jewett City is divided into zoning districts as shown on the Zoning Map (Appendix B). The zoning is based on considerations of the existing use of land, physical conditions, access, and the anticipated needs for various types of housing and economic activities. The names of the zoning districts and their purposes are as follows: 
3.1.1 	R – Residential District. It is intended that these zones remain exclusively residential in use, with permitted residential uses limited to single-family and two-family dwellings. (12/1/04) 
3.1.2 	RM – Residential, Multi-Family District. These zones include many large multi-family dwellings which form an important part of the Borough’s housing supply. These zones would continue to permit a variety of housing types, together with business and personal services and professional offices. The zones are located close to the central business area of the Borough, making many retail and service establishments within walking distance of the residents. 
3.1.3 	RC – Residential/Commercial District. These districts are located generally on the fringes of the central business area of the Borough and along the major traffic arteries. A mixture of residential dwelling types and limited business activities would be permitted, taking advantage of the great accessibility of these areas but, at the same time, safeguarding the residential properties in the zones. 
3.1.4 	C – Commercial District. This is the central business area of the community and the zoning is intended to support the economic well-being of this area by encouraging compatible activities and discouraging uses that might prevent desirable economic growth. Although it is intended primarily as a commercial area, residences are permitted above the street level. 
3.1.5 	I – Industrial District. These zones are based on the locations of existing industrial activity and are intended to provide area for expansion of current industrial land uses, or the development of future industrial uses. (12/1/04) 
SECTION 4.  R – RESIDENCE DISTRICTS 
4.1 	Permitted Uses. The following uses are permitted by right: 
4.1.1 	Single-family dwellings 
4.1.2 	Two-family dwellings 
4.1.3 	Home Occupations 
4.1.4 	Public and parochial schools, churches, and other places of worship 
4.1.5 	Accessory buildings and uses 
4.1.6 	Public utility structures such as pump stations, water storage, power transformers and the like 
4.1.7 	Buildings for the parking of emergency vehicles, and 
4.1.8 	Parks, playgrounds, and other public recreation facilities. 
4.2 	Special Exceptions. The following uses are permitted provided they meet the conditions of Section 12 of these Regulations. 
4.2.1 	Elderly housing and assisted living facilities. (12/1/04) 
SECTION 5.  RM – RESIDENCE, MULTI-FAMILY DISTRICTS 
5.1 	Permitted Uses. 
5.1.1 	Single-family, two-family, and multi-family dwellings, (12/1/04) 
5.1.2 	Elderly housing and assisted living facilities, (12/1/04) 
5.1.3 	Personal service shops, such as barber shops and beauty salons, 
5.1.4 	Business and professional offices, accommodating doctors, lawyers, engineers, architects, real estate brokers, insurance agents, and similar professions, (12/1/04) 
5.1.5 	Hotels and motels, and, 
5.1.6 	Public utility structures such as pump stations, water storage, power transformers, and the like. 
5.2 	Special Exceptions. The following uses are permitted provided they meet the conditions of Section 12 of these Regulations. 
5.2.1 	Membership clubs. 
SECTION 6.  RC – RESIDENTIAL/COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS 
6.1 	Permitted Uses. The following uses are permitted by right. 
6.1.1 	All uses permitted in Section 4.1 above, 
6.1.2 	Business and professional offices, accommodating doctors, lawyers, engineers, architects, real estate brokers, insurance agents and similar professions. 
6.1.3 	Personal service shops, such as barber shops and beauty salons 
6.1.4 	Food Vending Operations 
6.1.4.1 	Mobile food vending vehicles are prohibited in all Borough Zoning Districts. (01/01/2014) 
EXEMPTIONS: The provisions of this section shall not apply to special events, festivals, community projects or public events which occur on a periodic basis and/or those that are specifically approved by the Griswold Board of Selectmen as an approved community-based special event or the Jewett City Burgesses as an approved community-based special event. 
6.1.5 	Light custom crafting of specialty items such as fishing rods and related products, dental labs optical labs, computer repair and retail sales of products assembled on site, and store front retail businesses at street level. To expand the permitted uses within the RC – Residential Commercial Districts within the Borough of Jewett City to allow for a more diversified specialty business attraction. (12/16/13) 
6.2 	Special Exceptions. The following uses are permitted provided they meet the conditions of Section 12 of these Regulations 
6.2.1 	Multi-family dwellings, 
6.2.2 	Membership clubs, 
6.2.3 	Automobile service stations, 
6.2.4 	Drive-in or other quick service eating establishments, 
6.2.5 	Elderly housing and assisted living facilities, (12/1/04) and 
6.2.6 	New and used car sales and service. 
SECTION 7.  C – COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS 
7.1 	Permitted Uses. The following uses are permitted by right. The off street parking and loading requirements for motor vehicles (Section 11) and the site plan requirements (Section 13) do not apply to existing buildings in the C-Commercial District. (08/01/2017) 
7.1.1 	Retail businesses, such as grocery stores, drug stores, apparel stores, variety stores, antique shops, and sporting good stores, and book, stationery, magazine, candy and tobacco shops, 
7.1.2 	Eating and drinking establishments, 
7.1.3 	Business and personal services, such as banks, laundry and dry cleaning establishments, barber shops, beauty salons, printers and lithographers, 
7.1.4 	Business and professional offices, accommodating doctors, lawyers, engineers, architects, real estate brokers, insurance agents, and similar professions, 
7.1.5 	Repair services, such as radio, television, appliance and plumbing shops, upholstery shops and shoe repair shops, 
7.1.6 	Hotels, motels, 
7.1.7 	Theaters and other places of indoor entertainment, 
7.1.8 	Government offices and police and fire protection facilities, 
7.1.9 	Multi-family dwelling units provided all such units are located above or below the street level of the building, (12/1/04) 
7.1.10 	Public utility structures, such as pump stations, water storage, power transformers and the like, (12/1/04) 
7.1.11 	Membership clubs, and (12/1/04) 
7.1.12 	Public and parochial schools and other places of worship. (12/1/04) 
7.2 	Special Exceptions. The following uses are permitted provided they meet the conditions of Section 12 of these Regulations. 
7.2.1 	Single-family dwellings, two-family dwellings and multi-family dwelling units located on the street level of the building, (12/1/04) 
7.2.2 	Elderly housing and assisted living facilities, (12/1/04) 
7.2.3 	Automotive service and repair garages, 
7.2.4 	Drive-in or other quick service eating establishments, 
7.2.5 	New and used car sales and service. 
SECTION 8.    I – INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS 
8.1 Permitted Uses. The following uses are permitted by right. 
8.1.1 	The manufacturing, processing, assembling and packaging of products made from cellophane, canvas, cloth, work, fiber, felt, feather, fur, hair, horn, leather, paper, plastics, shell, glass, stone, textiles, tobacco, and wood, 
8.1.2 	Finishing and assembling of articles or products made of metal, excluding processes employing the use of drop hammers or drop forges, 
8.1.3 	The manufacturing, processing and packaging of foods, beverages, candy, cosmetics, pharmaceuticals and drugs, 
8.1.4 	Lumber yards, home and business improvement supply sales, and the sale and storage of construction supplies and equipment, 
8.1.5 	Warehousing and truck terminals, 
8.1.6 	Scientific and research laboratories, 
8.1.7 	Printing and publishing establishments, 
8.1.8 	New and used car sales, services and repairs, provided major repairs are conducted within building, 
8.1.9 	Retail business, such as grocery stores, drug stores, apparel stores, variety stores, antique shops, and sporting goods stores, and book, stationery, magazine, candy, and tobacco shops. Liquor stores are permitted by Special Exception as long as there is no consumption of liquor on the premises and as long as there are no liquor stores or retail businesses selling alcoholic beverages located on a lot within 500 feet of a lot containing a liquor store, any other store selling alcoholic beverages, a house of worship, public or private school, or public library. (11/18/11) 
8.1.10 	Eating and drinking establishments, 
8.1.11 	Business and personal services, such as banks, laundry and dry cleaning establishments, barber shops, beauty salons, printers and lithographers, 
8.1.12 	Business and professional offices, accommodating doctors, lawyers, engineers, architects, real estate brokers, insurance agents, and similar professions, 
8.1.13 	Repair services, such as radio, television, appliance and plumbing shops, upholstery shops and she repair shops, 
8.1.14 	Hotels, motels, 
8.1.15 	Theaters and other places of indoor entertainment, 
8.1.16 	Government offices and police and fire protection facilities, 
8.1.17 	Public utility structures, such as pump stations, water storage, power transformers and the like, and 
8.1.18 	Membership clubs. 
8.2 	Special Exceptions. The following uses are permitted provided they meet the conditions of Section 12 of these Regulations. (12/1/04) 
8.2.1 	Public and parochial schools, and other places of worship, (12/1/04) 
8.2.2 	Automotive service and repair garages, (12/1/04) 
8.2.3 	Drive-in or other quick-service eating establishments, (12/1/04) 
8.2.4 	Retail Businesses which are not package stores that may wish to sell beer and/or wine, not for consumption on the premises, and which receive subsequent state permits. (11/18/11) 
8.2.5 	Building materials reprocessing facility with reprocessing and recycling inside and finished material/product storage outside on a parcel over 5 acres. (01/15/12) 
8.2.6 	Power generation facilities (01/15/12) 
8.2.7 	Public utility structures such as pump stations, water storage, power transformers, and the like. (01/15/12) 
SECTION 9.    DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS 
9.1 	Minimum Lot Size and Street Frontage. Although the amount of developable land in the Borough is minimal and public sewer and water is available throughout the Borough, density is already high and open space limited. Therefore there is a need to address minimum lots size and minimum frontage requirements to protect the remaining available land from being developed at excessive levels of density or intensity. (9/26/02) 
9.1.1 	Existing lots upon which a single family dwelling is located or to be established shall comply with the requirements of Sections 9.2, 9.3, 9.4, 9.5, 9.6 and 9.7 of these Regulations. For all other uses of land, including cases where a commercial use abuts a residential use, the yard setback requirements of Sections 9.4 and 9.5 shall be increased by 50 percent of that required for a single-family dwelling. (9/26/02) 
9.1.2 	Except as provided in the following subsection, existing lots that are divided or subdivided into additional lots shall have a minimum of 50 feet of frontage on a street, as defined in these Regulations, for each lot so created. (9/26/02) 
9.1.3 	The Commission may approve a Special Exception in accordance with the criteria of Section 12.4 of these Regulations to allow a reduction of frontage to no less than 25 feet for lots (often called “flag”, “rear”, or “interior” lots) that are divided or subdivided into additional lots, provided that: (a) not more than two such lots shall be located adjacent to each other on the same side of the street; and 
(b) any two such adjacent lots shall be located not less than 50 feet from any other flag lot as measured in a straight line from their closest points. (9/26/02) 
9.1.4 	The division or subdivision of any lot within the Borough for [residential] development that requires the extension of any street to satisfy the street frontage requirement of Section 9.1.1 shall require the subdivider to extend such street in accordance with the construction standards required by the Town of Griswold Road Ordinance adopted June 11, 2002. (9/26/02) 
9.2 	Minimum Setback from Street Centerline. 
R Zones – 50 feet 
RC Zones – 50 feet 
RM Zones – 50 feet 
C Zones – 40 feet 
I Zones – 75 feet 

9.2.1 	Setback requirements shall be 75 feet on circular turn-arounds at the end of dead-end or cul-de-sac streets 
9.2.2 	Additions may be made to existing buildings that do not conform to the setback requirements of these Regulations provided the additions extend no closer than the existing building to the street. 
9.2.3 	Any new building in any Residential or Commercial district need not be set back further than the average setback for all other existing buildings in the block wherein it is to be constructed. 
9.2.4 	On the corner lot, setback requirements shall be met for both street frontages. 
Borough of Jewett City Zoning Regulations 3 Revised: August 1, 2017 
9.3 	Maximum Lot Coverage by Buildings. 
R Zones – 30% 
RC Zones – 40% 
RM Zones – 40% 
C Zones – 50% 
I Zones – 60% 

9.4 	Minimum Side Yards. 
R Zones – 10 feet 
RC Zones – 15 feet 
RM Zones – 15 feet 
C Zones – 10 feet 
I Zones – 20 feet 

9.4.1 	Side yards not required in RC and C Zones between adjoining commercial buildings within such zones. 
9.4.2 	Corner lots.  When a lot has two front yards, setbacks shall be maintained on corner lots where the front yard shall be the street side on which the house faces and the rear yard shall be opposite the front yard, and the remained side shall be the side yard. The setback dimensions shall be determined by the setback requirement 
9.5 	Minimum Rear Yard. 
R Zones – 20 feet 
RC Zones – 15 feet 
RM Zones – 15 feet 
C Zones – 10 feet 
I Zones – 20 feet 

9.6 	Maximum Building Height. 
R Zones – 35 feet 
RC Zones – 35 feet 
RM Zones – 35 feet 
C Zones – 50 feet 
I Zones – 50 feet 

9.7 	Minimum Floor Area for Residences. 
9.7.1 	One-story, single-family dwelling – 500 square feet. 
9.7.2 	Two-story, single-family dwelling – 600 square feet on the first floor and a total of 1,000 square feet on both floors. 
9.7.3 	Two-family dwelling – 500 square feet per dwelling unit. 
9.7.4 	Multi-family dwelling – 500 square feet per dwelling unit with one bedroom, plus 150 square feet for each additional bedroom. 
Borough of Jewett City Zoning Regulations 4 Revised: August 1, 2017 
9.8 	Maximum Density Allowance. The development of two-family and multi-family residences shall be limited to a maximum allowable density of four (4) units per acre, as follows: (12/1/04) 
9.8.1 	For two-family dwellings: Minimum lot area:  1/2 acre for each two-family dwelling, plus an additional 1/2 acre for one additional two-family dwelling. See section 10.8 (no more than two (2) principal structures on a lot) (12/1/04) 
9.8.2 	For multi-family dwellings: Minimum lot area of 1 1/2acres for up to six (6) dwelling units in one or two buildings. See Section 10.8 (no more than two (2) principal structures on a lot). (12/1/04) 
SECTION 10.  SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS 
10.1 	Conversion of Older Residences. A building used for residential purposes and located in an RM, RC or C zone may, with permission of the Planning & Zoning Commission, be converted so as to include a greater number of dwelling units, provided the following conditions are met: 
10.1.1 	The building is at least 20 years old and structurally capable of being enlarged to accommodate additional persons in a safe and healthy manner. 
10.1.2 	The lot is capable of meeting the dimensional requirements of the district in which it is located. 
10.1.3 	Off-street parking is in the form of either a garage or suitably-surfaced and drained parking area behind the building line shall be provided at the ratio of 1 1/2 spaces per dwelling unit. 
10.1.4 	Each dwelling unit shall contain a minimum of 500 square feet plus 150 additional square feet per bedroom and shall include complete kitchen facilities and a private bath. 
10.2 	Camper Units. One camper unit may be parked and occupied on a parcel or lot not to exceed three weeks with the written permission of the Zoning Enforcement Officer. No more than one camper unit may be parked or stored on a lot in a residential district for a period exceeding three weeks. 
10.3 	Accessory Buildings. An accessory building attached or connected to the principle building by walls or roofs shall be considered part of the principle building and limited by minimum yard requirements. 
10.4 	Height Limits. Not withstanding the height limitations imposed by other provisions of these Regulations, church spires, belfries, cupolas, towers, penthouses, domes, chimneys, flagpoles, radio and television antennae, ventilators, skylights, bulkheads, water tanks and similar features occupying in the aggregate not more than 10 percent of the ground area of the building and not used for human occupancy may be erected to such reasonable height as may be necessary to accomplish the purpose they are to serve. 
10.5 	Junk Yards Prohibited in All Zones. Without limiting the scope of Section 2.5 of these Regulations (unspecified uses prohibited), junk yards, as defined in these Regulations, shall be prohibited in all zones. (11/24/98) 
10.6 	Home Occupation. A Home Occupation, as defined in Section 20.1.9 of these Regulations, may be allowed in all residential zones subject to the issuance of a Zoning Permit by the Planning & Zoning Commission and compliance with the following terms and conditions. Permits for Home Occupations shall not be issued for periods exceeding three (3) years. A renewal application shall be filed a minimum of sixty (60) days prior to the Home Occupation expiration date. (12/28/00) 
10.6.1 	The Home Occupation shall be clearly secondary, subordinate, and incidental to the residential use of the property, and it shall not impair the residential character of the premises and neighborhood. Accessory buildings may be used for Home Occupations, provided that the other requirements of this section are met. There shall be no visible evidence or indication of the operation from the outside of any building or structure used for the Home Occupation: for example, there shall be no display windows, outside storage or display of goods, outside work areas, banners, lights, or other devices to attract public attention. (12/28/00) 
Borough of Jewett City 
Zoning Regulations 	5 Revised: August 1, 2017 
10.6.2 	Resident Occupant:  No more than two (2) Home Occupations shall be conducted on any premises. Each such Home Occupation shall be conducted by the residents of the premises. (12/28/00) 
10.6.3 	Employee:  No more than one (1) full-time or part-time person at one time shall be permitted for each Home Occupation in addition to the principal resident person conducting the use. (12/28/00) 
10.6.4 	The total square foot area used for the conduct of the Home Occupation, including accessory buildings and storage areas related to such use shall not exceed twenty percent (20%) of the floor area of the applicant’s principle dwelling unit on the site, but it shall not exceed 600 square feet. (12/28/00) 
10.6.5 	In addition to the two (2) residential parking spaces required for a dwelling, all Home Occupations shall provide enough additional parking spaces to alleviate the need to use town roads for customer or employee parking. As a minimum, Home Occupations shall provide one (1) additional parking space for each non-resident employee. (12/28/00) 
10.6.6 	It shall be the responsibility of the operator of the Home Occupation to secure all appropriate State and Federal licenses and permits prior to the conducting of a Home Occupation approved by the Commission. Failure to secure the necessary local, State and/or Federal permits shall be sufficient cause for the Commission to revoke the Home Occupation permit. (12/28/00) 
10.6.7 	A detailed written narrative describing all pertinent aspects of the proposed activity and acknowledging the requirements of this section shall be submitted with the application for a Home Occupation. (12/28/00) 
10.6.8 	The proposed use does not create any objectionable noise, odors, vibrations, or unsightly conditions noticeable off the lot. (12/28/00) 
10.6.9 	For Home Occupations involving the use of chemicals, solvents and/or electrical equipment, the applicant shall, prior to submitting the Home Occupation application, supply the Griswold Fire Marshal with Material Safety Data (MSD) Sheets for products used with the Home Occupation. In addition, the applicant shall also provide the Fire Marshal with a site map that shows the location of the chemicals, solvents and/or electrical equipment referenced in the MSD record. A copy of the MSD Sheet and site map shall be filed with the Home Occupation application. (12/28/00) 
10.6.10 	An accurately drawn plot plan (to scale) depicting property lines, structure locations, access drives, parking spaces, and any other pertinent features. (12/28/00) 
10.6.11 	An accurately drawn floor plan (to scale) depicting the area to be utilized by the proposed Home Occupation. (12/28/00) 
10.7 	Storage Containers. The location and use of a storage container(s) for the temporary storage of products or building materials as accessory use to the principal use on the property located within commercial and industrial zones, or associated with a residential or multi-family construction project, shall be subject to approval by the Griswold Zoning Enforcement Officer and shall require a temporary permit. The intent of this section to limit the number of and the use of storage containers to a fixed time period based on the specific needs of the applicant. (12/28/00) 
Borough of Jewett City 
Zoning Regulations 	6 Revised: August 1, 2017 
10.7.1 	Storage container(s) shall be located to the rear or side of the principal building and shall not occupy or obstruct required parking spaces or loading areas. Storage containers shall satisfy all applicable Zoning Regulations as deemed applicable by the Zoning Enforcement Officer. Each container shall contain a lockable door. Commercial advertising of any kind shall not be permitted on any storage container. Storage containers containing hazardous materials/dangerous goods shall satisfy the signage requirements of the local Fire Marshal. (12/28/00) 
10.7.2 	Storage container(s) shall be maintained in a neat and orderly condition. (12/28/00 
10.7.3 	The maximum time period for any individual permit issued by the Zoning Enforcement Officer shall not exceed three (3) months; however, the Zoning Enforcement Officer may allow the continued use of a storage container(s) for bona fide construction projects for an additional three (3) month period upon the receipt of a new permit application and fee. However, the Zoning Enforcement Officer may re-issue permits every three (3) months for a period of twelve (12) months. Any request beyond the twelve (12) month period shall be submitted as a new application to the Planning & Zoning Commission. (12/28/00) 
10.7.4 	The application fee for a storage container permit shall be $100.00 per storage container for a three 
(3) month period. (12/28/00) 
10.7.5 	Violations of these Regulations shall be grounds for the revocation and/or denial of an application renewal. (12/28/00) 
10.8 	Multiple Buildings. Only two (2) principal structures containing two (2) or more residential dwelling units shall be permitted on a lot within the Residential (R), Residential Multi-family (RM), Residential/Commercial (RC), and Commercial (C) Zoning District. Such development must also meet all other requirements as established in these Regulations. (12/1/04) 
10.9 	Elderly Housing and Assisted Living Facilities. In the RM zones, the following condition shall be met. (12/1/04) 
10.9.1 	Assisted living facilities shall be no more than one story in height.  (12/1/04) 
10.10 	Animals. Large animals such as cows, horses, sheep and pigs etc. including their miniature varieties, are prohibited in all borough zones. (01/01/14) 
Poultry may be kept for personal use only within the borough residential (br) zone provided that the number of Poultry does not exceed six (6). Poultry are prohibited in THE BRM, BRC, BC and BI Borough Zoning Districts. Roosters are prohibited in all zoning districts in the Borough.  Free-ranging of Poultry is prohibited in all zoning districts. Proper coops with fenced enclosures must be provided in the Borough Residential (BR) Zone at all times. (01/01/14) 
SECTION 11.   PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS 
11.1 	General. All off-street parking spaces shall consist of not less than 300 square feet per vehicle All parking spaces, loading facilities and access roadways shall have adequate all-weather surfacing treated to inhibit dust, adequate drainage, and shall allow free and safe movement of all vehicles customarily using the facility. 
11.2 	Off-Street Parking Requirements. Spaces shall be required as follows: (12/1/04) 
11.2.1 	Dwelling – 1½ spaces per dwelling unit 
Borough of Jewett City 
Zoning Regulations 	7 Revised: August 1, 2017 
11.2.2 	Hotel, motel – 1 space per guest sleeping room. 
11.2.3 	Restaurant, eating establishment or tavern – 1 space per each 50 square feet or portion thereof, of public floor space. For a drive-in eating establishment, a minimum of 10 parking spaces shall be required. 
11.2.4 	Personal patron service shops, i.e., barber shops, beauty salons – 1 space per patron accommodation. 
11.2.5 	Retail stores – 1 space per 150 square feet of floor space used for sale or display of merchandise. 
11.2.6 	Theater, auditorium, church or place of public assembly – 1 space per each 5 seats. 
11.2.8 	Finance, insurance or real estate establishment – 1 space per each 200 square feet of office space. 
11.2.9 	Wholesale establishment – 1 space per each employee. 
11.2.10 	Rest homes – 1 space per each 5 beds. 
11.2.11 	Elderly Housing and Assisted Living Facilities – 1 space per dwelling unit. 
11.2.12 	Industrial use – 1 space for each two employees on the largest shift. 
11.2.13 	Business and professional offices – 2 spaces per employee. 
11.2.14 	Multi-family Housing -Two outside spaces for each unit up to three bedrooms.  One additional outside parking space per bedroom for each unit with bedrooms over four. Spaces internal to a garage, accessory structure, or carport shall not be included toward this parking requirement. (03/30/09) 
11.2.15 	Gasoline Stations/Convenience Stores – One outside parking space for each 150 square feet of inside display area.  Spaces at the gasoline pumps, in the queuing aisle, or under the gasoline canopy, carport, or within an accessory structure shall not count toward this parking requirement. (03/30/09) 
11.3 	Circulation Patterns and Public Safety. Adequate provision shall be made for the separation of vehicular and pedestrian traffic, within a particular site or development, to minimize the potential for personal injury and to protect the health, safety and general welfare of Borough residents. (12/1/04) 
Section 11.4 was removed in its entirety (08/01/2017) 
SECTION 12.   SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS 
12.1 	General. In accordance with the following requirements, the Planning & Zoning Commission may grant a Special Exception. All requirements of this Section shall be in addition to other requirements applicable in the zoning district in which the Special Exception is located. 
12.2 	Application Procedure. All applications for Special Exceptions shall be submitted to the Planning & Community Development Department together with the site plan prescribed in Section 13 of these Regulations and the prescribed application fee at least ten (10) business days prior to a regularly scheduled meeting of the Planning & Zoning Commission. 
Borough of Jewett City Zoning Regulations 8 Revised: August 1, 2017 
12.3 	Planning & Zoning Commission on Action. The Planning & Zoning Commission shall hold a public hearing on the application within 65 days of its receipt and shall take action with regard to the application within 65 days after the public hearing thereon, all in accordance with the provisions of Section 8-3c of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended. 
12.4 	General Requirements for Approval. The Planning & Zoning Commission shall approve the issuance of a permit for a Special Exception when, after holding a public hearing, it has been determined that the proposal will meet the following general requirements and conforms to all other requirements of these Regulations. 
12.4.1 	That the proposed use shall be in harmony with the appropriate and orderly development of the neighborhood and will not hinder or discourage the development of adjacent property. 
12.4.2 	That any proposed building or structure shall be so designed and located on the site so that there will be adequate access for fire protection purposes. 
12.4.3 	That the streets serving the proposed use shall be adequate to safely carry the vehicular traffic generated by the proposed activity, that there is provision for entering and exit points which will not create a traffic hazard or undue traffic congestion, and that adequate off-street parking and loading facilities shall be provided. 
12.4.4 	That the proposed lot is of a size and dimension to accommodate the proposed activity and remain in keeping with the character of the surrounding neighborhood. 
12.4.5 	That the property of a proposed use will be suitably landscaped to provide a buffer area between the proposed use and adjacent residential properties. 
12.4.6 	That any new street, water main or sanitary sewer proposed in connection with the use will conform to applicable State and Borough standards. 
12.5 	Elderly Housing and Assisted Living Facilities. In R, RC, and C Zones, the conditions of Section 12.4, above, and the following shall be met: (12/1/04) 
12.5.1 	Assisted living facilities shall be no more than one story in height. 
12.6 	Multi-Family Dwelling. In RC and C Zones, the conditions of section 12.4, above, and the following shall be met: 
12.6.1 	No residential building located within the Borough shall contain more than six (6) dwelling units, and no building containing a mix of uses shall contain more that four (4) dwelling units, all of which shall be located above or below the street level of the building, except as provided in Section 7.2 for the 
(C) Commercial Districts. (12/1/04) 
12.6.2 	No building used for such purpose shall be located closer than 75 feet from any existing single-family dwelling. 
12.6.3 	No outside storage area will be provided unless it is completely screened from view from any adjoining property or road. Refuse containers shall be screened from view and provided in sufficient numbers to accommodate refuse from all residents in a sanitary and odorless manner. All accumulated refuse shall be removed from the premises at least once a week. 
12.6.4 	All driveways and parking areas shall be paved, curbed and drained and points of intersection with streets shall be designed to provide 350 feet of unobstructed visibility along the street. 
Borough of Jewett City 
Zoning Regulations 	9 Revised: August 1, 2017 
12.7 	Membership Clubs. In RC and RM zones, the conditions of Section 12.4, above, and the following shall be met: 
12.7.1 	Such uses shall not be located closer than 1,000 feet from any lot containing a place of worship or a school. 
12.8 	Automotive Service Stations. In RC zones, the conditions of Section 12.4, above, and the following shall be met: 
12.8.1 	No lot or building shall be approved for such use that is within 750 feet of another lot used for such use. 
12.8.2 	No part of a lot used for an automotive service station shall be located within 500 feet of a lot used for a church, school, playground or public park. 
12.8.3 	Only such repairs and mechanical work may be performed at an automotive service station as is permitted by a Limited Repairer’s License issued by the State of Connecticut pursuant to Chapter 246 of the Connecticut General Statutes, and all such work shall be performed within the station building. 
12.8.4 	The storing of wrecked or unlicensed motor vehicles for periods exceeding 24 hours shall not be permitted. 
12.9 	Automotive Service and Repair Garages. In RC, C, and I zones, the conditions of Section 12.4, above, and the following shall be met: (12/1/04) 
12.9.1 	No lot or building shall be approved for such use that is within 750 feet of another lot used for such use. 
12.9.2 	No part of a lot used for an automotive service station shall be located within 750 feet of a lot used for a church, school, playground or public park. 
12.10 	Drive-In Restaurants. In RC and C zones, drive-in or other quick service eating establishments shall meet the general requirements of Section 12.4, above, and the following: 
12.10.1 	Adequate off-street parking shall be provided on the lot to ensure that patrons do not park within the right-of-way of any street or highway, except that in no case shall less than ten off-street parking spaces be provided. 
12.11 	New or Used Automotive Sales and Service. In RC and C and I zones, the conditions of Section 12.4, above, and the following shall be met:  (1/5/99) / 12/1/04) 
12.11.1 	Any facilities used for the repair, maintenance or servicing of vehicles shall be located no closer than 750 feet from any church or school and all such activity shall be conducted within buildings. 
12.12 	Wireless Communications Facilities. The purpose of this section is to provide for the establishment and expansion of wireless communications services in accordance with the 1996 Federal Communications Act while protecting neighborhoods and minimizing adverse visual and operational effects of wireless communications facilities through careful design, siting, and screening in order to accomplish the following: (1/15/99) 
12.12.1 	Preserve the character and appearance of the Borough of Jewett City while allowing adequate communications services to be developed, 
12.12.2 	Protect the scenic, historic, and environmental resources of the Borough of Jewett City, 
Borough of Jewett City 
Zoning Regulations 	10 Revised: August 1, 2017 
12.12.3 	Provide standards and requirements for the regulation, placement, design and construction of wireless communications facilities, 
12.12.4 	Establish a review process that ensures action within a reasonable period of time for requests to place, construct, operate, or modify a wireless communication facility, 
12.12.5 	Minimize the total number of height of towers throughout the Borough of Jewett City by requiring tower sharing and clustering of wireless communications facilities, and 
12.12.6 	Prevent potential damage to adjacent properties from tower failure. 
These Regulations are intended to be consistent with the Telecommunications Act of 1996 in that (1) they do not prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the provision of wireless communication services, (2) they are not intended to unreasonably discriminate among wireless providers, and (3) they do not regulate wireless telecommunications services on the basis of the environmental effects of radio frequency emissions to the extent that the regulated services and facilities comply with the Federal Communication Commission’s (FCC) Regulations concerning such emissions. 
12.13 	Definitions: (1/15/99) 
12.13.1 Antenna: 	Device used to receive or transmit electromagnetic waves. Examples include but are not limited to whip, panel or dish antennae. 
12.13.2 Co-Location: Locating wireless communication equipment of less than one provider on a single tower 
12.13.3 Monopole: A circular, self-supporting vertical pole with no guy wire anchors. 
12.13.4 Premises: That area of land dedicated for the principle use of siting a wireless telecommunications facility, whether dedicated for that purpose by lease, fee, simple ownership, easement, or otherwise. Antennas accessory to and mounted upon an existing building shall not be deemed to be “premises” as defined herein. Premises shall not exceed one quarter (1/4) of an acre. 
12.13.5 Propagation Analysis: An analytical technique used to determine and delineate the location of areas and strength in which electromagnetic communications can be conducted. 
12.13.6 Tower: A structure, whether freestanding or attached to another structure that is used to support equipment used to receive or transmit electromagnetic/radio waves. Examples include monopoles, self-supporting lattice, and guyed towers. 
12.13.7 Wireless Communications: Commercial wireless and telecommunications systems that include but are not limited to cellular, personal communications services (PCS), specialized mobilized radio (SMR), enhanced specialized mobilized radio (ESMR), paging, and related systems. 
12.13.8 Wireless Communications Facilities: All ground and roof-mounted towers or antennae, ancillary equipment and other structures associated with the transmission and reception of wireless communications. 
12.14 	General. Wireless Communications Facilities shall be permitted in all zones, subject to the following requirements, in addition to any other applicable provisions of these Regulations:  (1/15/99) 
12.14.1 	All wireless communications facilities shall comply with the rules and regulations as set fourth by the FCC. Towers not requiring Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) paintings or markings shall be painted a non-contrasting blue, gray or other neutral color. 
Borough of Jewett City 
Zoning Regulations 	11 Revised: August 1, 2017 
12.14.2 	Co-location is encouraged and preferred to the construction of a new tower. The applicant shall commit to allow co-location in accordance with this Section. Applicants shall provide a description of existing towers or other suitable antenna mounting locations in the service area and documentation indicating why their antennas cannot be mounted on these towers.  Such documentation shall include demonstration that the shared use is not technically, legally, or environmentally feasible or, for towers constructed prior to the effective date of this section, that shared use is  not economically feasible or that the owner of such facility/facilities has/have refused permission for the shared use. The owner of any tower approved under this section shall be required to make space available for at least four additional antennas, including competitors. Such availability shall be made under commercially reasonable terms and conditions. Failure of an owner to share use of a tower approved hereunder shall constitute a violation of any permit issued to such owner and shall be grounds for the Planning & Zoning Commission, upon public hearing and notice to the owner, to revoke such permit. In the event that co-location is found to be infeasible by the applicant, the Planning & Zoning Commission may retain a technical expert to verify if co-location at the site is feasible or not feasible. The cost for such a technical expert will be at the expense of the applicant, and such cost shall be reimbursed prior to the decision on any pending application. Failure to reimburse the Planning & Zoning Commission for such costs shall be grounds for denial of the application without prejudice. 
12.14.3 	All towers shall be a monopole design unless otherwise approved by the Planning & Zoning Commission. 
12.14.4 	The maximum height of a tower proposed under these Regulations shall be 190 feet. 
12.14.5 	No lights shall be mounted on proposed towers unless otherwise approved by the FAA. 
12.14.6 	The design of the wireless communications facility shall comply with the standards promulgated by the FCC for non-ionizing electromagnetic emissions. 
12.14.7 	The minimum lot area of the lot on which the wireless communication facility premises is located shall be that of the zone in which it is located and the lot shall meet both the buildable land requirements of the lot and requirements of Subsection 12.14.8 below. 
12.14.8 	No portion of a wireless communication facility premises shall be located within 200 feet of a residence, residential accessory building or property line, whichever is closer. 
12.14.9 	Generators, air conditioners, compressors or any other machinery installed shall comply with state and local noise regulations. 
12.14.10 	A chain link fence with a height of eight feet shall be required around the wireless communications facility premises. A minimum setback distance of 10 feet shall be maintained between equipment cabinets, equipment buildings and the fence enclosure. 
12.14.11 	Landscaping shall be required around the fence. At a minimum, the landscaping shall consist of a row of evergreen trees planted not more than five feet on center. The evergreen trees shall be a minimum of six feet in height at planting. All landscaping shall be properly maintained to ensure screening effectiveness. 
12.14.12 	Antennas or accessory building or equipment mounted to or on an existing structure or building shall, to the greatest extent possible, blend with the color and design of the underlying structure. 
12.14.13 	Roof-mounted antennas shall not exceed more than 15 feet above the highest part of the building or structure and shall be set back from the roof edge a minimum of 10 feet. 
Borough of Jewett City 
Zoning Regulations 	12 Revised: August 1, 2017 
12.14.14 	Buildings shall be designed to be in harmony with the surrounding neighborhood properties, i.e., buildings must have characteristics such as rooflines, siding, etc., that are compatible with residential structures in the immediate area such as determined by the Planning & Zoning Commission. Buildings shall be limited to one story not exceeding 14 feet in height. Building dimensions shall not exceed 10 feet by 20 feet. Flat roof structures are prohibited, unless an exception is granted by the Planning & Zoning Commission. 
12.14.15 	Commercial advertising shall not be allowed on any antenna, tower or accessory building or equipment. 
12.14.16 	No wireless communication facility shall be designed, located or operated as to interfere with existing public safety communications. 
12.14.17 	Plans for the wireless communications facility shall be prepared and signed and sealed by a professional engineer licensed in the State of Connecticut. 
12.14.18 	All applications shall comply with any applicable requirements of the Floodplain Management Ordinance and the Inland Wetlands, Watercourses & Conservation Planning & Zoning Commission Regulations. 
12.14.19 	All equipment cabinets and equipment buildings shall be maintained in good appearance. The Planning & Zoning Commission shall determine whether or not the facilities are maintained in good appearance. 
12.14.20 	Antennas shall be permitted on existing sign pylons, telephone poles and other freestanding structures. 
12.14.21 	Unpaved driveways leading to the wireless communications facility premises area shall not exceed 10% in grade. Grades exceeding 10% shall be paved with bituminous concrete. No driveway, whether paved or unpaved, shall exceed 15% in grade. 
12.14.22 	Appropriate safety signage shall be affixed to the perimeter chain link fence, equipment cabinets and equipment buildings. 
12.15 	Application Requirements. New towers under Subsection 12.15.1 of these Regulations shall be a Special Exception under Section 12 of these Regulations. New antennas on existing structures shall require site plan review under Section 13 of these Regulations. In addition to the requirements under Sections 12 and 13 of these Regulations, applications pursuant to this Section shall be accompanied by the following:  (1/15/99) 
12.15.1 New Towers 
a) 	A survey meeting A-2 standards of the wireless communications premises site at a scale of one inch to 40 feet with topography drawn at a minimum of five-foot contour intervals. The survey shall show existing utilities, property lines, existing buildings or structures, stone walls or fence lines and wooded areas within 200 feet of the site area. Show boundary of any wetlands, flood plains or watercourses within 200 feet of the site area. 
b) 	A description of the slopes, wetlands, watercourses and other environmental characteristics of the site and any historically designated areas of the site and the impact that the tower will have on these resources. 
Borough of Jewett City 
Zoning Regulations 	13 Revised: August 1, 2017 
c) 	A design drawing, including a cross section and elevation of the proposed tower. A description of the tower’s capacity as well as the proposed location of all mounting positions for co-located antennas and the minimum separation distances between antennas. The design shall also illustrate how the tower will collapse upon itself without encroaching upon any adjoining property. 
d) 	A propagation analysis that illustrates the predicted propagation for the location of the proposed wireless communication site. 
e) 	A map depicting the extent of the service area of the proposed wireless communications site along with a map indicating the search radius for the proposed site. 
f) 	The applicant must certify that existing towers within 1,500 feet of the proposed new tower do not meet the applicant’s technical requirements or lack the structural capacity to accept additional antennas. Furthermore, the applicant must demonstrate that it has examined all wireless telecommunications sites or existing structures over 50 feet in height within a two-mile radius to determine whether existing facilities can be used to provide adequate coverage and/or capacity as part of the applicant’s system. The Planning & Zoning Commission may require the investigation of alternative sites by the applicant and demonstration of a good faith effort to co-locate with other carriers. Such good-faith effort includes contact with all other licensed carriers licensed to operate a wireless communications facility in Griswold. In the event that the applicant finds alternate site(s) to be infeasible, the Planning & Zoning Commission may retain a technical expert to verify if the alternate site is feasible or not. The cost for such a technical expert will be at the expense of the applicant, and such costs shall be reimbursed at the expense of the applicant, and such cost shall be reimbursed prior to the decision on any pending application. Failure to reimburse the Planning & Zoning Commission for such costs shall be grounds for denial of the application without prejudice. 
g) 	An elevation drawing to scale of all proposed equipment buildings or ancillary equipment. 
h) 	Details, including dimensions and appearance of all proposed antennas and associated equipment. 
i) 	Proposed utilities, including distance from source of power, size of service available and required locations of proposed utility lines, whether underground or above ground. 
j) 	Plans indicating locations and specifics of proposed screening, landscaping, fencing and lighting. 
k) 	Erosion and sedimentation plan for construction phase and as a permanent measure. 
l) 	A graphic representation of the proposed installation in relation to the site and its vicinity in order to ascertain the visual impacts associated with the proposal. Examples of such representation include photo simulations or architectural drawings or renderings. 
m) 	Show longitude and latitude values of the tower location. 
Borough of Jewett City 
Zoning Regulations 	14 Revised: August 1, 2017 
12.15.2 New Antennas 
a) 	Detail design plan, including dimensions and appearance of all proposed antennas and associated equipment. 
b) 	An elevation drawing of all proposed equipment, buildings or ancillary equipment and host structure. 
c) 	Proposed utilities, including distance from source of power, sizes of service available and required locations of proposed utility lines, whether underground or above ground. 
d) 	A graphic representation of the proposed installation in relation to the site and its vicinity in order to ascertain the visual impacts associated with the proposal. Examples of such representation include photo simulations or architectural drawings or renderings. 
e) 	An A-2 survey of the property may be required at the discretion of the Planning & Zoning Commission. 
f) 	Earth station dish type antennas for uses other than commercial wireless and telecommunications systems that include but are not limited to cellular, personal communications services (PCS), specialized mobile radio (SMR), enhanced specialized mobile radio (ESMR), paging and related systems, are governed by Section 11.16 of the Griswold Zoning Regulations. 
12.15.3 	Review and Decision. In its review and decision on the application for a wireless communication tower, antennas and/or facilities, the Planning & Zoning Commission shall: 
a) 	Act on the application in accordance with the schedule set forth in Sections 8-3c and 8-7d of the Connecticut General Statutes, 
b) 	Find conformance with all applicable criteria of these Regulations, including Sections 12 and 13, as the case may be, 
c) 	Find that the planned equipment cannot be accommodated on an existing tower as documented by a licensed professional engineer registered in the State of Connecticut, 
d) 	Find that the equipment would not cause unacceptable interference with the operation of other existing or planned equipment of an existing structure, and 
e) 	Find that the existing or planned equipment would not cause unacceptable interference with the equipment proposed by the applicant and that interference cannot be prevented or eliminated at a reasonable cost. 
12.15.4 Abandonment 
a) 	Upon abandonment of use, the carrier shall physically remove the wireless communications facility within 90 days from the date of abandonment. Abandonment shall be evidence by loss of any necessary license from the Federal Communications Planning & Zoning Commission, voluntary abandonment by the operator or other evidence indicating an intent to permanently discontinue the use. A finding of abandonment shall not be made except following a public hearing with notice to the property owner and operator of record. “Physically remove” shall include, but not be limited to, removal of antennas, base equipment and security barriers from the subject property and restoring the location of the wireless communication facility to its natural condition, except that any landscaping and grading shall remain in the after-condition. 
Borough of Jewett City 
Zoning Regulations 	15 Revised: August 1, 2017 
b) 	If an owner or operator fails to remove a wireless telecommunications facility in accordance with this section, the Town of Griswold shall have the authority to enter the subject property and physically remove the facility. Costs for the removal of the wireless communication facility shall be charged to the landowner in the event that the Town of Griswold must remove the facility, and the cost thereof may be deducted from any bond posted by the carrier. 
12.15.5 Site Bond. The owner of the communications tower shall post a cash bond with the Treasurer of the Town of Griswold in an amount satisfactory to remove all physical improvements to the telecommunications facility premises. The amount of the cash bond shall be based on 5% of the total cost of the construction of the site, including the cost of the tower, or the cost of dismantling the tower, whichever is greater. The applicant shall submit, with the application to construct a telecommunications tower, an itemized cost estimate prepared by a Connecticut registered engineer to erect the proposed tower and all associated site improvements. In addition, the engineer shall also submit an itemized estimate for the dismantling of the tower and all associated site improvements necessary to return the premises to its original state. The cash bond shall remain with the Treasurer of the Town of Griswold and shall be in full force and effect for the life of the wireless telecommunications facility. Failure to maintain the bond shall result in an immediate Cease-and Desist order by the Planning & Zoning Commission’s Zoning Enforcement Officer. 
12.15.6 Maximum Building Heights. No building shall exceed three full stories, nor shall the total building height above the finished grade exceed 35 feet, except that features such as steeples, cupolas, water towers, antenna structures for individual dwellings, chimneys, wind energy conservation systems and agricultural buildings may exceed 35 feet in height up to a maximum of 50 feet in height, and any such structure which exceeds 35 feet shall require a Special Exception in accordance with Section 12 of these Regulations. The Planning & Zoning Commission may, by Special Exception in accordance with Section 12 of these Regulations, permit a non-residential building higher than 35 feet or three stories if it determines that such building shall not constitute a safety hazard or be visually inconsistent with the general character and appearance of the surrounding area. All items higher than 35 feet must have fall space on the same lot, equal to the height of the item, to protect adjacent property. For Wind Energy Conversion Systems (WECS) see Section 1 of these Regulations. For wireless communications facilities, towers and other commercial radio tower structures, see Section 
12.12 of these Regulations. 
SECTION 13.   SITE PLAN REQUIREMENTS 
13.1 	General Requirements. A site plan shall be submitted when applying for a Zoning Permit involving uses other than single-family dwellings, two-family dwellings, and for any accessory buildings thereto, and for all Special Exceptions. Applications for Zoning Permits shall be submitted to the Department of Planning & Community Development and are reviewed by the Planning & Zoning Commission.  (12/1/04) 
13.2 	Site Plan Ingredients. A site plan on a sheet no larger than twenty four inches (24) by thirty-six inches (36), at a scale of one inch equals twenty feet (1”=20’), or other such scale as may be approved by the Commission shall be prepared that will include and show, where applicable, the following information, and shall be accompanied by all written reports and documentation as required herein. Such plan shall be prepared and sealed by a professional Engineer, land surveyor or architect licensed to practice in the State of Connecticut: (12/1/04) 
13.2.1 	Name and address of applicant,  (12/1/04) 
13.2.2 	Address of property and name of owner of record,  (12/1/04) 
Borough of Jewett City 
Zoning Regulations 	16 Revised: August 1, 2017 
13.2.3 	Scale, north arrow, date of drawing or revision, and name of person preparing the site plan, (12/1/04) 
13.2.4 	Property boundaries, dimensions and area,  (12/1/04) 
13.2.5 	Locations of all existing and proposed buildings and uses on site, and within 50 feet of the property lines, including but not limited to: signs, sidewalks, driveways, parking and loading areas, and abutting streets, poles, hydrants and other utility appurtenances, areas to be used for exterior storage and the type of screening provided,  (12/1/04) 
13.2.6 	Dimensions of all yards, as required by these Regulations, (12/1/04) 
13.2.7 	Locations and descriptions of water supply and sewage disposal facilities, (12/1/04) 
13.2.8 	Existing and proposed drainage structures on the property and those off the property that may affect the proposed building or use, and  (12/1/04) 
13.2.9 	Proposed landscaping, including type, size and location of proposed plantings, (12/1/04) 
13.2.10 	Demonstration of satisfaction of the Parking & Loading Requirements, (12/1/04) 
13.2.11 	Estimated number of residents/occupants/employees.  (12/1/04) 
13.3 	Site Plan Evaluation. The Commission shall determine the following in its review of a site plan. (12/1/04) 
13.3.1 	Any proposed building or structure shall be so designed and located on the site so that there will be adequate access for emergency vehicles. (12/1/04) 
13.3.2 	The streets serving the proposed use shall be adequate to safely carry the vehicular traffic generated by the proposed activity, and there will be provision for entrance and exit points which will not create a traffic hazard or undue traffic congestion. (12/1/04) 
13.3.3 	All proposed traffic access ways are adequate but not excessive in number, adequate in width, grade, alignment and visibility; not located too near street corners or other places of public assembly; and other similar safety considerations. (12/1/04) 
13.3.4 	Adequate off-street parking and loading spaces are provided to prevent parking in public streets of vehicles of any persons connected with or visiting the use and the interior circulation system is adequate to provide safe accessibility to all required off-street parking spaces. (12/1/04) 
13.3.5 	All playground, parking and service areas are reasonably screened at all seasons of the year from the view of adjacent lots and streets and the general landscaping of the site will preserve and enhance the borough streetscape, so that landscaping will be visually dominant. Preservation of existing trees over 12” in diameter to the maximum extent possible shall be encouraged. (12/1/04) 
13.3.6 	Lighting from the installation of outdoor flood or spot lighting and illuminated signs will be properly shielded so that such lighting will not adversely affect any abutting property or public street. (12/1/04) 
13.3.7 	The character and appearance of the proposed use, buildings and/or outdoor signs will be in general harmony with the character, and will improve and enhance the general appearance of the surrounding neighborhood and that of the Borough of Jewett City and will not adversely affect the general welfare of the residents of the Borough. (12/1/04) 
Borough of Jewett City 
Zoning Regulations 	17 Revised: August 1, 2017 
13.4 	Waivers. The Commission may, upon written request by the applicant, waive one or more of the site plan ingredient requirements if the applicant can show, to the satisfaction of the Commission, that the information is not needed to reach a decision on the application. (12/1/04) 
13.5 	Technical Review. The cost of any technical review of the site plans or other documents by professionals duly contracted through the Town of Griswold for any application for Plan Review, Zoning Permit, or Special Exception, having been deemed necessary by the Zoning Official, Town Planner, or Planning & Zoning Commission shall hereafter be borne by the applicant. In accordance with the most current schedule in Town Ordinance Section 144, Land Use Application Review Fees which is appended to this document as Appendix A. (03/30/09) 
The following 13.5.1–13.5.6 were removed on 03/30/09 
13.5.1 	Review by a licensed Engineer (12/1/04) 
13.5.2 	Review by a licensed Architect (12/1/04) 
13.5.3 	Review by a licensed Environmental Professional (12/1/04) 
13.5.4 	Review by a licensed Surveyor (12/1/04) 
13.5.5 	Review by a licensed Soil Scientist (12/1/04) 
13.5.6 	Legal Review (12/1/04) 
13.6 	Landscaping, Screening, Buffer, and Architectural Design Requirements. 
13.6.1 	Purpose. The following landscaping, screening, buffer, architectural design standards are designed to improve and enhance the aesthetic appearance of proposed development and protect property values through the preservation of existing vegetation and the establishment of new landscaping materials and architectural standards. (12/28/00) 
13.6.2 	Uses requiring Special Exceptions, Zoning Permits and/or Site Plan Approval. The following landscaping, screening, buffer, architectural design and signage standards shall apply to all commercial, industrial, and multi-family uses requiring Special Exceptions, Zoning Permits and/or site plan approval. (12/28/00) 
13.6.2.1 	General. All portions of a building lot or property which are not used for the location of buildings, structures, accessory uses, off-street parking and loading areas, sidewalks, or similar purposes shall be landscaped and permanently maintained to improve the appearance of the development and the Borough of Jewett City as a whole. To the extent possible, existing specimen trees shall be retained and protected and incorporated into the landscape scheme for the proposed development. (12/28/00) 
a) 	Official Plans. All landscaping plans shall conform to the Borough of Jewett City Zoning Regulations, as amended. (12/28/00) 
b) 	Installation. All plant materials shall be installed according to accepted horticultural standards and methods and planting areas and beds shall be mulched to a minimum depth of two (2) inches. Automatic water systems are encouraged. (12/28/00) 
c) 	Maintenance. All plantings shown on an approved site plan shall be maintained in healthy growing condition and all fences and walks shall be maintained in good physical and aesthetic condition throughout the life of the use. Vegetation, fences and walls not so maintained shall be replaced with new materials no later than the beginning of the following growing season. (12/28/00) 
Borough of Jewett City 
Zoning Regulations 	18 Revised: August 1, 2017 
13.6.2.2 Front Landscaping Areas. (Type A Species) 
a) 	Location. The required front yard setback, as measured from the property line, shall include a minimum eight (8) foot front landscape area along all streets, as shown on the attached “Landscape Design Standards”. Such landscaped area shall be retained and is to be used for no other purpose. Signs may be located within the 8-foot setback area if approved by the Planning & Zoning Commission. (12/28/00) 
(1) 	
In situations where the edge of pavement or curb within a street line right-of­way does not coincide with the front lot line, the applicant shall, in addition, landscape the area between the front lot line and the edge of the street pavement or sidewalk in such a manner as will not obstruct vehicular sight lines. (12/28/00) 

(2) 	
Prior written approval from the Town of Griswold and/or the Connecticut Department of Transportation (CDOT) may be required in cases as referenced above in item a. (12/28/00) 


b) 	Standards. All front landscape areas shall have at least one (1) shade tree for each twenty-five (25) feet of front lot width or measured parallel to the street line and shall be set back at least ten (10) feet from the street line. Where property fronts on a state highway, the Commission will accept the CDOT written recommendation for the recommended front setback distance. (12/28/00) 
c) 	Front Landscape Area Plants. The purpose of this type of planting is to provide partial visual screening and partial separation. Plant materials shall consist of shade trees, flowering trees, and/or low, broad-leafed or needled evergreens planted with ground cover and may include evergreen trees as shown on the attached “Landscape Type Standard”. Trees may be planted in groups; however, the spacing between trees or groups of trees shall not exceed fifty (50) feet. Shade trees shall not be planted under or within fifteen (15) feet of overhead utility lines. Each required shade tree shall be at least two and one-quarter (2-1/4) inch caliper, as measured six (6) inches above the root crown. Each flowering tree shall be a minimum of 8 feet in height at the time of planting. Low, broadleaf evergreens shall not exceed thirty-six (36) inches in height. Please refer to the “Landscape Varieties for Specific Location and Purposes List”, Section 7.0. (12/28/00) 
13.6.2.3 Parking Areas (Type B Species) 
a) 	Location. On-site parking areas shall be planted with shade trees that are located entirely within the parking field, as shown on the attached “Landscape Design Standards”, except that no more than one required tree shall be located in each field corner. (12/28/00) 
b) 	Standards. All parking areas shall have at lease one (1) shade tree for each ten (10) required off-street parking spaces. Each tree shall be located in a porous island. (12/28/00) 
Borough of Jewett City 
Zoning Regulations 	19 Revised: August 1, 2017 
c) 	Parking Landscape Area Plants. The desired effects of this type of planting are to screen interiors of parking areas and to provide shade for the protection of pedestrians and vehicles. Plant materials shall consist of shade trees planted with ground cover, as shown on the attached “Landscape Type Standards”. The trees shall be evenly distributed throughout the parking lot area and shall be protected from vehicle bumpers and doors. Each required shade tree shall be at least two and one-quarter (2-1/4) inch caliper, as measured six (6) inches above the root crown. Please refer to the “Landscape Varieties for Specific Location and Purposes List”, Section 7.0. (12/28/00) 
d) 	Sidewalks. Sidewalks at least three (3) feet in width shall be installed within the site to provide walkways between parking areas and other principal or accessory uses when deemed necessary for public safety. Sidewalks shall provide handicap ramps at all driveway and intersection crossways. (12/28/00) 
13.6.2.4 	Buffer Strips. (Type C Species) 
a) 	Location. A buffer strip shall be required along and within all non-residential district boundaries immediately adjacent to a Residential District or Residence Use and may be required along and within the rear and/or side lot lines on any Special Exception use. Such buffer strip shall comply with at least the following minimum provisions. (12/28/00) 
(1) 	
The buffer strip shall be at least eight (8) feet in width and shall be retained as an integral part of the development project and is to be used for no other purposes. (12/28/00) 

(2) 	
A berm, hedge, mound, wall or fence of suitable location, height, design and materials as determined by the Planning & Zoning Commission may be required in conjunction with any portion of the required planting and/or buffer strip. (12/28/00) 


b) 	Standards. The buffer strip shall consist of a single row of evergreen plantings with at least two trees for each ten (10) feet of buffer length per row, as measured parallel to the property line. (12/28/00) 
c) 	Buffer Strip Landscape Area Plants. The purpose of this type of planting is to provide complete visual screening of the activity on the lot. The planting shall consist of a single row of evergreen trees at least eight (8) feet in height, as shown on the attached “Landscape Type Standards”. Non-evergreen plantings and/or a screening berm, hedge, fence or wall at least five (5) feet in height may be used in conjunction with evergreen trees. The evergreen trees shall be planted at three (3) feet on center. The evergreen trees may be grouped or staggered at intervals, provided that the spacing between groups is filled with a screening hedge, berm, fence or wall at least five (5) feet in height. Please refer to the “Landscape Varieties for Specific Location and Purposes List” Section 13.6.2.12.c. (12/28/00) 
13.6.2.5 	Protection from Vehicles. When vehicles will be located adjacent to sidewalks, fences, walls, buffer strips, trees, landscaping or similar obstructions, a suitable barrier, curb, wheel stop or similar device shall be provided so that vehicle overhang does not damage said plantings or obstruction. (12/28/00) 
Borough of Jewett City 
Zoning Regulations 	20 Revised: August 1, 2017 
13.6.2.6 
13.6.2.7 
13.6.2.8 
13.6.2.9 
13.6.2.10 
Sight Lines. The minimum required front, parking and buffer landscaped areas shall not obstruct vehicle sight lines and shall be planted with trees, shrubs, and other materials of a type and height as required herein. (12/28/00) 
Quality and Methods. All required plantings shall be of species and varieties as approved by the Commission and shall be installed in accordance with the standards of the American Nurseryman’s Association. (12/28/00) 
Landscaping of Developed Sites. To the greatest extent possible, the minimum landscape requirements contained in this section shall be adhered to for any site plan application involving the expansion, structural alteration, or reuse of an existing building or site, and/or a new use or change of use for a developed site. (12/1/04) 
Landscape Modifications. Existing specimen trees may be used to satisfy the landscape requirements provided they are protected during construction and the area within five 
(5) feet of the tree trunk consists of porous materials to permit adequate drainage. (12/28/00) 
a) 	The Planning & Zoning Commission may, upon written request, modify or waive the location, number and/or type of plantings required for any front, parking or buffer landscape area where the existing natural topography, existing natural vegetation, and/or proposed alternative method such as a berm, mound, hedge, fence or wall at least five (5) feet in height can be reasonably shown to achieve the applicable landscape objectives as identified in this section. (12/28/00) 
b) 	Prior to granting any modification or reduction of these landscaping requirements by the Commission, the applicant shall submit a preliminary standard or parking lot layout with all required landscaped areas in order to substantiate that the proposed project can, in fact, comply with these Regulations prior to any such landscape modification. (12/28/00) 
Other Landscape Plan Elements. Any preliminary or final landscape plan required under these Regulations shall show all required landscape areas plus the following additional elements, as applicable: (12/28/00) 
a) 	Exterior lighting fixtures, back lighted signs and security lighting, including location, height, fixture design, materials and illumination. Also provide schedule of hours when lighting types will be illuminated. (12/28/00) 
b) 	Freestanding signs, including location, height, design, colors, material and illumination. (12/28/00) 
c) 	Refuse collection areas, including dumpsters, screening and vehicle pick-up maneuvering areas. Any refuse collection area shall be located near or adjacent to the building’s loading area and/or service entrance. (12/28/00) 
d) 	Mailbox clusters, including location, height and design. (12/28/00) 
e) 	Ground mounted mechanical units, including cooling towers, air conditioning units, compressors, above ground and below ground storage tanks, etc., with their locations, heights, capacities and purpose. (12/28/00) 
f) 	Other similar site improvements such as stone walls, fences, fire hydrants, utility poles, walkways, etc. (12/28/00) 
Borough of Jewett City 
Zoning Regulations 	21 Revised: August 1, 2017 
13.6.2.11 
Architectural Design. The architectural design, scale and mass of buildings and other structures, including, among other elements, the exterior building materials, color, roof-line, and building elevations, shall be of such character as to harmonize and be compatible with the other buildings in the district so as to preserve and improve the appearance and beauty of the community. (12/28/00) 
a) 	Buildings designed to achieve a small scale and residential appearance shall be encouraged. (12/28/00) 
b) 	Pitched roof buildings shall be encouraged. (12/28/00) 
c) 	Rooftop mechanical equipment, other than solar panels, shall be concealed from all sides. (12/28/00) 
d) 	Buildings shall be designed and located on the site so as to retain the existing topography and natural features of the land to the greatest extent possible. (12/28/00) 
e) 	Commercial buildings, office buildings, restaurant buildings (including fast food) shall be designed to reflect a New England Colonial, Early American or Traditional type of architecture, in keeping with the surrounding architecture. (12/28/00) 
f) 	Existing stone walls shall be incorporated into the design and layout of the proposed development. If the walls require removal due to curb cuts, sight line problems or building(s)/improvement(s) placement, said wall(s) shall be reconstructed on the property. Existing stone walls that do not require relocation shall be rebuilt if their current condition warrants it. (12/28/00) 
g) 	Building Color/Façade: Building color and materials are important to the aesthetics and character of the development and its impact on the surrounding community. The following standards have been incorporated to encourage the use of quality materials to complement surrounding residential neighborhoods: (12/28/00) 
1) 	Predominant exterior building materials must be of high quality, including brick, wood, stone and tinted/textured concrete masonry units. Smooth-faced concrete blocks, tilt-up concrete panels, and prefabricated steel panels are prohibited, unless the applicant can show that said materials conform to the architectural requirements of Sections 13.6.2.11 e, g, and g.2 and g.4. 
2) 	Façade colors must be low reflecting, subtle, and neutral or earth-toned. The use of metallic colors, black or fluorescent colors are prohibited and the excessive use of high-intensity colors or black is prohibited. (12/28/00) 
3) 	Building trim may feature brighter colors, but neon tubing is not allowed as an accent material. (12/28/00) 
4) 	All facades of a building that are visible from adjoining properties or public streets should contribute to the scale features of the building and encourage community integration by featuring characteristics similar to a front façade. (12/28/00) 
Borough of Jewett City 
Zoning Regulations 	22 Revised: August 1, 2017 
13.6.2.12 Landscape Varieties for Specific Locations and Purposes List. (12/28/00) 
a) Type A Species – Front Area Landscape Requirements. (12/28/00) 
These types of trees are tall shade variety and flowering deciduous variety: (12/28/00) 
• 
Maple • Crab Apple 

• 
Oak • Flowering Cherry 

• 
Sycamore • White Ash 

• 
Dogwood • Bradford Pear 


Also permitted within the front yard landscape area, parking areas and buffer areas are various types of flowering plants and spreading evergreens: (12/28/00) 
• 
Rhododendron • Azalea 

• 
Juniper • Arrowwood 

• 
Yews • Mapleleaf Vibrunum 

• 
Holly 


b) Type B Species – Parking Area Landscape Requirements. (12/28/00) 
These types of trees are tall shade variety: (12/28/00) 
• 
Maple • Gingko 

• 
Oak • Sweet Gum 

• 
Sycamore • American Holly 


Parking lot drainage outlet structures that flow water onto grass swales or into wetland areas shall use one or more of the following salt tolerant plants within the receiving swale: (12/28/00) 
• 
Flat Pea (Lathco) 

• 
Switch Grass (Blackwell) 

• 
Tall Fescue (Kentucky 31) 

• 
Crown Vetch (Chemung, Penngift) 


c) Type C Species – Buffer Area Landscape Requirements. (12/28/00) 
These types of trees are tall evergreen variety: (12/28/00) 
• 
Arborvitae • American Holly 

• 
Blue Spruce • Juniper 

• 
White Pine • Eastern Red Cedar 

• 
Hemlock • Japanese Yew 


Borough of Jewett City 
Zoning Regulations 23 Revised: August 1, 2017 
13.6.2.13 	The Planning and Zoning Commission may, at its discretion, provide waivers or modification of specific landscaping, screening, and buffer requirements of this section 
13.6. (03/30/09) 
13.6.2.13.1 	Upon written request of the applicant accompanied by a written explanation of what portion(s) of Section 13.6 are desired to be waived or modified and an explanation of why existing or proposed site conditions pose special difficulty, over and above mere increases in cost, to achieve the goals of this Section 13.6 and are not necessary to the design of a reasonable, safe, and attractive project in context of both present or permitted future development nearby.  Conditions of waiver or modification may include, but are not limited to : 
a. 	
Situations where a site has been designed and submitted to the Commission as a single, unified planned development and its designated to be subdivided into phases or components and sold independently, subject to cross easements or other perpetual restrictions for shared parking, access,  landscaped areas, amenities, and provision for the maintenance thereof. 

b. 	
Situations where the topography of a site is such that buffering is not required; such situations where adjoining properties are so far above or below the grade of the subject site that the adjoining property will not be subjected to noise, glare from parking lot lights, vehicles, signs, litter, or visual intrusion. 

c. 	
Situations where the adjoining properties contain landscaping or buffering that would comply with this Section 13.6 and such property is owned in perpetuity by an entity which will preserve such property in its natural state, and has entered into a perpetual easement with the applicant to that effect. 


Borough of Jewett City 
Zoning Regulations 	24 Revised: August 1, 2017 

Borough of Jewett City Zoning Regulations 25 Revised: August 1, 2017 Borough of Jewett City Zoning Regulations 26 Revised: August 1, 2017 

13.7 	General Sign Requirements. The following general sign requirements shall apply throughout the Borough of Jewett City: In addition, any site plan which includes reference to a sign but does not provide specific details regarding the type of sign, size of sign, type of technology, with day and night brightness for the lighting of sign, graphics in sign design, hours of operation, and specifics regarding the static versus cycling nature of sign message shall not include any sign approvals as part of the site plan approval regardless of whether that exclusion is stated at the time of that approval.(12/28/00) (2/15/11) 
13.7.1 	No sign shall be designed or located in a manner that confuses or obstructs the view of official traffic signs or signals nor shall an illuminated sign or lighting device be so directed to permit the beams and illumination there from to be directed or beamed upon a public street, highway, sidewalk, or adjacent lot such that it causes glare or reflection constituting a traffic hazard or nuisance. (12/28/00) 
13.7.2 	No sign or advertising device shall be erected or maintained at the intersection of streets in such a manner as to obstruct free and clear vision of the intersection. (12/28/00) 
13.7.3 	All signs shall be constructed of sound materials, firmly supported and maintained in good condition and repair. It is the responsibility of the applicant to check with the building inspector to determine if a building permit is required. (12/28/00) 
13.7.4 	Except for a one-week time limit, no sign or part thereof shall contain or consist of banners, posters, pennants, ribbon streamers, spinners, or other similar moving, fluttering or revolving devices. (12/28/00) 
13.7.5 	Signs for political purposes shall be allowed provided that such signs, banners, or posters shall be displayed not more than thirty (30) days before the election and removed not more that seven (7) days following the election. (12/28/00) 
13.7.6 	Ground signs, including supports, shall not exceed a height of twelve (12) feet in a residential district, or twenty-four (24) feet in commercial or industrial district, above the surface of the ground on which it is located. (12/28/00) 
13.7.7 	A religious, governmental or institutional use shall have not more than one sign, not exceeding twenty (20) square feet. Business directory/welcoming signs erected by or on behalf of a governmental body serving a public information purpose may exceed this number and size, but shall be professionally designed and reviewed by the Commission.  (12/18/00) 
13.7.8 	Temporary signs, not over six (6) square feet in area, and advertising the sale, rental, building contractor or special features of the building or lot on which they are located, may be erected in residential districts. In non-residential districts, temporary signs, not over thirty-two (32) square feet in area, advertising the sale, rental, or special features of the building or lot on which they are located may be erected. Temporary sign(s) shall be removed in accordance with the following: (12/28/00) 
13.7.8.1 	Temporary sign(s) relating to the construction of a residence shall be removed immediately upon the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy by the Building Official. (12/28/00) 
13.7.8.2 	Temporary sign(s) relating to the sale of a residence or residential property shall be removed within 5 working days of the transfer of the title of the property. (12/28/00) 
13.7.8.3 	Temporary sign(s) relating to the repair or remodeling of a residence shall be removed immediately upon the completion of the work as permitted by the permit issued. (Permit shall include any permit issued by the Town of Griswold, i.e., Building, Health, Planning & Zoning, Conservation Commission, Board of Selectmen.) (12/28/00) 
Borough of Jewett City 
Zoning Regulations 	27 Revised: August 1, 2017 
13.7.8.4 	Temporary sign(s) shall not be placed in the right-of-way line of any public or private street. The sign(s) shall be placed within the property line of the property. (12/28/00) 
13.7.9 	No sign shall advertise a product, service, or activity other than that which is produced, provided or conducted on the premises except that a maximum of two (2) directional signs each not more than four (4) square feet in area and conforming to the other provisions of these Regulations shall be permitted off the premises, and governmental business directory/welcoming signs shall be permitted according to Section 4.1.7 above. (12/28/00) 
13.7.10 Signs in Residential Districts. The following signs are permitted in Residential Districts. (12/28/00) 
13.7.10.1 	One sign giving the name and address of the property and/or the occupant. Such signs shall not exceed four (4) square feet. (12/28/00) 
13.7.10.2 	One sign identifying a permitted profession or home occupation, not exceeding four (4) square feet. (12/28/00) 
13.7.10.3 	One sign identifying an approved special exception, not exceeding thirty-two (32) square feet. (12/28/00) 
13.7.10.4 	One sign offering more than one vacant lot for sale in an approved subdivision, such sign not to exceed thirty-two (32) square feet. Two such signs are permitted where the number of lots for sale is ten (10) or more. The sign(s) may be displayed for the duration of the approval of the subdivision and shall be removed immediately when all lots have been sold or conveyed. Said sign(s) shall be maintained in good appearance. Said sign(s) shall be located in the right-of-way of the street line and placed so that it does not create a sight line problem and shall conform to Section 11.6 of these Regulations. (12/28/00) 
13.7.10.5 	No sign shall be equipped with flashing lights or movable parts in a residential district. (12/28/00) 
13.7.10.6 	No sign, other than one identifying the occupant of a residence, shall be located closer than five (5) feet from any property line in a residential district, except that signs permitted in accordance with Sections 13.7.7 and 13.7.10.7 may be permitted within the five (5) foot setback area. (12/28/00) 
13.7.10.7 	A Zoning Permit shall be obtained for a permanent sign that identifies a development or subdivision. The sign face shall not exceed six square feet in area or 4 feet in height above the existing grade of the sign location. The sign shall be constructed of permanent materials and shall be placed in the right-of-way of the street line and shall be placed so that it does not create a sight line problem. The placement of the sign shall conform to Section 11.6 of these Regulations. (12/28/00) 
13.7.11 	Signs in Commercial and Industrial Districts. Every place of business may erect plain or illuminated signs upon the property on which the business is conducted which indicate the name of the owner or proprietor, the character of the business, the name of the business, and/or the products made or sold on the site, subject to the following regulations: (12/28/00) 
13.7.11.1 	Each individual commercial building located on a separate lot and in a separate building from other uses may have a non-movable, free-standing sign not exceeding thirty-two 
(32) square feet in area. (12/28/00) 
Borough of Jewett City 
Zoning Regulations 	28 Revised: August 1, 2017 
13.7.11.1.1 	Each individual commercial building located on a separate lot and in a separate building from other uses may have a maximum of two (2) portable, movable signs, each not more than eight (8) square feet in area. Such signs shall not be located within or on a street, right-of­way, sidewalk, or driveway. (12/28/00) 
13.7.11.2 	Where two or more commercial uses are grouped in a single building or in one or more buildings on a single lot, as in a shopping center, one sign not exceeding 100 square feet shall be permitted. For a commercial building with frontage on two streets, two such signs are permitted. (12/28/00) 
13.7.11.3 	Each commercial or professional use may be permitted one sign, not exceeding four (4) square feet in size, attached to the building in which it is located, unless such use is located in a separate building on a separate lot and has no free-standing sign, in which case the sign may be increased to eight (8) square feet. (12/28/00) 
13.7.11.4 	The total area of all signs for each unit of occupancy of a building shall not exceed two 
(2) square feet for each front foot of building occupied by such unit and shall be located at least ten (10) feet back of the street line, except that for each five (5) feet of additional setback beyond the required setback line, an additional 5% of sign area shall be permitted; but in no case shall the square footage of such sign exceed three times the lineal frontage of the building. (12/28/00) 
13.7.11.5 	A Zoning Permit shall be obtained for any sign exceeding thirty-two (32) square feet in size, unless the design and location of such sign is shown on a site development plan approved by the Commission. (12/28/00) 
13.7.12 	A Message Board Sign Panels for Banks and/or Financial Institutions in Commercial and Industrial Zones may be added as one component of the single free-standing sign for the bank or financial institutions under 13.7.11.1 or 13.7.11.5 provided there shall be no increase in the total sign area; that no more than 25% of the total sign area is devoted to recurring, lighted advertising or public services messages, provided that the message sign board advertises goods or services available from the bank or financial institution or  public service/municipal related messages only,  and provided that the duration of each message, transition time between messages, and brightness has been demonstrated to follow the Federal Highway Administration Guidelines on Changeable Message Signs in Memorandum HEPR-20 dated September 25, 2007 and as subsequently revised.  Lighted message boards shall be set to function from 6:00 A.M. to 10:00 P.M. with the exception of time and temperature information or emergency alert information which can be provided at all times of the day or night. (11/09/2010) 
13.7.13 	Identification and Public Service Signs or Message Boards. (11/09/2010) 
13.7.13.1 	A Signs on Town-owned property for all Zoning Districts may be permitted on certain properties owned by the Borough of Jewett City and the Town of Griswold subject to the following regulations for identification and public service signs or message boards. (11/09/2010) 
13.7.13.2 	One free-standing identification sign or lighted message board at Town Hall or Fire Station is permitted with as many as  two-faces, each face up to maximum of 32 square feet in area, and up to a maximum height above the natural grade to six feet high overall including mounting after review by the Zoning Enforcement Officer. (11/09/2010) 
Borough of Jewett City 
Zoning Regulations 	29 Revised: August 1, 2017 
13.7.13.3 	Signs shall be located no closer than ten feet from the front boundary line of the lot or any internal access way on the lot provided that the location meets clear sightline maintenance regulations. Sign should be readable from the road or access way curb. (11/09/2010) 
13.7.13.4 	Sign or message boards at Town Hall or Fire Station may be lighted by external fixtures on the ground or within a valance. Alternatively, the sign may be internally lighted. Message boards may be lighted with LEDs whose intensity is programmed and monitored by sensors so brightness is not excessive for prevailing ambient conditions; and which message may be changed with time frequency designed not to distract motorists and to follow Federal Highway Administration Guidelines on Changeable Message Signs in Memorandum HEPR-20 dated September 25, 2007 as subsequently revised. (11/09/2010) 
13.7.13.5 	Message boards at Town Hall and Fire Station shall be set to function only from 6:00 
A.M. to 10:00 P.M. local time(11/09/2010) 
13.7.14 	Special Sponsor Signs attached to existing structures and fences located in Town or Borough-owned public recreational areas, ball fields, or parks are permitted as long as each sponsor sign is thirty-two 
(32) square feet or less in size. (11/09/2010) 
13.8 	Bond Requirement. In the event that certain improvements may not be installed at the time of occupancy of a site or building due to weather conditions or other factors beyond the control of the applicant, the Zoning Enforcement Officer may issue a temporary Certificate of Zoning Compliance at the time of the application for a Certificate of Occupancy, provided that the applicant shall require a performance bond in the form of cash, surety, or an irrevocable letter of credit from a Connecticut banking institution in an amount necessary to cover one hundred fifty percent (150%) of the construction cost, as estimated at the time of projected completion to insure the completion of such improvements not more than six (6) months following such occupancy. Said construction estimate shall be reviewed and approved by the Town Engineer prior to the issuance of a temporary Certificate of Occupancy. All public health and safety related components of a project must be completed prior to occupancy or use of any parcel of land, building, or structure, and shall be bonded. (12/28/00) 
In the event that the improvements described above are not completed within the time limits contained herein, the Commission, Zoning Board of Appeals, or the Zoning Enforcement Officer, as the case may be, shall be authorized to utilize the performance bond to complete such improvements, and to compensate the Town for any administrative expenses incurred in connection with the completion of such improvements. (12/28/00) 
13.8.1 	Maintenance bonds may be required by the Commission to insure that landscaping material which has been improperly planted or cared for will be replaced; that public improvements have been properly installed; and that other defects which do not appear immediately after completion of construction will be repaired or utilized, as the case may be, not more than one (1) year following completion of all improvements, as evidenced by the issuance of a Certificate of Zoning Compliance, or the release of the bond as described above. (12/28/00) 
13.8.2 	All bonds posted in accordance with these Regulations shall be effective at least until the completion of the activity or development which they serve to guarantee. No such bond shall require the Town or any agency thereof to incur any expense or enter into any contract prior to payment of the obligation which such bonds secure. All bonds shall be in such form, as the Town Attorney shall require. (12/28/00) 
Borough of Jewett City 
Zoning Regulations 	30 Revised: August 1, 2017 
13.9 	Erosion and Sedimentation Control Plan. A soil erosion and sediment control plan shall be submitted with any application for development when the disturbed area of such development is cumulatively more than one-half (1/2) acre. The soil erosion and sediment control plan shall contain proper provisions to adequately control stormwater runoff on the proposed site based on the best available technology. Such principles, methods and practices necessary for certification are found in the “Connecticut Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control (2002)” or as amended available through the Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection. (03/30/09) 
13.9.1 	The Soil Erosion and Sediment control Plan shall include the following 
A. 	A narrative describing: 
1. 	
The development, 

2. 
The Schedule for grading and construction activities including: a) Start and completion date. b) Sequence of grading and construction activities c) Sequence of installation and/or application of soil erosion and sediment control 

measures, and d) Sequence for final stabilization of project site. 

3. 	
The design criteria for proposed soil erosion and sediment control measures and storm water management facilities. 

4. 	
The construction details and the installation and/or application procedures for proposed soil erosion and sediment control measures and stormwater management facilities, and 

5. 
The operations and maintenance program for proposes soil erosion and sediment control measures and stormwater management facilities. 


B. 	A map of at lease one inch equals fifty feet (1" = 50') showing: 
1. 	
The location of the proposed development and adjacent properties, 

2. 
The existing and proposed topography including soil types, wetlands, watercourses and water bodies, 

3. 	
The existing structures on the project site, if any, 

4. 	
The proposed area alterations including cleared, excavated, filled or graded areas and proposed structures, utilities, roads and, if applicable, new property lines. 

5. 
The location of and design details for all proposed soil erosion and sediment control measures and stormwater management facilities, 

6. 	
The sequence of grading and construction activities. 

7. 	
The sequence for installation and/or application of soil erosion and sediment control measures. 


Borough of Jewett City 
Zoning Regulations 	31 Revised: August 1, 2017 
8. 
The sequence for final stabilization of the development site, and 

9. 	
The words "Certified by the Griswold Planning and Zoning Commission" with designated space for the date and signature of the Chairman or Secretary of the Commission; 


C. The narrative required in Section 13.9.1 a) may be included on the map of Section 13.9.1 b) if room allows it without affecting the readability of the map. The items required to be mapped in Section 13.9.1 b) may be depicted on the site plan map required in Section 13.2 if the readability of the site plan is not affected. 
13.9.2 	After review of the Erosion and Sediment Control Plan by the Commission of its designated agent, the Commission shall vote to certify, modify and certify or deny that the soil erosion and sediment control plan complies with these Regulations. A vote of the Commission to approve a site plan shall mean certification of the erosion and sediment control plan as well. Prior to certification, any plan submitted to the Commission may be reviewed by the New London County Soil and Water Conservation District which may make recommendations concerning such plan, provided such review shall be completed within thirty (30) days of the receipt of such plan by the New London County Soil and Water Conservation District. 

13.9.3 	The estimated costs of measures required to control soil erosion and sedimentation as specified in the certified plan, may be covered in the cash passbook or letter of credit acceptable to the Commission. 
13.9.4 	The Commission or its designated agent shall periodically conduct inspections to verify compliance with the certified plan and that control measures are properly performed or installed and maintained. The commission may require the applicant to submit progress reports which show that soil erosion and sediment control measures and facilities have been performed or installed according to the certified plan and are being correctly operated and maintained. 
SECTION 14.  NON-CONFORMING BUILDINGS AND USES 
14.1 	Non-Conforming Building and Uses. Any non-conforming use of a building or lot lawfully existing at the effective date of these Regulations or of any amendments thereto, may be continued, and any building so existing which was designed, arranged, intended for or devoted to a non-conforming use therein changed subject to the following regulations: 
14.1.1 	Nothing in this ordinance shall prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any portion of a building or structure declared unsafe by a proper authority. 
14.1.2 	A non-conforming use may be extended to another part of a building designed for such use but not at the expense of a conforming use. 
14.1.3 	No building devoted to a non-conforming use shall be enlarged or extended unless the use therein is changed to a conforming use. 
14.1.4 	Structural alterations of any non-conforming building may be permitted, provided the total costs of such alterations do not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the assessed valuation of such building at the time it becomes non-conforming, unless the use thereof is changed to a conforming use. 
14.1.5 	When a building in which there is a non-conforming use is damaged by fire, explosion, act of God, or act of the public enemy, it may be reconstructed, repaired or rebuilt only to its previous floor area and cubical content, provided such reconstruction or rebuilding is commenced within one year of such damage, and the same non-conforming use is continued. 
Borough of Jewett City 
Zoning Regulations 	32 Revised: August 1, 2017 
14.2 	Changes. A non-conforming use may, by permission of the Planning & Zoning Commission, be changed to another non-conforming use when the proposed use is equally appropriate or more appropriate to the district than the existing use. 
14.3 	Abandonment. When a non-conforming use intentionally abandoned or discontinued or converted to another use, it shall thereafter be used in conformity with the regulations for the district in which it is located. (03/30/09) 
SECTION 15.   FEES, PENALTIES 
15.1 	Fees. See Appendix A, (03/30/09) 
Section 144.  Land Use Application Processing and Review Fees 
15.1.1 	Fees shall be waived for official municipal agencies. 
15.2 	Penalties. In accordance with Section 8-12 of the Connecticut General Statutes, the owner or agent of any building or premises where a violation of any provision of these Regulations has been committed or exists, or the lessee or tenant of an entire building or premises where such violations have been committed or exits, or the agent, architect, builder, contractor or other person who commits, takes part or assists in any such violation or who maintains any building or premises in which such violation exists, shall be fined not less than ten nor more than two hundred dollars for each day that such violation continues; but if the offense is willful, the person convicted thereof shall be fined not less than $100.00 nor more than $250.00 for each day that such violation continues, or imprisoned not more than 10 days for each day such violation continues or both; and the circuit court shall have jurisdiction of all such offenses, subject to appeal as in other cases. 
SECTION 16.   APPEALS 
16.1 	Appeals. Any person may appeal to the Zoning Board of Appeals when it is alleged that there is an error in any order, requirement, or decision made by the Zoning Enforcement Officer related to the enforcement of these Regulations. The Board may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, or decision appealed from and shall make such order, requirement, or decision as in its opinion ought to be made in the premises, and shall have the powers of the officer from whose order, requirement, or decision the appeal was taken. The concurring vote of four (4) members of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, or decision of the Zoning Enforcement Officer. (12/28/00) 
16.2 	Variances. Any person seeking a Variance from the literal enforcement of these Regulations may apply to the Zoning Board of Appeals for a Variance. Said Board may, after consideration of a variance application in accordance with Section 8-6 and 8-7 of the Connecticut General Statutes, approve or deny a Variance, except that no Variance may be approved for uses in districts in which such uses are not otherwise permitted by these Regulations. (12/28/00) 
SECTION 17.   AMENDMENTS 
17.1 	General. These Regulations may be amended by the Planning & Zoning Commission, after proper public notice and public hearing, in accordance with Section 8-3 of the Connecticut General Statutes. 
17.2 	Variance Notification: The applicant shall, no later than ten (10) days prior to the hearing for the Variance, send notices to all abutting property owners and all owners directly opposite the applicant’s property by First class mail, and proof of such mailing shall be evidenced by a certificate of mailing. Such ownership shall be indicated on the most recent Grand List. Said notices shall include the following information:  (12/28/00)   (8/10/09 
Borough of Jewett City 
Zoning Regulations 	33 Revised: August 1, 2017 
1) 	The zoning regulation(s) that is (are) the subject of the Variance application. (12/28/00) 
2) 	Detailed written narrative explanation of the proposed Variance application.  (12/28/00) 
3) 	Copy of any plan or sketch that shows the location of the Variance(s) as described in the Variance application. (12/28/00) 
4) 	The date, time and place of the Zoning Board of Appeals hearing. (12/28/00) 
The applicant shall present the evidence of mailing to the Zoning Board of Appeals at the scheduled hearing. Failure to satisfy these requirements shall render the Variance application null and void. If an application is declared null and void, a new application and application fee shall be required. (12/28/00)  (8/10/09) 
SECTION 18.   SEPARABILITY 
18.1 	Should any section or provision of these Regulations be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of these Regulations as a whole or any part thereof, other than the part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. 
SECTION 19. EFFECTIVE DATE 
19.1 	These Regulations amend and supersede Regulations adopted by the Zoning Commission of the Borough of Jewett City on September 18, 1975, and subsequently amended. Planning & Zoning functions for the Borough of Jewett City was transferred to the Town of Griswold, Planning & Zoning Commission, by Ordinance adopted by the Warden and Burgesses on October 2, 1995 and approved by the freemen of the Borough of Jewett City at a meeting held on October 10, 1995. The effective date of transfer of duties was January 1, 1996. The Griswold Planning & Zoning Commission accepted the duties of the Zoning Commission for the Borough of Jewett City at their Regular Meeting held on December 11, 1995. These amended Regulations shall take effect on March 30, 2009. 
SECTION 20. DEFINITIONS 
20.1 	General. Certain words and terms used in these Regulations shall have the meanings presented in this section. All words in the present tense include the future tense. The word “shall” is always mandatory; a “building” includes a “structure”; a “building” or “structure” includes any part thereof; “used” or “occupied” shall be deemed to include “designed, intended, or arranged to be used or occupied”. 
Abutting: 	Separated by no intervening private property; properties separated by a public or private street shall be deemed to be abutting. (3/9/04) 
Accessory Building or A building or use subordinate to and customarily incidental to the principle building Use: or use of land or buildings and on the same lot or on a contiguous lot under the same ownership. 
A residential facility primarily inhabited by individuals requiring professional Assisted Living Facility: assistance to maintain daily function due to physical or mental disability. (12/1/04) 
Camper Unit: 	A self-propelled or portable unit, such as a camper bus, travel trailer, truck-mounted camper, or other similar unit, originally designed and constructed or redesigned and reconstructed for recreation or other shelter for one or more persons. 
Borough of Jewett City 
Zoning Regulations 	34 Revised: August 1, 2017 
Planning & Zoning The Planning & Zoning Commission of the Town of Griswold. Commission: 
District:  A zoning district established by Section 3 of these Regulations. (12/1/04)  
Dwelling, Single-Family:  A residential building containing one dwelling unit, other than a mobile home, designed for and occupied by one family only.  
Dwelling, Two-Family:  A residential building containing two dwelling units, designed for occupancy by not more than two families.  

Dwelling, Multiple-A residential building designed for or occupied by three or more families with the Family: number of families in residence not exceeding the number of dwelling units provided. 
Dwelling Unit: 	One room or rooms connected together, constituting a separate, independent housekeeping establishment for owner or renter occupancy, and containing independent cooking and sleeping facilities and toilet facilities. 
Elderly Housing: 	A housing unit or group of housing units specifically designed for and occupied by adult individuals over the age of 65, for whom no physical assistance is necessary. (12/1/04) 
Family: 	One or more persons occupying a single dwelling unit, provided that, unless all members are related by blood or marriage, no such family shall contain over five (5) persons. 
Junk Yard: 	An area of land, with or without buildings, used either as a principle or accessory use or occupied by the outdoor storage of used or discarded materials such as waste paper, rags, scrap metal, building materials, house furnishings, machinery, vehicles or parts thereof, with or without dismantling, processing salvage, sale or other use of disposition of the same. A deposit or the outdoor storage on a lot of more than two (2) wrecked or unregistered vehicles, or vehicles otherwise not in a condition for legal use on public highways, or parts of more than two (2) such vehicles, shall be deemed a junk yard. (11/24/98) 
Home Occupation: 	Accessory uses conducted for compensation by the occupant(s) of a residential building or lot, which complies, with the provisions of Section 10.5 of these Regulations. Home Occupations shall not include restaurants, tea rooms, or other eating or drinking places; dog kennels, animal hospitals; barber shops or beauty salons having more than one (1) sink with one (1) chair; doctors, dentists, or lawyers; or automotive service, supply, sales or repairs except for vehicles registered in the name of family members residing in the dwelling. (12/28/00) 
Borough of Jewett City 
Zoning Regulations 	35 Revised: August 1, 2017 Borough of Jewett City 
Home Occupation:  Home Occupations include, but are not limited to: the preparation and sale of those products customarily produced in the home or garden, and actually produced in the subject home or garden, such as baking and home preserves; the preparation and sale of the products of the arts and crafts actually prepared on the subject premises, such as sewing, painting, wood carving, cabinet making, ceramics, writing, sculpture, ornamental glass and metal working; the workshops of skilled craftsmen such as watchmakers, plumbers, electricians, carpenters, house painters, paperhangers, and radio and television repairmen; and the offices of architects, accountants, engineers, psychotherapists, real estate and insurance agents, and other recognized professional groups. (12/28/00)  
Lot:  One or more adjacent parcels of land under single ownership or control to be used, developed, or built upon as a unit.  
Lot Frontage:  The continuous linear measurement of the lot boundary that abuts the street. (9/26/02)  
Membership Club:  Buildings and facilities owned and operated by a corporation, association, person or persons, for a social, educational or recreational purpose, to which membership is required for participation and not primarily operated for profit nor to render a service which is customarily carried on by a business. (12/1/04)  
Street:  An improved right-of-way accepted for public use by lawful procedure and suitable for vehicular travel; or a proposed street shown on a subdivision plan approved by the Planning & Zoning Commission.  
Storage Container:  Any portable structure which has been or can be mounted on wheels, or any shipping type container regardless of the material of which it is constructed. (12/28/00)  
Telecommunications Facilities:  See section 12.13 of these Regulations. (1/15/99)  
Towers, Communications:  See Section 12.13 of these Regulations. (1/15/99)  
Use:  The purpose for which property is arranged, designed or intended, or for which the land and/or building is or may be occupied or maintained. (12/1/04)  
Yard:  A required ground area of a lot, unoccupied by any buildings, extending between the property line and any building for the distance specified in these Regulations.  
Zone:  A zoning district established by Section 3 of these Regulations. (12/1/04)  

Zoning Regulations 36 Revised: August 1, 2017 
APPENDIX A 
TOWN ORDINANCE OF FEES FOR LAND USE APPLICATION PROCESSING AND REVIEW 

Land Use Ordinance 144 of the Town of Griswold pertaining to Land Use Application Processing and Review Fees, adopted 9/23/08 and made effective on 10/11/08. 144.030 Fee Schedule (03/30/09) 
§144.010 Fees Established. 
Pursuant to Section 8-1c of the Connecticut General Statutes there is established a schedule of fees for the processing of land use applications received by the Planning and Zoning Commission, Zoning Board of Appeals and Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Conservation Commission.  The schedule of fees established shall supersede those fees presently charged by the land use commissions and boards as previously established in Section 143 and pursuant to any provision of the General Statutes or any Special Act. These fees are intended to cover a portion of the Town’s costs for processing and administrative handling of land use applications, including, but not limited to: legal advertisements regarding public hearings, decisions of a commission, and other matters requiring publication in a newspaper; other notifications or referrals required or authorized by applicable law; recording and transcribing, where necessary, of public hearings and meetings, the preparation of minutes and other documentation applicable to the application, and other clerical expenses; staff salaries and overhead expenses for staff to the commission, including officials of the Town for whom land use application review is only a part of his/her duties, such as the sanitarian, fire chief, etc.; Town Attorney fees in direct connection with legal advice, review of documents, and attendance at meeting, where deemed desirable, in connection with the application; inspection of construction and other work to insure compliance with approved permits and applicable regulations; keeping and updating of files and other documentation relative to the application; such other expenses as may be incidental to the processing of land use applications or subsequent research or review relating to land status requested by outside parties but involving documents or procedures within the Town of Griswold. 
§144.020 Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply: 
“Commission(s)” means one or all of the land use regulatory agencies of the Town of Griswold known as the Planning and Zoning Commission, Zoning Board of Appeals and Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Conservation Commission. 
“Processing of land use application(s)” means the actions of a commission, supported by staff employed by the Town of Griswold, independent contractors, or consultants, in receiving, reviewing and acting upon an application to conduct an activity regulated by said commission and including both pre-action reviews and post-approval supervision of work and inspection of activities permitted. 
“Improved land area” means any portion(s) of a development site not covered by buildings, but covered by parking, driveways, outdoor storage or loading areas, lawns, formal landscaped areas, or any other area not in its natural state. 
“Fixed Application Fees” shall mean those set forth in Section 144.030, subsection A of this Chapter. 
“Additional Expenses” shall mean those reimbursements set forth in Section 144.030, subsection C of this Chapter. 
Any other term not defined in this Ordinance shall have the meaning set forth in the “definitions” section of any applicable regulations (e.g., the zoning regulations for zoning applications, the subdivision regulations for subdivision or resubdivision applications, etc.). 
Borough of Jewett City 
Zoning Regulations 37 Revised: August 1, 2017 
§144.030 Fee Schedule. 
A. 	Fixed Application Fees. Commissions shall charge Fixed Application Fees for the processing of land use applications in accordance with the following schedule: 
Planning & Zoning Commission 	Completed application forms along with the required fee are to be submitted to the Planning and Community Development Department no later than ten (10) Business days prior to the meeting. Meetings are held on the second Monday of each month. 
Application Fee 	State Fee Total 
Zone Changes 
Text Amendment Flat Fee $375 + $60.00 = $435.00 Map Amendment Flat Fee $400 1 to 14 acres + $60.00 = Variable Map Amendment* $600 15 acres or more + $60.00 = Variable *PZC Commission may reduce the map amendment fee to the Flat Fee if the requested zone change is for a less intensive zone usage. 
Zoning Permits 
Residential $150 / unit + $60.00 = Variable 
Basic Review of Site Plan $250 + $60.00 = $310.00 
Minor Change in Use or Site Plan for Existing 

$300 	+ $60.00 = $360.00 
Commercial /Industrial 
New Commercial/Industrial or Site Plan $400 + $25 / 1,000 sq. ft.** 

+ $60.00 = Variable 
Amendment of Existing  Commercial /Industrial 
Home Occupation $250 + $60.00 = $310.00 

Special Exceptions 
Residential (multifamily) $200 / unit + $60.00 = Variable 
New Commercial or Industrial $600 + $25 / 1,000 sq. ft.** + $60.00 = Variable 
Existing Buildings/Modifications $350 + $25 / 1,000 sq. ft. ** + $60.00 = Variable 

** Charge per 1000 sq. ft. of buildings and outside active area proposed 
CGS Section 8-30 Zoning Appeals 	$500 + $50.00/unit + $60.00 Variable 
Subdivisions 	$300 / lot + $50 per lot + $60.00 = Variable 
Minimum $350 

Re-Subdivisions 	$350 / lot + $50 per lot + $60.00 = Variable 
Minimum $400 

Zoning Board of Appeals 	Completed application forms along with the required fee are to be submitted to the Planning and Community Development Department no later than three Thursdays prior to the meeting. Meetings are held on the first Wednesday of each month. 
Application Fee State Fee 	Total 
Variance $150.00 + $60.00 = $210.00 Appeal of Zoning Enforcement Officer Order $150.00 + $60.00 = $210.00 Automotive Location $150.00 + $60.00 = $210.00 
Borough of Jewett City 
Zoning Regulations 	38 Revised: August 1, 2017 
Inland Wetlands & Watercourses Completed application forms along with the required fee shall be submitted to the Planning Conservation Commission & Community Development Department no later than 15 days prior to the meeting. Meetings are held on the third Thursday of each month. 
Application Fee State Fee Total Basic Fee  
1-family & 2-family residences or Wetlands Enforcement $100.00 + $60.00 = $160.00 Officer Administrative Approval Commercial multi-family residence per dwelling unit $ 50.00 + Basic Fee 
If Applicable add: 
Public Hearing $175.00   + Basic Fee 
Wetlands Jurisdiction Review $ 75.00   + Basic Fee 
Regulation Amendment $175.00   + Basic Fee 
Subdivision: For each lot with wetlands or watercourses 

and/or in which activity is proposed in a wetland or $ 50.00/lot + Basic Fee 
regulated area 
Commercial Activity $300.00 + Basic Fee 

Total Variable 
B. 	Maximum Fee; Calculation of Fee. Except as provided in Paragraph C below, no application fee calculated in accordance with the preceding formulae shall exceed $20,000.00.  Each applicant for any permit shall provide, at the time of application, the necessary data to permit the calculation of the application fee (such as square footage of buildings or outside storage or active display area requested, the proposed number of lots, or acreage involved in a zone change), and such information shall, where appropriate, be certified by a licensed land surveyor, professional engineer, or registered architect.  Failure to file any application fee set forth in this ordinance shall be grounds for denial, without prejudice, of such application. 
C. Additional Reimbursable Costs. 
In addition to the fixed fees set forth in subsection A of this section, the commissions may collect payment for direct costs of materials and review services performed by other than town employees, including but not limited to: 
a. 	
specialized inspections; 

b. 	
third party reviews with professional certifications; 

c. 	
reviews by consultant Town Attorneys; 

d. 	
reviews by consultant Town Professional Engineers; 

e. 	
reviews by licensed Landscape Architects; 

f. 	
reviews by licensed Architects; 

g. 	
reviews by archeologist/cultural resource consultants; 

h. 	
reviews by certified soil scientists, wildlife biologists, or ecologists; 

i. 	
reviews by Licensed Environmental Professionals; 

j. 	
reviews by certified professional in stormwater quality; 

k. 	
legal, stenographic and transcription services associated with any type of land use application. 


The Commission may require an applicant to provide certifications, inspections or professional consultant reports at the applicant’s expense. It is intended that the fixed fees set forth in subsection A do not cover such costs for additional expenses resulting from non-town staff reviews necessitated by land use applications. These additional expenses will be required where applicable for any permit application before any land use Board or Commission, regardless of whether a public hearing is required. This section is also applicable to all expenses incurred after an approval is issued in the event that action is needed to enforce compliance with specific conditions of approval or violation of regulations. 
D. Fees Not in Lieu of Bonds. The payment of fees shall not prohibit commissions from requiring performance or forfeiture bonds to ensure the successful completion of all work as may be prescribed in the respective land use regulations. 
Borough of Jewett City 
Zoning Regulations 	39 Revised: August 1, 2017 
§144.040 Exemptions 
All boards and agencies of the Town of Griswold, including the use of fire company properties for fire protection purposes, shall be exempt from the payment of fees established pursuant to this chapter.  Each board may in whole or in part exempt an application from the payment of any or all fees if said application is for low and moderate income housing or special needs housing.  In addition, each commission shall be authorized, by majority vote, to reduce or waive application fees where (1) the application does not appear, upon initial examination, to require intensive staff review and 
(2) the applicant is a non-profit entity which qualifies for tax deductible charitable contributions under Regulations of the 
U.S. Internal Revenue Service. The commission may also credit all or a portion of application fees from previous application(s) which were denied or withdrawn, where the review work performed on the previous application(s) may be of benefit in reviewing the new application.  Any commission exempting an application from payment of a fee, in whole or in part, shall state in the minutes of the meeting at which the plan was received the fee type exempted, the percentage exempt and reasons for granting the exemption.  This exemption shall not prohibit a commission from requiring consultant reports, professional certification or conducting inspection to ensure conformance with land-use regulations. 
§144.050 Payment of fees 
A. Other Fees.  The payment of a fee established in accordance with the provision of this chapter shall not relieve the applicant, owner or their agent from the payment of other fees that may be prescribed for a different type of land use application, or by another ordinance of the Town of Griswold. 
B. 	Fees Nonrefundable. All fees received by a commission as part of a land use application submission shall be nonrefundable. 
C. 	Method and Timing of Payment, Failure to Pay.  All Fixed Application Fees shall be paid by cash, check or money order made payable to the Town of Griswold. Fees shall be paid at the time of application submission. The applicant shall be provided with invoices or other evidence of any Additional Expense(s), and reimbursement to the Town shall be made within thirty (30) days after presentation of such invoices or other evidence. Failure to comply with this subsection shall be grounds for denial of any application without prejudice, or revocation of any permit previously issued.  Reimbursement of the Town under this subsection shall be a condition for the endorsement of any plan, the issuance of any final permit, or the issuance of any certificate of zoning compliance for an approved application, or the renewal of any periodic or temporary approval, as the case may be. 
D. 	Post Approval Notices and Fees. The Town is authorized to place a notice of non-payment of review fees on the land records if any fees from pre-approval or post-approval non-staff reviews are not paid for a period of 90 days. 
§144.060 Periodic Updates of Fee Schedule 
The foregoing fees schedules are based upon an analysis of the expenses incurred, on average, in the processing of land use applications as of the date of passage of this Chapter. The First Selectman shall periodically examine the expenses incurred by the Town in the processing of land use applications, and shall make recommendations based on input from land use boards and commissions to the Board of Selectmen for adjustments to the foregoing fee schedules based upon current staffing, regulatory requirements, and other relevant factors. 
Borough of Jewett City 
Zoning Regulations 	40 Revised: August 1, 2017 

41 

S
U
B
D
I
V
I
S
I
O
N 
R
E
G
U
L
A
T
I
O
N
S 

FOR THE 

T
O
W
N 
O
F 
G
R
I
S
W
O
L
D
, 
C
O
N
N
E
C
T
I
C
U
T 
& 
T
H
E 
B
O
R
O
U
G
H 
O
F 
J
E
W
E
T
T 
C
I
T
Y
, 
C
O
N
N
E
C
T
I
C
U
T 


EFFECTIVE DATE: MARCH, 1972 
REVISED TO JUNE 01, 2015 
GRISWOLD PLANNING & ZONING COMMISSION 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 

SECTION PAGE 
SECTION 1 PREAMBLE.....................................................................................................1 

1.1 
Authority ......................................................................................................1 

1.2 
Policy ............................................................................................................1 

1.3 	Title ..............................................................................................................1 

SECTION 2 OPTIONAL SKETCH PLAN PREVIEW .................................................................1 

2.1 	Purpose .........................................................................................................1 

2.2 	Optional Sketch Plan Review..........................................................................1 

2.3 	Sketch Plan Contents .....................................................................................2 

2.4 	Commission Review .......................................................................................2 

2.5 	Review of Free Split Lot Documentation by Zoning Officer and/or Town Planner ..............................................................2 
SECTION 3 REQUIRED PROCEDURES ...............................................................................3 

3.1 	Submission ...................................................................................................3 

3.2 	Fee ...............................................................................................................3 

3.3 	Hearing .........................................................................................................3 

3.4 	Regional Planning Agency Referral .................................................................4 

3.5 	Wetlands Agency Referral ..............................................................................4 

3.6 	Approval........................................................................................................4 

3.6.1 Vote by the Commission ....................................................................4 

3.6.2 Final Approval ...................................................................................5 

3.7 	Posting of Performance Guarantee.................................................................5 

3.8 	Endorsement of the Plan ...............................................................................5 

3.9 	Filing the Plan ...............................................................................................6 

3.10 	Time Limit on Completion .............................................................................6 

3.11 	Acceptance of Roads .....................................................................................6 

3.12 	Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Plan ..........................................................7 

3.13 	Notice to Neighboring Municipalities .............................................................7 

3.14 	Street Numbers ............................................................................................7 

i 
SECTION 4 SUBDIVISION PLAN CONTENTS .......................................................................7 

4.1 
General Requirements ...................................................................................7 

4.2 
Key Map ........................................................................................................8 

4.3 
Boundary Survey Map....................................................................................8 

4.4 
Construction Plan ........................................................................................10 

4.5 
Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Plan .......................................................11 

4.6 
Soil Investigations .......................................................................................13 

4.7 Other Supporting Documents ......................................................................13 

4.8 Re-subdivision Plans ...................................................................................14 

SECTION 5 CONVENTIONAL SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS......................................14 

5.1 General .......................................................................................................14 

5.2 Lots ............................................................................................................14 

5.3 Streets ........................................................................................................15 

5.3.3 Cul-de-sac Requirements..................................................................15 

5.4 Drainage .....................................................................................................18 

5.5 Open Space ................................................................................................. 19 

5.5.1 Area ................................................................................................19 

5.5.2 Standards .......................................................................................19 

5.5.3 Fee–in–lieu of Open Space ..............................................................19 

5.5.4 Open Space Waiver .........................................................................21 

5.6 Pedestrian Easement ...................................................................................21 

5.7 Reserve Strips .............................................................................................21 

5.8 Flooding Considerations ...............................................................................22 

5.9 Floodway Encroachments ............................................................................22 

SECTION 6 CONSERVATION SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS......................................22 

6.1 General .......................................................................................................22 

6.1.1 Findings ..........................................................................................23 

6.2 
Allowable Density ........................................................................................23 

6.2.1 Density Yield Plan ...........................................................................23 

6.2.2 Bonus Lots ......................................................................................23 

6.3 
Lots .............................................................................................................23 

6.4 
Streets ........................................................................................................24 

ii 
6.5 
Drainage .....................................................................................................25 

6.6 
Open Space ................................................................................................. 26 

6.7 
Pedestrian Easement ...................................................................................27 

6.8 
Reserve Strips .............................................................................................27 

Flooding Considerations ..............................................................................27

6.9 
6.10 Floodway Encroachments ............................................................................28 

SECTION 7 IMPROVEMENTS .........................................................................................28 

7.1 Streets ........................................................................................................28 

7.2 Drainage .....................................................................................................28 

7.3 Monuments and Markers ............................................................................28 

7.4 Street Signs ................................................................................................. 28 

7.5 Utilities .......................................................................................................29 

7.6 Open Space ................................................................................................. 29 

7.7 Cleanup .......................................................................................................31 

7.8 Inspection and Approval of Work ................................................................32 

7.9 Revisions ....................................................................................................32 

7.10 Bond Release ...............................................................................................32 

SECTION 8 WAIVERS .....................................................................................................32 

8.1 Waivers ......................................................................................................32 

8.2 Authority for Waivers of Subdivision Requirements ......................................33 

SECTION 9 GENERAL .....................................................................................................33 

9.1 Amendments ..............................................................................................33 

9.2 Interpretation ..............................................................................................33 

9.3 Penalties ......................................................................................................33 

9.4 Validity ........................................................................................................33 

9.5 
Effective Date ..............................................................................................33 

9.6 
Temporary and Limited Moratoria from Residential Subdivisions /Re-subdivisions .....................................................................33 
SECTION  10 DEFINITIONS ................................................................................................34 

Applicant ....................................................................................................34 

Attorney ......................................................................................................34 

iii 
Building Lot ................................................................................................. 34 
Commission ................................................................................................34 
County Soil and Water Conservation District .................................................34 
Disturbed Area.............................................................................................34 
Erosion ........................................................................................................34 
First Selectman ............................................................................................34 
Improvements .............................................................................................34 
Land Surveyor ..............................................................................................34 
Net Buildable Area and Well Installations ....................................................34 
Non–Buildable Area ....................................................................................34 
Plan .............................................................................................................35 
Pedestrian Easement ...................................................................................35 
Re-subdivision .............................................................................................35 
Sediment .....................................................................................................35 
Side walk ....................................................................................................35 
Soil ..............................................................................................................35 
Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Plan ........................................................35 
Street ..........................................................................................................35 
Subdivision ..................................................................................................35 

APPENDIX 
A Town Ordinance of Fees for Land Use Application Processing & Review ....................... 
Fee Schedule ................................................................................................................. 
Maximum Fee: Calculation of Fee .............................................................................  
Additional Reimbursable Costs .................................................................................  
Fees Not in Lieu of Bonds ........................................................................................ 
Exemptions ............................................................................................................. 
Payment of Fees ............................................................................................................  
Periodic Updates of Fee Schedule ................................................................................... 

iv 
SECTION 1 – PREAMBLE 

1.1 	Authority. Pursuant to the authority conferred by Chapter 126 of the General Statutes of the State of Connecticut, the Planning and Zoning Commission adopts these Regulations controlling the subdivision and re-subdivision of land in the Town of Griswold. 
1.2 	Policy. It is declared to be the policy of the Planning and Zoning Commission to consider land subdivision as a part of a plan for the orderly, efficient, and economical development of the Town. This means, among other things, that land to be subdivided shall be of such character that it can be used for building purposes without danger to health and safety; that proper provision shall be made for water supply, surface-drainage and sewage disposal, especially in regard to existing or officially proposed municipal utility facilities; that the proposed streets shall be in harmony with existing or officially proposed principal thoroughfares, especially in regard to safe intersections with such thoroughfares, and so arranged and of such width as to provide an adequate and convenient system for present and prospective traffic needs; that, in places deemed proper by the Commission, open spaces for parks and playgrounds shall be shown on the subdivision plan; that undue density of population shall be avoided, especially where development would create an undue burden on municipal facilities; that adequate access to properties for emergency vehicles shall be provided; that adequate light and air shall be afforded to all properties; and that proper provision be made for the control of erosion and sedimentation. 
1.3 	Title. These Regulations shall be known as the Subdivision Regulations of the Town of Griswold, Connecticut, and shall be referred to herein as “these Regulations”/ 
SECTION 2 – OPTIONAL SKETCH PLAN REVIEW 
2.1 	Purpose. The subdivision of land is a complex procedure, usually involving action by several officials and agencies and frequently costing a lot of money. Therefore, persons intending to subdivide land in the Town of Griswold are urged to submit a sketch plan of the land to be subdivided and to discuss their intentions informally with the Commission prior to the preparation of the required plan. Presentation of a sketch plan is at the discretion of the applicant and is intended to ensure that basic requirements can be met prior to incurring engineering, legal and application costs related to the proposed subdivision. The informal review of the sketch plan affords both the Commission and the applicant an opportunity to gain information and raise questions about the subdivision, local regulations and procedures. The sketch plan enjoys no official status, and consent of the Commission with regard to its feasibility in no way implies approval of the formal subdivision plan. No fee or application form is required for the presentation of a sketch plan. 
2.2 	Effect of Optional Sketch Review. Neither the applicant nor the Commission shall be in any way bound by any statement made during the Optional Sketch Review consideration, nor shall the statement of any Commission member be deemed to be an indication of prejudgment or prejudice, it being acknowledged by the applicant that the Commission's responses, like the request itself, are preliminary and subject to further change and refinement. There shall be no vote or other formal action on any request for Optional Sketch Review consideration, other than referrals to other municipal, State, or Federal agencies for review and comment if deemed advisable by the Commission. (8/10/09) 
1 

2.3 	Sketch Plan Contents. The sketch plan should be drawn at a scale of at least one (1) inch equals 100 feet, and should show such information as will enable the Commission to locate the property, determine the physical characteristics of the property, and understand what the applicant proposes to do with the property. At least the following should be shown: 
1. 	
The property boundary and the names of abutting property owners. 

2. 	
Contour information. (These may be simple enlargements of U.S. Geological Survey topographic maps.) 

3. 	
Locations of existing structures, roads, easements, utility rights-of-way, rock outcrops, wetlands and watercourses. 

4. 	
Locations of proposed streets, building lots and open space. 

5. 	
Estimated total acreage of the parcel to be subdivided and the estimated size, in square feet, of each lot. 

6. 	
An indication of the proposed method of providing water supply and sewage disposal. 


2.4 	Commission Review. A presentation of a sketch plan to the Commission may be arranged by contacting the Chairman or Secretary of the Commission or the Zoning Enforcement Officer at least ten (10) days prior to a regularly scheduled meeting and requesting that the presentation be placed on the meeting agenda. The Commission shall discuss the proposal with the applicant and shall give its informal comments to the applicant not later than the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Commission. 
2.5 	Review of "Free–Split" lot documentation by Zoning Enforcement Officer and/or Town Planner. In order to avoid possible nonconformance to the zoning regulations, or to avoid the creation of illegal lots which would require some subdivision or resubdivision processes under these Regulations, no division of property, by map or deed, should be filed on the land records without compliance with this Section. Owners or their agents should certify by letter, the owner's basis for their entitlement for a "free–split" designation; and documentation including the status of the land prior to March 1971; and including the dimensions of the current parent parcel and "free split" parcel; and including the owners' or their agent's certification that the division is in compliance with zoning and subdivision regulations. The site plan for any “free–split” should not contain any notes indicating "remaining land" or other comparable wording for a parcel that does not comply with the Zoning Regulations of the Town of Griswold and these Regulations. (8/10/09) 
In the event that the status of the land division is unclear, the Planning Commission shall determine whether an existing division of land constitutes a subdivision or resubdivision under authority of Connecticut General Statute Section 8–26, or upon application to the commission by the owners or their agent. 
2 

SECTION 3 – REQUIRED PROCEDURES 

3.1 	Submission. Any person intending to make application for a subdivision of land in the Town of Griswold shall contact the Chairman or Secretary of the Commission or the Zoning Enforcement Officer at least ten (10) days prior to a scheduled meeting of the Commission and request that such application be placed on the meeting agenda. Copies of the plan as described in Section 4 of these Regulations shall be submitted to the Commission or the Zoning Enforcement Officer, along with a completed application form and the required fee. Application forms are available at the office of the Zoning Enforcement Officer. 
a. 	
The day of receipt of an application shall be the day of the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Commission immediately following the day of submission to the Commission or the Zoning Enforcement Officer of such application or thirty-five (35) days after such submission, whichever is sooner. 

b. 	
The Commission shall transmit two (2) copies of the plan to the Board of Selectmen or its designee who shall review and comment on the plan’s compliance with the Road Ordinance of the Town and shall recommend the amount of a bond to cover proposed improvements relating to the roads, drainage features and street signs. (8/10/09) 

c. 	
For subdivisions or re-subdivisions involving the construction of new streets, the applicant shall 


submit two copies of the plan to the !ssessor’s office for verification of new street names to 
avoid duplicate street names. 
3.2 	Fee. All applications shall be submitted with cash, check or money order made payable to the Treasurer, Town of Griswold, in an amount which is shown in the Land Use Fee Ordinance currently in force and amended from time to time to reflect reasonable fee increases. The current version of Section 144 is attached to this document as Appendix A. (8/10/09) 
a. 	In the case of a re-subdivision, the fee shall be based on the number of new lots created. However, in no case shall the fee be less than three hundred fifty ($350) dollars. 
3.3 	Hearing. The Commission may hold a public hearing regarding any subdivision proposal within sixty-five (65) days of the submission thereof if, in its judgment, the specific circumstances require such action. A public hearing shall be held for any subdivision involving more than five (5) lots, or a creation of a new street or road, or an extension to an existing street, or a reconfiguration in width, length or direction of an existing street. No plan or re-subdivision shall be approved by the Commission without a public hearing.  Whenever a subdivision/resubdivision application is filed with the Commission that requires a public hearing, or whenever the Commission deems it necessary to hold a public hearing for the application, the applicant shall, no later than 10 (ten) days prior to the date of the scheduled public hearing, send notices to all abutting property owners and all owners directly across the street from the applicant’s property by First lass Mail, with proof of such mailing to be evidenced by a certificate of mailing. Such ownership shall be as indicated on the most recent Grand List. Said notices shall contain the following information: (8/10/09) 
a. 	
A copy of the subdivision application filed with the Commission. 

b. 	
A copy of the subdivision site plan. If the site plan contains multiple sheets, the sheet that best describes the proposed project shall be forwarded. The copy may be reduced as long as the document is readable. 

c. 	
A narrative describing the proposed subdivision/resubdivision. 

d. 	
A copy of the legal notice giving the date, time, and place of the public hearing. 


3 

Notice of a hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the Town at least twice at intervals of not less than two (2) days; the first not more than fifteen (15) days, nor less than ten (10) days, and the last not less than two (2) days prior to the date of such hearing, and by sending a copy thereof by registered or certified mail to the applicant. The Commission shall close the public hearing no more than thirty-five (35) days after its opening. 
3.4 	Regional Planning Agency Referral. Whenever a subdivision of land is planned, the area of which will abut or include land in another municipality, the Commission shall, before approving the plan, submit it to the regional planning agency or agencies of the region or regions within which it is located. The regional planning Commission or agencies receiving such referral shall, within thirty-five (35) days report to the Commission and to the applicant its findings on the inter-municipal aspects of the proposed subdivision. If such report of a regional planning Commission is not submitted within thirty-five (35) days after the referral from the Commission, it shall be presumed that such agency does not disapprove of the proposed subdivision. The regional planning Commission's report shall be purely advisory. (8/10/09) 
3.5 	Wetlands Agency Referral. If the proposed subdivision or re-subdivision involves land regulated as an inland wetland or watercourse under the provisions of Chapter 440 of the General Statutes, the applicant shall submit an application to the Griswold Inland Wetlands Commission no later than the day the application is filed for subdivision or re-subdivision approval with the Griswold Planning and Zoning Commission. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall not render a decision until the Inland Wetlands Commission has submitted a report with its final decision to the Planning and Zoning Commission. In making its decision, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall give due consideration to the report of the Griswold Inland Wetlands Commission.  
3.5.1 	The Commission may notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the Water Resources Unit of the Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection, prior to approving any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit copies of such notices to the Federal Insurance Administrator. (8/10/09) 
3.6 	Approval 
3.6.1 	Vote by the Commission. The Commission shall vote to approve, modify and approve, or disapprove any subdivision application or maps and plans submitted therewith within sixty-five (65) days after the public hearing thereon or, if no public hearing is held within sixty-five (65) days after the receipt thereof. Notice of the decision of the Commission shall be published in a newspaper having a substantial circulation in the municipality and addressed by certified mail to the applicant by its secretary or clerk, under his signature within fifteen (15) days after such decision has been rendered. Provided, however, an extension of time not to exceed a further period of sixty-five (65) days, in total, may be had with the consent of the applicant for all of the time limits for the opening of a public hearing, closing of a public hearing, or time to act on an application. 
4 

3.6.2 	Final Approval. The Commission shall give approval to the application if it finds it conforms to the requirements of these regulations and the Zoning Regulations. Unless provided otherwise by Statute, any such final approval shall lapse on the date, not more than five (5) years from the date of final approval was granted, if the subdivision is not completed by that date, provided, however, that the final approval may, upon request by the applicant, be renewed by the Commission at its discretion for not more than five (5) years from the expiration of the initial approval period. (8/10/09) 
3.7 	Posting of Performance Guarantee. Prior to endorsement of the plan, the Commission shall require from the applicant a cash bond or an irrevocable letter of credit securing to the Town of Griswold the installation and maintenance of any erosion and sedimentation control plan approved in accordance with Section 4.5 of these Regulations and any measures to be taken to control soil erosion and sedimentation likely to occur from the proposed subdivision. Prior to the sale of any lot in the subdivision, the Commission shall require from the applicant a cash bond or an irrevocable letter of credit in a form reviewed and approved by the Town Attorney with conditions satisfactory to the Commission and it securing to the Town of Griswold the actual construction and installation of all improvements as required by these Regulations, including the construction of streets, drainage features, street signs, the installation of monuments and markers, the grading and improvement of recreation facilities, and clean up of the premises. The amount of the bond shall be determined by the Commission after consultation with the First Selectman. The restriction on sale of lots prior to the posting of a bond shall be enforced by a restriction in a form reviewed and approved by the Town Attorney, which restriction shall be filed prior to the endorsement of the subdivision plan in accordance with Section 3.8 of these Regulations. (8/10/09) (03/21/2013) 
3.8 	Endorsement of the Plan. If the Commission votes to approve a plan, or modify and approve a plan, its approval with the date thereof, together with a statement of any modifications applying to such approval, shall be endorsed and signed by the Chairman or Secretary of the Commission in the space provided for such purpose on one (1) Mylar copies of the plan provided by the applicant. In addition to the above, the applicant shall provide three (3) paper copies of the endorsed plan. (8/10/09) 
Endorsement of the Final Subdivision Plan. When the Commission approves a subdivision application without required modifications or conditions, signed plans shall be delivered by the Commission to the Applicant for filing with the Griswold Town Clerk not more than Thirty days after the time for taking an appeal from the action of the Commission has elapsed; or when the Commission approves, with modifications, and/or conditions, signed plans shall be delivered by the Commission to the applicant for filing with the Town Clerk, not more than thirty days after the revised plans modified in accordance with the Commission's approval, are delivered to the Commission, (8/10/09) 
The plans shall bear the seal of the surveyor and the engineer, and a certification that they are substantially correct to the degree of accuracy shown thereon, and shall be Mylar film or its equivalent or as updated from time or any other material approved by the Town Clerk and shall be 36 inches long and 24 inches wide. The final plans shall be accompanied by any documents required by these Regulations such as bonds, road deeds, liens, conservation and drainage easement and the like. (8/10/09) 
Any conveyance to the town of Griswold shall be accompanied by a current Certificate of Title, prepared by an attorney admitted to the bar of the State of Connecticut, and certifying that such conveyance is free and clear of, or subordinated to, any mortgage lien, restriction or other 
5 

encumbrance. The final plan shall contain a statement pursuant to C.G.S. 8-26c of the date when approval of the subdivision shall expire for failure to complete all work. (8/10/09) 
3.9 	Filing of the Plan. Alteration of Subdivision Plan Before or After Filing with Town Clerk: If the Final Subdivision Plan is altered, changed, erased, or revised in any way before or after the time the Plan is filed with the Town Clerk, the approval shall be void unless the Amended Subdivision has been approved by the Commission and a new Plan is endorsed and filed with the Town Clerk. (8/10/09) 
One of the endorsed Mylar copies of the plan shall be filed by the applicant in the office of the Griswold Town Clerk and any plan no so filed within ninety (90) days of the date such plan is delivered to the applicant or within ninety (90) days of the date upon which such plan is taken as approved by reason of the failure of the Commission to act, shall become null and void, except that the Commission may extend the time for such filing for two (2) additional periods of ninety (90 days and the plan shall remain valid until the expiration of such extended time. (8/10/09) 
3.10 	Time Limit on Completion. Unless provided otherwise by Statute any person, firm or corporation making any subdivision of land shall complete all work in connection with such subdivision within five (5) years after the approval of the plan for such subdivision, which completion date shall be noted on the plan by the Chairman or Secretary of the Commission at the time of endorsement of the approved plan. 
3.10.1 	Failure to complete all work within such five-year period shall result in automatic expiration of the approval of such plan, and no additional lots shall be conveyed in the subdivision by the subdivider except with approval by the Commission of a new application for subdivision of the subject land. If lots have been conveyed during such five-year period, the Commission shall call the bond or other surety on said subdivision to the extent necessary to complete 
work required to serve those lots/ “Work” for purposes of this section means all physical 
improvements required by the approval of the plan, other than the staking out of lots, and includes but is not limited to the construction of roads, storm drainage facilities and water and sewer lines, the setting aside of open space and recreation areas, installation of telephone and electric services, planting of trees or other landscaping, and installation of retaining walls or other structures, as may be required by these Regulations. 
3.11 	Acceptance of Roads. When all improvements relating to a subdivision road have been completed, the applicant shall request from the Board of Selectman that a Town Meeting be scheduled to accept said road in accordance with the requirements and procedures of Griswold Town Ordinance Section 202, Article V, as amended. The applicant shall provide the Board of Selectmen with three 
(3) copies of as-built plans of the road and related improvements at the time of the request in all instances where the actual construction varied from the originally approved plans. 
3.11.1 	The Board of Selectmen shall notify the Commission of such request and provide the Commission with one (1) copy of the as-built plans for the road where appropriate. The Commission shall examine the as-built plans for consistency with the approved plan of subdivision and report its findings to the Board of Selectmen within thirty-five (35) days after being notified by said Board. 
6 

3.11.2 	The Board of Selectmen shall examine the road for consistency with the construction plans or as-built plans, as appropriate, and shall call a Town Meeting for action on acceptance of the road, provided the date of such meeting shall be no sooner than thirty-five (35) days after the notice to the Commission of the request for acceptance. 
3.12 	Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Plan. A soil erosion and sediment control plan shall be submitted with any subdivision application for development when the disturbed area of such development is cumulatively more than one-half (1/2) acre. The soil erosion and sediment control plan shall be submitted pursuant to Section 4.5 of these Regulations and be consistent with the CTDEP Soil and Erosion Control Manual dated 2002 or as amended from time to time. The Commission, in its sole discretion, shall determine what constitutes the size of the disturbed area. (8/10/09) 
3.13 	Notice to Neighboring Municipalities. The Commission shall notify the clerk of any adjoining municipality of the pendency of any subdivision or re-subdivision on any site when: 
3.13.3 	!ny part of the property affected by the ommission’s decision is within 500 feet of the 
adjoining municipality; 
3.13.4 	A significant portion of the traffic to the completed project will use streets within the adjoining municipality to enter or exit the site; 
3.13.5 	A significant portion of the sewer or water drainage from the project on the site will flow through and significantly impact the drainage or sewer system within the adjoining municipality; or 
3.13.6 	Water runoff from the improved site will impact streets or other municipal or private property within the adjoining municipality. 
Such notice shall be made by mail and shall be mailed within seven (7) days of the date of receipt of the subdivision or re-subdivision application. A representative from the adjoining municipality may appear and be heard at any hearing on any such subdivision or re-subdivision. 
3.14 	Street Numbers. On all approved subdivisions and re-subdivisions, the applicant shall submit a one-inch equals 100 feet (1” = 100’) 11 x 17 inch paper copy of the approved plan (the original of which shall be 24 x 36 inches) to the !ssessor’s Office for the assignment of street numbers. (8/10/09) 
SECTION 4 -SUBDIVISION PLAN CONTENTS 
4.1 	General Requirements. Ten (10) copies of all maps, plans and profiles shall be submitted with the application, and unless otherwise permitted by these Regulations, conform to Class A-2 standards for accuracy as defined in “Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies, Section 20-300b-1 through 20-3006-20” as amended from time to time/ They shall be presented on good-quality white paper prints and shall be no larger than thirty-six (36) by twenty-four (24) inches in size. All such prints shall have a one-half (1/2) inch border on three (3) sides and a two (2) inch border on the left side. If more than one (1) sheet is submitted, they shall be bound. All such prints shall bear the following information: (8/10/09) 
4.1.1 	The name or title of the subdivision and the words, “Griswold, onnecticut”/ 
7 

4.1.2 	The name of the subdivider and owner of the property. 
4.1.3 	North point, scale, date of survey, and date of drawing and dates and subject matter of all subsequent revisions. (8/10/09) 
4.1.4 	Where only a part of the subdivision is shown on the sheet, a key map shall show its location in relation to the whole subdivision. 
4.1.5 	Name, registration number, and seal of land surveyor or engineer who prepared the drawing. 
4.1.6 	A parcel history and a parcel map or inset showing and documenting the origin and previous division procedures, if any, to the parcel status in March 1971 to the present parcel subject to subdivision or resubdivision approval. This parcel history, and parcel map should be signed and certified by a licensed land surveyor and/or attorney. (8/10/09) 
4.2 	Key Map. The key map shall be at a scale not smaller than one inch equals 2,000 feet (1”= 2,000’) and shall show the location of the proposed subdivision and all existing roads and watercourses within 2,000 feet of it. If space permits, the key map may be included as an insert map on the boundary survey map. The key map may be a simple tracing of the area from a U.S. Geological Survey topographic map. 
4.3 	Boundary Survey Map. This map shall show the entire parcel at a scale of at least one inch equals one hundred feet, (1” = 100’) although a scale of one inch equals fifty feet (1” = 50’) or one inch equals forty feet (1” = 40’) will also be acceptable/ If the property to be subdivided contains more than ten (10) acres and less than half of it is to be divided into new building lots, only that portion of the property to be divided into building lots shall be required to be surveyed to conform to the Class A-2 standards referred to in Section 4.1, above. The boundaries for the remainder of the property may be taken from the !ssessor’s Maps for the Town of Griswold/ The boundary survey map shall show the following: 
4.3.1 	North point, scale, date of survey, date of initial drawing and subsequent dates of revisions and change descriptions made to the plans. 
4.3.2 	Boundaries, dimensions and acreage of the property to be subdivided. 
4.3.3 	Boundaries of properties and names of property owners within 100 feet of the proposed new building lots. 
4.3.4 	Locations and designations of all wetlands and watercourses including seventy–five (75) feet onto the adjoining property and rock outcroppings. (8/10/09) 
4.3.5 	Boundaries, dimensions, bearings, area in square feet, and lot numbers of all proposed lots. (Lot areas may be shown in tabular form on the same sheet.) 
4.3.6 	All existing buildings, stonewalls. Type of construction and state of repair of all stonewalls (abandoned walls, heritage walls, or recent and rebuilt walls) shall also be described on the plan sheets. (8/10/09) 
8 

4.3.7 	All existing monuments, pipe markers and other physical evidence concerning property boundaries. Where new markers are established, they shall be referenced to established points of the Connecticut State Plane Coordinate System, unless the applicant can show, in writing and to the satisfaction of the Commission that such reference would be an unreasonable hardship because of distance or topographic problems. 
4.3.8 	Locations of all existing and proposed easements, rights-of-way, drainage rights and open spaces. 
4.3.9 	Locations of street rights-of-way, bearings, curve data, including arc length, radii and central angles, street names, pavement widths, stations along centerlines at one hundred (100) foot intervals, and locations of sidewalks and street pavement within the rights-of-way. 
4.3.10 	Contour lines at five (5) foot intervals, where the general slope exceeds ten percent (10%), and at two (2) foot intervals for lesser slopes. Elevations shall be referenced to U.S. Geological Survey datum. 
4.3.11 	Locations of lots, open space, easements, rights-of-way, boundary or lot frontage stonewalls to be retained, new location and construction details/cross section for stonewalls to be relocated, and rights to drain. Refer to Zoning Regulation Section 21 for construction and configuration details describing abandoned walls, heritage walls, or recent/rebuilt walls. (8/10/09) 
4.3.12 	Street names of existing and proposed streets. 
4.3.13 	All applications for subdivisions (including manufactured home parks and subdivisions) greater than five (5) acres or fifty (50) lots (whichever is less) shall include with such applications base flood (100-year flood) elevation data for that portion of the subdivision which permits the construction of buildings and which is located within A Zones on the Town’s Flood Insurance Rate Map, dated January 3, 1985, or any subsequent revision thereof. (1/1/93) 
4.3.14 	The words “!pproved by the Griswold Planning and Zoning ommission” with designated spaces provided for the date and signature of the Chairman or Secretary of the Commission and where an Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Conservation Commission permit was required, a signature space and date for the Chairman/Secretary of the Inlands Wetlands and Watercourses Conservation Commission. (8/10/09) 
4.3.15 	The words “Date of ompletion of all work” with designated space for the date and initials of the Chairman or Secretary of the Commission, the Chairman of the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Conservation Commission, and the date when public improvements must be completed shall be included in a signature block located on the boundary survey plan or plans that show all lots involved in the subdivision/resubdivision process. 
4.3.16 	Line of Sight Measurements for Driveways Serving All Lots. The applicant shall show either by a table or by notes on the boundary survey plan for each driveway location the measured line of sight distance and the necessary clearing or grading to achieve the minimum sight distances suggested by Conn DOT standards for the level of use of the road accessed by this driveway. (8/10/09) 
9 

4.4 	Construction Plan. A Construction Plan, drawn at a scale of one inch equals forty feet (1” = 40 feet’) shall be submitted when any type of construction, such as roads, drainage, water supply or sewer systems, retaining walls, etc., is to be carried out in connection with the subdivision. The construction plan shall be prepared by a Connecticut registered professional engineer. The construction of all new streets and required improvements to existing town streets shall be in conformance with the current Road Ordinance of the Town of Griswold or as amended from time to time. All other construction shall be in accordance with Form 815 or the most current edition of the onnecticut Department of Transportation, ureau of Highways “Standard Specifications for Roads, ridges, and Incidental onstruction” and any supplements and amendments thereof unless otherwise specifically provided by these Regulations. The construction plan shall include the following where applicable: 
4.4.1 	Plan and profile for all proposed streets and required improvements to existing town streets, showing: 
a. 	
Existing surface elevation along the centerline. 

b. 	
Locations, proposed grades, vertical curves with centerline elevations every fifty (50) feet, except that such information shall be provided at ten (10) foot intervals within eighty (80) feet of the centerline cross point of an intersection. 

c. 	
Location, size and invert elevations of existing and proposed storm drains, catch basins, manholes, bridges, culverts, outfalls, and other drainage features. 

d. 	
Location, size and invert elevations of proposed sewers, if any. 

e. 	
Location and size of all water supply and distribution facilities and hydrants. 

f. 	
Cross-sections at 100-foot intervals where existing terrain slopes more than ten percent (10%). 

g. 	
Sidewalk location, if any. 

h. 	
Locations of street signs, trees and other special landscape features to be installed by the applicant. 


4.4.2 	Where drainage systems are to be constructed, one copy of the construction plan shall be suitably marked to show watershed data used in the design of such systems and shall be accompanied by all calculations used in the drainage design, including easements, rights-of­way and rights to drain. 
Drainage systems for stormwater shall encourage low impact design (LID) techniques and be consistent with the 2004 CTDEP Stormwater Management Manual or its amendments from time to time, unless site topographic or soil infiltration conditions preclude their use. 
10 

4.4.3 	In the case of retaining walls or other special features, such as stone walls to be preserved, relocated and/or reconstructed, a drawing to a scale of one-half (1/2) inch equals one (1) foot of all such details shall be furnished. Stonewalls shall be classified on the site plans as abandoned walls, heritage walls, or recent/rebuilt walls described in the Zoning Regulation Section 21. 
4.5 	Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Plan. If the proposed subdivision will result in the disturbance of more than one-half (1/2) acre of land, the applicant will submit as part of the subdivision plan, a Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Plan that contains proper provisions to adequately control stormwater runoff in the proposed subdivision based on the best available technology. Such principles, methods, and practices necessary for certification are found in the “onnecticut Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment ontrol” (2002) as amended, available from the Natural Resources Center of the Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection. Alternative principles, methods and practices may be used with prior approval of the Commission. 
4.5.1 	The Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Plan shall include the following: 
(a) 	A narrative describing: 
1. 	
The development; 

2. 	
The schedule for grading and construction activities including: 

A. 	Start and completion dates; 
B. 	Sequence of grading and construction activities; 
C. 	Sequence for installation and/or application of soil erosion and sediment control measures; 
D. 	Sequence for final stabilization of project site. 

3. 	
The design criteria for proposed soil erosion and sediment control measures and stormwater management facilities. 

4. 	
The construction details and the installation and/or application procedures for proposed soil erosion and sediment control measures and stormwater management facilities. 

5. 	
The operations and maintenance program for proposed soil erosion and sediment control measures and stormwater management facilities. 


(b) A map meeting the scale requirements of Section 4.3, showing: 
1. 	
The location of the proposed development and adjacent properties; 

2. 	
The existing and proposed topography including soil types, wetlands, watercourses and water bodies; 

3. 	
The existing structures on the project site, if any; 

4. 	
The proposed area alterations including cleared, excavated, filled or graded areas and proposed structures, utilities, roads and, if applicable, new property lines; 

5. 	
The location of and design details for all proposed soil erosion and sediment control measures and stormwater management facilities; 

6. 	
The sequence of grading and construction activities; 

7. 	
The sequence for installation and/or application of soil erosion and sediment control measures; 

8. 	
The sequence for final stabilization of the development site; 

9. 	
The words “ertified by the Griswold Planning and Zoning ommission” with 


11 

designated space for the date and signature of the Chairman or Secretary of the Commission. 
(c) 	A separate site plan/profile sheet(s), showing proposed temporary erosion and sedimentation control measures while the road/drainage improvements are under construction, shall be filed for review and approval. This sheet may form the substance of the temporary stormwater plan for the CTDEP General Permit. (8/10/09) 
4.5.2 	The narrative required in Section 4.5.1(a) may be included on the map of Section 4.5.1(b) if room allows it without affecting readability of the map. The items required to be mapped in Section 4.5.1(b) may be depicted on the subdivision plan map required in Section 4.3 if the readability of the subdivision plan is not affected. 
4.5.3 	After review of the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Plan by the Commission or its designated agent, the Commission shall vote to certify, modify and certify, or deny that the soil erosion and sediment control plan complies with these Regulations. A vote by the Commission to approve a subdivision plan shall mean certification of the erosion and sediment control plan as well. Prior to certification, any subdivision plan submitted to the Commission may be reviewed by the New London County Soil and Water Conservation District, which may make recommendations concerning such plan, provided such review shall be completed within thirty (30) days of receipt of such plan by the New London County Soil and Water Conservation District. 
4.5.4 	The estimated costs of measures required to control soil erosion and sedimentation, as specified in the certified plan, shall be secured by a partial or full cash bond or other assurance acceptable to the Commission in accordance with the provisions specified under Section 3.7 of these Regulations. 
12 

4.5.5 	The Commission or its designated agent shall periodically conduct inspections to verify compliance with the certified plan and that control measures are properly performed or installed and maintained. The Commission may require the applicant to submit progress reports which show that soil erosion and sediment control measures and facilities have been performed or installed according to the certified plan and are being correctly operated and maintained. 
4.6 	Soil Investigations. Any subdivision or part thereof for which a public sewage disposal system is not available shall be subject to the following requirements: 
4.6.1 	Soil percolation test holes shall be taken as requested by the Director of Health and certified by him to be satisfactory for on-lot sewage disposal. 
4.6.2 	At least two (2) percolation test holes per lot shall be required. Such test holes shall be located not closer than 100 feet from each other. The results of such tests shall be listed in tabular form by lots and made part of the Subdivision Plan. 
4.6.3 	In investigating soil conditions, observation pits may be required to check for ground water, ledge rock, or available good seepage soil below normal depths. 
4.6.4 	Soils must have an acceptable percolation rate, without interference from ground water or impervious strata below the level of the absorption system. The technical standards for determining acceptance shall be the State Sanitary Health Code. 
4.7 	Other Supporting Documents. Before approval of any subdivision, the Commission shall require the following: 
4.7.1 	Evidence of permits for activities that might be controlled by the Griswold Inland Wetlands & Watercourses and Conservation Commission. 
4.7.2 	Where applicable, written statements attesting to the suitability of (1) water and sewer systems from the Jewett City Water Company and Griswold Sewer Authority and/or the Director of Health, and/or the Southeastern Connecticut Water Authority under provisions of Section 13 of Special Act 381 (1967), as amended, and (2) all other improvements such as road, drainage and monuments from the First Selectman. 
4.7.3 	The subdivider shall submit to the Commission written copies of all agreements, restrictive covenants, or other documents governing the use, reservation, or maintenance of all land. 
4.7.4 	When the subdivision includes any portion of a watercourse that is located within an A Zone on the Flood Hazard Boundary Map for Griswold and the subdivision would result in the alteration or relocation of that watercourse, the applicant shall submit assurance in writing that the flood-carrying capacity of the watercourse will be maintained. 
4.7.5 	Review letter from State Archeologist. Subdivision or resubdivision site plans, which include more than 10 acres, shall be forwarded by the applicant to the State Archeologist on or before the date of submittal of the application to the commission, with a request for review regarding significant historical or cultural resources which may be located on the parcel to be subdivided. The applicant must submit a copy of their letter with certified mail receipt. 
13 

Before approval, the Applicant shall submit for consideration by the Commission a letter from the State Archeologist with the conclusions or recommendations for site plan revisions to protect real or likely historical or cultural resources, or the results of an investigation by a consulting archaeologist where such investigation is recommended by the State Archeologist. When the applicant demonstrates that the State Archeologist has had thirty days or more to provide such letter, the commission can consider a lack of response as a “no effect” decision/ (8/10/09) 
4.8 	Re-subdivision Plans. The information required to be submitted under Sections 4.1 through 4.7, above, of these Regulations shall apply to both subdivisions and re-subdivisions, except that for re-subdivisions, the information submitted need not cover that area of the original subdivision unaffected by the re-subdivision. 
SECTION 5 – CONVENTIONAL SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS 
5.1 	General. The design of the subdivision shall show consideration of and respect for the natural landscape. Designs shall be aimed at fitting the subdivision to the land rather than altering the land to make it fit the subdivision. 
5.2 	Lots. All lots shall front on and provide driveway access to an existing street or one proposed by the subdivision plan. (3/1/05) 
5.2.1 	Wherever possible, side lot lines shall be at right angles to the street and radial to curves and lots shall be generally four–sided and largely rectangular in shape consistent with zoning regulations that proscribe a minimum lot width of 100 feet at any point except for a rear lot and a common driveway to a rear lot and contain a net buildable area of 30,000 contiguous square feet. (8/10/09) 
5.2.2 	Lot sizes and street frontage requirements shall conform to the Zoning Regulations of the Town of Griswold. 
5.2.3 	Locations of proposed principal buildings, driveways, water supplies and sewage disposal systems shall be shown on all lots containing wetlands, watercourses, slopes in excess of ten percent (10%), ledge outcrops or shallow to bedrock soils. 
5.2.4 	To the maximum extent possible, lots shall be arranged in a manner that provides the best opportunity for the use of solar energy in buildings subsequently constructed on them. As a general rule, lot arrangement should enable principal buildings to be situated so that their longest axis lies in an east/west direction, so as to expose the front or rear of the building to the south. Attention should be given to ensuring that projected building locations are not shaded by topographic features or by buildings on adjoining properties. 
5.2.5 	Driveways shall be designed so that the final grade does not exceed fifteen percent (15%). Driveways with ten percent (10%) to fifteen percent (15%) grades shall be paved with concrete or bituminous concrete for that portion or portions of the driveway between 10 percent and 15 percent slope with an additional twenty–five (25) feet to be paved on both ends of that driveway segment. (8/10/09) 
14 

5.2.6 	Up to two–tiers of rear lots behind the frontage lots, may be proposed only in R–60 and R– 80 zoning districts. With one tier of rear lots, each rear lot shall have at least a 50-foot access strip to the road frontage. With two tiers of rear lots, a minimum frontage access strip for each lot of 30 feet is required. Rear lots are encouraged to have common driveways whose length for the common portion shall have a maximum length of 1000 feet for 1 and 2 tiers. (8/10/09) 
5.2.7 	All land shall be in the form of zoning compliant lots conforming to the requirements of the underlying zoning district or that have obtained appropriated variances from the Zoning 
oard of !ppeals-there shall be no notes describing lots as “remaining land” on any 
subdivision site plans. (8/10/09) 
5.3 	Streets. Streets shall be in harmony with existing streets and highways in the Town of Griswold, especially in regard to safe intersections, and shall be constructed to effect the safest possible movement of pedestrian and vehicular traffic. (3/1/05) 
5.3.1 	All proposed new streets shall connect with one or more approved town streets or state highways, except that any part of an approved subdivision containing more than thirty (30) residential lots shall have at least two (2) points of access. (3/1/05) 
5.3.2 	Streets shall be laid out to provide connections with existing streets on adjacent properties, where appropriate. Consideration shall be given to connecting with future streets on adjacent property where future subdivision appears possible under current zoning and subdivision regulations. (8/10/09) 
5.3.3 (a) 	A dead-end street for subdivisions shall be provided with a circular turn-around area at the closed end. For subdivisions which are being developed in phases, a temporary cul­de-sac shall be provided at the closed end of the dead-end street in each phase of the subdivision. Upon the extension of the dead-end street, or the interconnection of the dead-end street to another street, the temporary cul-de-sac shall be removed and the area which accommodated that portion of the temporary cul-de-sac exterior to the continuation of the street, shall be loamed and seeded in accordance with the requirements of these Regulations. 
For subdivisions in residential districts and containing residential lots, shall have a radius of fifty (50') feet and a paved radius of not less than forty (40') feet. Such streets, in residential districts and containing residential lots, will be permitted only where an alternative street layout is deemed by the Commission to be impractical because of the dimensions, shape or physical condition of the property. 
A dead-end street for residential districts and containing residential lots shall not exceed six hundred (600') feet in length unless it is of a temporary nature; and it is demonstrated to the Commission that it can reasonably be expected to be extended and to interconnect with an existing or proposed road on adjoining land or where it would otherwise be impractical to develop the property; in which event, the Commission may extend the maximum dead-end street length for streets in residential districts containing residential lots to up to one thousand two hundred (1,200') feet. Except as provided in Section 5.3.3(b) hereof, a dead-end street shall not exceed one thousand two hundred (1,200') feet. 
15 

Except as provided in Section 5.3.3(b), hereof, no street shall be extended from an existing dead-end street if the farthest point of the new dead-end street exceeds one thousand two hundred, (1,200') feet from a road with an alternative route of access; provided, however, that if this prohibition results in the deprivation of any reasonable development of the subject property to the point that approaches an unconstitutional taking, the Commission may grant a waiver in accordance with Section 8.1 of these Regulations. 
(b) 	
The Commission shall have the right to approve dead-end streets in industrially or commercially zoned subdivisions with industrial and/or commercial lots which exceed one thousand two hundred (1,200') feet in length. In granting such approval, the Commission shall consider the following factors: 

(i) 	
Whether the lots in such subdivision have access to a public water supply for fire suppression purposes, which can be installed in accordance with the technical requirements of the public water system provider; 

(ii) 	
Whether the circular turn-around at the closed end of the dead-end street can accommodate a radius of not less than sixty (60') feet with a paved radius of not less than fifty (50') feet; 


(iii) 	Whether the Commission has received a recommendation from the Town of Griswold Economic Development Commission that the proposed dead-end street length will promote economic development within the Town of Griswold; 
(iv) 	
Whether the Commission has received a review by the senior public safety official of the Town of Griswold indicating that the proposed dead-end street makes adequate provision for access and circulation of emergency vehicles. 

(v) 	
Whether the developer of the proposed dead-end street demonstrates to the Commission that there is a reasonable likelihood that the dead-end street can, in the future, be extended to interconnect with another existing or proposed road or street; and, in conjunction therewith, the subdivider proposes the dedication of an access strip from the termination of the initial phase or phases of the subdivision and extends the dead-end street to the subdivision property line in the final phase for the future road interconnection to the property line of the property being subdivided; and 

(vi) 	
Whether the horizontal and vertical geometry of the proposed dead-end street is sufficient to comply with AASHTO minimum site line requirements for the proposed access intersection for each lot in the subdivision to the dead-end street. 



(c) 	
In subdivisions of industrially or commercially zoned lots which contain dead-end streets which exceed one thousand two hundred (1,200') feet from a road with an alternative route of access, the Commission may require the Applicant to provide an alternative means of ingress and egress for emergency vehicles to lots within such subdivision and to reasonably improve any such required emergency access drive to facilitate access by such emergency vehicles to lots within such industrially or commercially zoned subdivision. 

(d) 	
In commercially or industrially zoned subdivisions with industrial and/or commercial lots with dead-end streets, the Commission may require that the Applicant design and obtain approval of a continuation of such dead-end street to a state or municipal road or street in situations in which (i) the Applicant, alone or in combination with other parties filing simultaneous subdivision applications, controls the land required for such future interconnection and (ii) the Commission deems such future interconnection prudent based upon the scope and intended uses of the commercially or industrially zoned subdivision. Where the Applicant does not control the land required for such future interconnection, the Commission may require that the subdivision street be designed to the property line, as described above, and constructed in conjunction with the final phase of the land being subdivided. 

(e) 	
In the design of all cul-de-sacs, the subdivider shall dedicate an easement thirty (30') feet in width and twenty (20') feet in depth to the Town of Griswold at the terminus of the cul-de-sac for snow storage as indicated on Exhibit 5.3 .3a, which easement area shall be granted to the Town of Griswold contemporaneously with the conveyance of the dead-end street to the municipality. In addition, no shrubbery, irrigation system, landscaping other than lawn area, stone wall, fence or other obstruction shall be placed in the area between the pavement edge and the street property line around the entire circumference of a cul-de-sac and this restriction shall be noted on the record subdivision plan for such dead-end streets. 

(f) 	
The Commission shall have the discretion to require, as a component of any subdivision application in which the proposed dead-end street length exceeds one thousand two hundred (1,200') feet, a traffic study performed by a professional engineer licensed in the State of Connecticut engaged in the discipline of traffic analysis, determining that the roadway standards proposed in the subdivision application are sufficient to accommodate anticipated traffic generation and turning movements based upon the anticipated build-out of the commercial or industrial subdivision. 

(g) 	
In commercial and/or industrial subdivisions, the Commission shall have the discretion to require street pavement widths for dead-end streets greater than twenty-eight (28') feet but not exceeding thirty-four (34') feet based upon the intended street geometry, trip generation and anticipated uses for the subdivision. 


16 

5.3.4 	The tangent distance between reverse curves shall not be less than fifty (50) feet. Except for intersections and turn-a-rounds on dead-end streets, no curve shall have a radius of less than one hundred (100) feet, as measured radial to the centerline. 
5.3.5 	Except where impractical because of topography or other conditions, streets shall be perpendicular to intersections for a distance of at least one hundred (100) feet. All corners shall be rounded, with a radius of not less than twenty-five (25) feet. Centerlines of alternate side streets shall not be closer than one hundred twenty-five (125) feet, measured along the centerline. Wherever a proposed subdivision street intersects with a state highway or major Town road, a minimum sight distance of three hundred fifty (350) feet shall be required in each direction along the state highway or major Town road. 
17 

5.3.6 	If authorized by Statute, whenever any subdivision is proposed for land accessible only by an unpaved street or an existing Town street which does not conform with minimum requirements of grade, alignment, width and construction set forth in these Regulations or the Road Ordinance of the Town of Griswold, and the Commission determines that approval of the subdivision plan would be contrary to the public safety unless such street was altered or improved where it fronts the proposed subdivision or beyond the limits of the proposed subdivision, as long as the road section within those limits is deemed directly impacted by the creation of the subdivision, the Commission may disapprove such plan or may condition its approval upon alteration of such street within those said impacted limits by and at the expense of the subdivider, as long as it is reasonable and necessary to maintain the health and safety of the public, or may disapprove such plan until the Board of Selectmen has authorized expenditures for such improvements.  (3/1/05) (8/10/09) 
5.3.7 	Where such improvement from the centerline is impractical, the Commission may require, if authorized by Statute, improvements of comparable value to be performed along the existing road frontage of the subdivision or adjacent frontage impacted by the subdivision. In the alternative, the Commission may require that the cost of such improvements shall be paid to the Board of Selectmen, or its designated agent, in lieu of the completion of such improvements by the applicant. Such payment shall be held in a separate fund to be used exclusively for the improvement of the subject street in ways, which directly benefit the future owners of lots in the subdivision. (3/1/05) (8/10/09) 
5.3.8 	In making the determinations set forth in the preceding two paragraphs, the Commission 
shall take into account the street’s ability to handle the increased volumes of traffic which 
will be generated by the proposed subdivision; the ability of school buses and emergency vehicles to travel the street safely to serve the new lots in the subdivision in view of the additional traffic caused by the new subdivision;the drainage conditions of the street and the impact of the new lots and related improvements on the existing stormwater management systems or the need for expansion or improvement of such systems; the impact of proposed driveways on the existing street, including sight lines, drainage impacts, required grading, and safe access; the projected pedestrian traffic from the lots and the anticipated pedestrian improvement between them; and generally the impact of the subdivision on the ability of any vehicle to use the street safely. (3/1/05) 
5.4 	Drainage. An adequate system of stormwater drainage shall be provided and no natural watercourse shall be altered or obstructed in such a way as to reduce the natural runoff capacity unless substitute means of runoff are provided. The developer shall use as guidance the Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection Stormwater Manual (2004) to manage stormwater flows that result from requested subdivision lot development and road drainage improvements and shall be incorporate any additional requirement that may be included in the Municipal Stormwater Management Plan and resulting ordinances. The developer shall provide additional capacity in adjacent culverts and other drainage features for accommodating increased runoff from the proposed development should it be deemed necessary by the Commission. All existing and proposed drainage systems shall be indicated as to size and location on plans and profile sheets. Drainage rights-of-way through lots shall be at least twenty (20) feet wide, and follow property lines wherever possible. The Commission may require culverts and other stormwater drainage installations where it deems necessary, to connect with one or more natural watercourse(s). All necessary easements for drainage shall be provided prior to plan approval. (8/10/09) 
18 

5.5 	Open Space. In accordance with the authority granted in Section 8-25 of the Connecticut General Statutes, the Commission shall require the provision of open spaces, parks and playgrounds within all conventional subdivisions of five (5) or more lots, according to the following requirements: (3/29/06) 
5.5.1 	Area. When deemed appropriate by the Commission in accordance with Section 5.5, above, the area of dedicated open space within a conventional subdivision shall be ten percent (10%) of the overall gross area of the parcel to be subdivided whether or not it is so subdivided entirely at the time of application. Generally such dedication shall not be less than one acre and shall be of such size and location as deemed appropriate by the Commission.  (3/29/06) (8/10/09) 
5.5.2 	Standards. To the greatest extent possible, dedicated open space(s) shall be contiguous, and separation between open spaces on the subject parcel or other contiguous parcels shall be minimized. In determining the amount and location of open space to be required under this Section, the Commission may consider the entire parcel owned or controlled by the applicant and not just that portion which is the subject of the pending application; and the Commission may allocate open space areas for future subdivision phases when and if they are sought. (3/29/06) 
Where more than ten (10) lots are proposed, the Commission may require that two (2) or more acres be suitable for active recreational use. Such active recreation area shall be graded and drained, if necessary, and seeded to prevent erosion. Areas intended for active recreation shall be so shaped that the greatest dimension is not more than three times than the least dimension. Open spaces intended for public access shall directly abut a public street with a required street frontage of not less than 20 feet. (3/29/06) 
No open spaces intended for natural protection buffers or ornamental purposes shall be filled, excavated, or re-graded; nor shall any vegetation within such area be cut, without specific approval of the Commission, and such land shall be left free and clear of any waste, such as refuse, debris, cut brush, stumps or boulders. Land intended for conservation purposes shall remain in its natural state, unaltered from its condition at the time of subdivision application.  (3/29/06) 
5.5.3 	Fee-in-lieu of Open Space. In accordance with Section 8-25 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended by Public Act 90-239, Section 1, the Commission may authorize a subdivider to pay a fee and/or transfer land to the Town of Griswold in lieu of the disposition of land by one of the methods set forth in Section 7.6.1 of these Regulations. Such authorization may be granted by the Commission and when it determines, in its sole discretion, that there are inadequate areas on the subdivision which merit preservation by one of the methods set forth in Section 7.6.1, or that conditions such as subdivision size, population densities, existing open space in the neighborhood, topography, soils or other characteristics are such that on-site open space is not as desirable as a fee-in-lieu of open space.  (3/29/06) 
5.5.3.1 	Amount. Such fee or combination of fee and the fair market value of land transferred shall be equal to not more than ten percent (10%) of the fair market value of the land to be subdivided prior to the approval of the subdivision. The fair market value shall be determined by an appraiser selected from a list of approved appraisers provided by the Commission. The applicant shall pay directly all appraisal fees and expenses incurred by the applicant and/or the Commission. (3/29/06) (8/10/09) 
19 

5.5.3.2 	Procedure. To employ the fee-in-lieu of open space option, the following procedure shall be used:  (3/29/06) 
a. 	
The applicant, an advisory agency to the Commission, Commission staff, or the Commission itself identify a subdivision where the fee-in-lieu of procedure should be utilized with a brief narrative explaining the reasons for such procedure to be used; (3/29/06) 

b. 	
The Commission shall determine whether to accept the proposal, or to accept a different combination of land transfer and fee, or to require an open space dedication only; (3/29/06) 

c. 	
The Commission and applicant shall jointly select an appraiser to submit a report. Steps a. through c. may be accomplished at the application acceptance portion of the process; (3/29/06) 

d. 	
The applicant shall submit the appraisal during the formal application review process; (3/29/06) 

e. 	
The Commission, as part of the action on the applicant, shall either accept the fee-in-lieu proposal, a combination of fee and land transfer proposal, or require an open space dedication.  (3/29/06) 


5.5.3.3 	Payment. The method of payment of any fees under this Section shall be one of 
the following options “a” or “b” as prescribed below. (3/29/06) 
a. 	
The applicant, at his/her option, may submit the entire fee in one lump sum prior to the filing of subdivision Mylars with the Town Clerk; or, (3/29/06) 

b. 	
The applicant may elect to submit a fraction of such payment, the numerator of which is one and the denominator of which is the number of approved building lots in the subdivision, no later than the time of the sale of each approved building lot; and a restriction executed by the applicant and filed in the land records describing this requirement shall be placed on the final subdivision map filed in the Town Clerk's office. If this option is chosen, the applicant shall submit a cash or passbook bond or an irrevocable letter of credit in a form acceptable to the Town under provision stated in these regulations, equal to the full amount of fee required, prior to the filing of the subdivision maps in the Town Clerk's office. Any required fees shall be paid to the Town prior to the release of this bond.   (3/29/06) (8/10/09) 

c. 	
No building permits shall be issued for any lot in the subdivision until such fractional part is paid for that lot.   (3/29/06) 


5.5.3.4 	Dedicated Fund. Fees submitted under this Section shall be deposited by the Town of Griswold in a fund which shall be used for the purpose of preserving open space or acquiring additional land for open space or for recreational or agricultural purposes.  (3/29/06) 
20 

5.5.4 	Open Space Waiver. The Commission shall make provisions for open space as set forth in Section 5.5, or authorize a fee-in-lieu of open space for all conventional subdivisions. Waivers of the fee-in-lieu of procedure of Section 5.5.3 shall be granted in the following instances as specifically required by Section 8-25 of the Connecticut General Statutes.  (3/29/06) 
5.5.4.1 	Where the transfer of all land in a subdivision of less than five (5) lots is to a parent, child, brother, sister, grandparent, grandchild, aunt, uncle, or first cousin of the property owner for any or no consideration. Such intended transfer shall be evidenced by covenants, restrictions, contracts, or other legally binding documents as the Commission may approve, which documents will be filed in the Land Records along with the Subdivision Plan. If the Commission determines, subsequent to the approval of such subdivision, that such transfers were intended to be temporary, and for the sole purpose of evading the requirements of this Section, the Commission may, following a public hearing with notice owing by certified mail to the violator, void, in whole or in part, any such subdivision approval, and may cause notice thereof to be filed in the Land Records; and (3/29/06) 
5.5.4.2 	Where the subdivision is to contain affordable housing, as defined in Section 8­39a of the Connecticut General Statutes, equal to twenty percent (20%) or more of the total housing to be constructed in such subdivision. Such restrictions for affordable housing shall be evidenced by such documents as the Commission may require, and such restrictions shall run with the lots affected thereby in perpetuity. If, subsequent to approval of the Subdivision, the lots designated for affordable housing shall not be sold for that purpose, the Commission may, following a public hearing with notice by certified mail to the violator, void, in whole or in part, any such subdivision approval, and may cause notice thereof to be filed in the Land Records.  (3/29/06) 
5.6 	Pedestrian Easement. In areas where the proposed street system does not conform to a convenient pattern of pedestrian circulation, particularly in the vicinity of parks, schools, playgrounds, commercial centers, or other semi-public places, the Commission may require the establishment of 10-foot easements for pedestrian ways. Concrete sidewalks four (4) feet in width are encouraged; but in lieu of sidewalks in residential areas, the Commission may require a flat, clear, walkable area on either side or both sides of a town road within the right–of–way. This walkable area should, at a minimum, have a four (4) foot paved width graded to provide a route with no more than five (5%) percent change in topography across its width and generally following the horizontal topography of the road right–of way. (8/10/09) 
5.7 	Reserve Strips. Reserve strips of land which, in the opinion of the Commission, shows intent on the part of the subdivider to control access to land dedicated or to be dedicated to public use shall not be permitted. When a subdivision proposes the extension of or the connection to an unimproved reserved street right-of-way, it shall be the responsibility of the subdivider to improve the entire length of said street extension or connection to the adjacent property. (8/10/09) 
21 

5.8 	Flooding Considerations. The Commission shall determine that proposed subdivisions (including manufactured homes subdivisions) are reasonably safe from flooding. When a subdivision is proposed in an ! or !E Zone on the Town’s Flood Insurance Rate Map, dated July 18, 2011, or any subsequent revisions thereof, it shall be reviewed to assure the following: (7/11/11) 
5.8.1 	That all proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage within the flood-prone areas. 
5.8.2 	That all public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electricity and water systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage. 
5.8.3 	That adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
5.8.4 	That new and replacement water supply systems are designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems. 
5.8.5 	That new and replacement sanitary sewer systems are designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system or discharge from the systems into flood waters. 
5.8.6 	That on-site sewage disposal systems are located to avoid impairment of them or contamination from them during flooding. 
5.8.7 	That the flood-carrying capacity is maintained within any altered or relocated portion of any watercourse. 
5.8.8 	That all applications for subdivisions, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions, greater than fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres, whichever is the lesser, shall include with such applications base flood elevation data for that portion of the development located within the SFHA. (7/11/11) 
5.9 	Floodway Encroachments. Within the floodway, designated on the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map for the Town of Griswold, dated July 18, 2011, or any subsequent revision thereof, a copy of which is on file with the Commission, all encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements to existing structures, and other development, are prohibited unless certification, with supporting technical data, by a Connecticut registered professional engineer is proved by the applicant demonstrating, through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice, that such encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels during a 100-year flood. (7/11/11) 
SECTION 6 – CONSERVATION SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS 
6.1 	General. These conservation subdivision regulations are intended to provide flexibility in the placing of residential units on areas of a proposed site best suited for development and to protect the remaining land as open space. Proposed building lots shall be of such shape, size, location, topography, and character that buildings can be constructed reasonably, occupied, and used for building purposes without danger to the health, safety and general welfare of the occupants and the public. The amount of disturbance such as site grading, vegetative and rock wall removal shall be minimized insofar as practicable to preserve worthy land characteristics and lessen the likely impact on environmental systems such as areas of steep topography, significant wetland areas, 
22 

groundwater, watercourses, and vegetative and wildlife communities. Proposed building lots shall be designed and arranged to make the best use of the natural terrain, to avoid unnecessary regrading, to protect the natural environment, to preserve natural features such as stonewalls, ridge lines, water bodies, watercourses and vegetation, and to preserve existing significant historical or cultural features. Conservation subdivision design standards shall apply only to single-family residential subdivision. This section is adopted pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes Section 8­25(c) and is intended to adopt some of those provisions for “cluster subdivisions”/ (8/18/05) (8/10/09) 
6.1.1 	Findings: The Commission finds that in some cases the strict adherence to traditional land development and subdivision techniques within the Town of Griswold may result in: 
6.2 	Allowable Density. The determination for the number of allowable lots in a conservation subdivision shall be determined by a density yield plan as prescribed in Section 6.2.1, below. 
6.2.1 	Density Yield Plan. The determination for the number of allowable lots in a conservation subdivision shall be determined by a conventional subdivision plan, produced under the signature and seal of a Connecticut licensed design professional, which demonstrates compliance to the satisfaction of the Commission with all the applicable requirements for conventional subdivisions as prescribed in Section 5 of these Regulations. A minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the building lots shown on the Density Yield Plan shall demonstrate compliance with public health code requirements. 
6.2.2 	Bonus lots. Where 34 percent or more of lots of the existing or proposed road frontage is within a dedicated open space area and that 34 % is at least 200 feet in depth; and where 34 percent or more of the subdivision acreage is dedicated to open space, then the conservation subdivision shall be granted one (1) additional bonus lot beyond the number of lots estimated by the density yield plan. (8/10/09) 
6.3 	Lots. All lots shall front on, and provide driveway access to a street, which meets the standards of the Road Ordinance of the Town of Griswold as revised from time to time. (8/10/09) 
6.3.1 	Wherever possible, side lot lines shall be at right angles to the street and radial to curves and lots shall be generally four–sided and largely rectangular in shape and consistent with zoning regulation that proscribe a minimum lot width of 100 feet at any point except a driveway / common driveway to a rear lot and a minimum net buildable area of 30,000 contiguous square feet not containing watercourses, wetland soils, topographic slopes over twenty (20%) percent. (8/10/09) 
6.3.2 	All land shall be in the form of lots or in proposed open space. No notes suggesting "remaining land" shall appear on the subdivision plans. (8/10/09) 
6.3.3 	Dimensional requirements for lots in a conservation subdivision shall conform to the minimum requirements as shown below. 
Minimum lot size 40,000 square feet Minimum street frontage 150 feet Minimum front yard setback 50 feet Minimum side and rear yard setback 30 feet Maximum lot coverage 20 % Maximum building height 35 feet 
23 

6.3.4 	Locations of proposed principal buildings, driveways, water supplies and sewage disposal systems shall be shown on all lots. 
6.3.5 	To the maximum extent possible, lots shall be arranged in a manner that provides the best opportunity for the use of solar energy in buildings subsequently constructed on them. As a general rule, lot arrangement should enable principal buildings to be situated so that their longest axis lies in an east/west direction, so as to expose the front or rear of the building to the south. Attention should be given to ensuring that projected building locations are not shaded by topographic features or by buildings on adjoining properties. 
6.3.6 	Driveways shall be designed so that the final grade does not exceed fifteen percent (15%). Driveways with ten percent (10%) to fifteen percent (15%) grades shall be paved with concrete or bituminous concrete for that portion or portions of the driveway ten percent (10%) or greater in grade. Portions of driveways requiring paving shall be shown on subdivision lot site plans at a scale of 1 inch to 40 feet with an additional 25 feet paved on both ends of a driveway segment with a slope between 10 percent and 15 percent. 
6.3.7 	Lots located within a conservation subdivision shall, upon approval and recording of the final plans, be noted for zoning purposes as being part of a conservation subdivision (e.g. R­80(C); R-60(C), and thereafter be regulated by the dimensional requirements of the R-40 zoning district, as established in Section 10 of the Griswold Zoning Regulations. 
6.3.8 	Rear lots with lot area that is 1 1/2 times the requirement of frontage lot in the underlying zone may be approved in no more than two tiers behind the frontage lots with an access strip consisting of a minimum of 30 feet frontage on the town or state road, with common driveways being encouraged to serve no more than four (4) lots to a maximum length of 1000 feet, with a minimum ratio of frontage to rear lots of 2:5 where permitted by the geometry of the parcel. Minimum rear lot area shall be determined as the area of the lot wider than 100 feet, i.e., not counting the access strip for any portion of the driveway. In laying out rear lots, the applicant is encouraged to use the natural terrain, to avoid unnecessary regrading, to protect the natural environment, and to preserve existing significant historical or cultural features. (8/10/09) 
6.4 	Streets. Streets shall be in harmony with existing streets and highways in the Town of Griswold, especially in regard to safe intersections, and shall be constructed to effect the safest possible movement of pedestrian and vehicular traffic. 
6.4.1 	All proposed streets shall connect with one or more approved Town streets or state highways, except that any part of a subdivision containing more than thirty (30) residential lots shall have at least two (2) points of access. 
6.4.2 	Streets shall be laid out to provide connections with existing streets on adjacent properties, where appropriate. Consideration shall be given to connecting with future streets on adjacent property where future subdivision appears probably. 
6.4.3 	A dead-end street shall be provided with a circular turn around area at the closed end having a paved radius of at least forty (40) feet. Such streets will be permitted only where an alternative street layout is deemed by the Commission to be impractical because of the dimensions, shape or physical conditions of the property. A dead-end street shall not exceed six hundred (600) feet in length unless it is of a temporary nature and is planned for extension and can reasonably be expected to connect with an existing or proposed road on adjoining land or where it would otherwise be impossible to develop the property. In no 
24 

case shall a dead-end street exceed 1,200 feet. No street shall be extended from an existing dead-end street if the farthest point of the new dead-end exceeds 1,200 feet from a road with an alternative route of access. 
6.4.4 	The tangent distance between reverse curves shall not be less than fifty (50) feet. Except for intersections and turn-a-rounds on dead-end streets, no curve shall have a radius of less than one hundred (100) feet, as measured radial to the centerline. 
6.4.5 	Except where impractical because of topography or other conditions, streets shall be perpendicular to intersections for a distance of at least one hundred (100) feet. All corners shall be rounded, with a radius of not less than twenty-five (25) feet. Centerlines of alternate side streets shall not be closer than one hundred twenty-five (125) feet, measured along the centerline. Wherever a proposed subdivision street intersects with a state highway or a major town road, a minimum sight distance of three hundred fifty (350) feet shall be required in each direction along the state highway or major town road. 
6.4.6 	If authorized by Statute, wherever any subdivision is proposed for land accessible only by an unpaved street or an existing Town street which does not conform with minimum requirements of grade, alignment, width and construction set forth in these Regulations or the Road Ordinance of the Town of Griswold, and the Commission determines that approval of the subdivision plan would be contrary to the public safety unless such street was altered or improved where it fronts the proposed subdivision or beyond the limits of the proposed subdivision, as long as the road section within those limits is deemed directly impacted by the creation of the subdivision, the Commission may disapprove such plan or may condition its approval upon alteration of such street within those said impacted limits by and at the expense of the subdivider, as long as it is reasonable and necessary to maintain the health and safety of the public, or may disapprove such plan until the Board of Selectmen has authorized expenditures for such improvements.  (3/1/05) (8/10/09) 
6.4.7 	In making the determinations set fourth in the preceding two paragraphs, the Commission 
shall take into account the street’s ability to handle the increased volumes of traffic which 
will be generated by the proposed subdivision; the ability of school buses and emergency vehicles to travel the street safely to serve the new lots in the subdivision in view of the additional traffic caused by the new subdivision; the drainage conditions of the street and the impact of the new lots and related improvements on the existing stormwater management systems or the need for expansion or improvement of such systems; the impact of proposed driveways on the existing street, including sight lines, drainage impacts, required grading, and safe access; the projected pedestrian traffic from the lots and the anticipated pedestrian improvement between them; and generally the impact of the subdivision on the ability of any vehicle to use the street safely. (3/1/05) 
6.5 Drainage. It shall be the policy in these regulations that stormwater management resulting from development of lots, roads, and drainage improvements should be consistent with the guidelines of the CTDEP Stormwater Manual of 2004 as amended from time to time. To reduce long term maintenance of roads and drainage structures, the Commission may encourage drainage swales and curbless roads where these measures have been shown to be effective and reduce town maintenance costs for the catch basins, piping and curbs to be installed only when higher slope, stormwater volume or soil infiltration characteristics preclude the preferred curbless, swaled road design. An adequate system of stormwater drainage shall be provided and no natural watercourse shall be altered or obstructed in such a way as to reduce the natural runoff capacity unless 
25 

substitute means of runoff are provided. The developer shall provide additional capacity in adjacent culverts and other drainage features for accommodating increased runoff from the proposed development should it be deemed necessary by the Commission. All existing and proposed drainage systems shall be indicated as to size and location on plans and profile sheets. Drainage rights-of-way through lots shall be at least twenty (20) feet wide, and follow property lines, wherever possible. The Commission may require culverts and other storm drainage installations where it deems necessary, to connect with one or more natural watercourses. All necessary easements for drainage shall be provided prior to plan approval. (8/10/09) 
6.6 	Open Space. The Commission shall require dedicated open space for all conservation subdivisions, according to the following requirements: 
6.6.1 	The minimum area of dedicated open space within a conservation subdivision shall be at least one-third (34%) of the overall gross area of the parcel to be subdivided. The gross area of the parcel to be subdivided shall be characterized as percent buildable and percent non– buildable according to definitions in Section 10. (8/10/09) 
6.6.2 	To the greatest extent possible, dedicated open space(s) shall be contiguous, and separation between open spaces minimized. Open space offered should consist of a variety of front and rear land whose characteristics in total reflect the percentages of buildable versus non– buildable land in the total parcel to be subdivided. (8/10/09) 
6.6.3 	Where eight (8) or more lots are proposed, the Commission may require that two (2) or more acres be suitable for active recreational use. Such active recreation area shall be graded and drained, if necessary, and seeded to prevent erosion. Areas intended for active recreation shall be so shaped that the average greatest dimension is not more than three times than the average lesser dimension. (8/10/09) 
6.6.4 	All open spaces shall directly abut a public street with a required street frontage not less than 100 feet. (8/10/09) 
6.6.5 	No open spaces intended for natural protection buffers or ornamental purposes shall be filled, excavated, or regraded, nor shall any vegetation within such area be cut, without specific approval of the Commission, and such land shall be left free and clear of any waste, such as refuse, debris, cut brush, stumps or boulders. Land intended for conservation purposes shall remain in its natural state, unaltered from its present condition at the time of subdivision application. 
6.6.6 	Lands proposed as dedicated open space within a conservation subdivision that are used for a bona fide agricultural purpose at the time of subdivision approval may be continued to be used as such, though no agricultural use employed on dedicated open space may be expanded or intensified by the owner or lessee of said open space. Expansion shall mean the development, clearing, or physical alteration of open space lots or portions thereof which are not used for bona fide agricultural purposes at the time of subdivision application, and shall be prohibited. Intensification shall mean an increase in the number of buildings other structures, the number of cattle grazed, or a change in the nature of the agricultural use from that employed at the time of subdivision application and shall be prohibited. The harvest of timber and/or the extraction of gravel and earth products shall not be considered a bona fide agricultural use as allowed by this section. 
26 

As an information statement to future lot owners, a note will be added to the subdivision site plan for lots adjacent to active farms stating that active agricultural activity on the adjacent lot may occasionally create odors or dust associated with it and that there is a Right to Farm law in Connecticut. (8/10/09) 
6.6.7 	Proof, in accordance with Section 7.6 of these Regulations and to the satisfaction of the Commission, shall be provided to the Commission prior to the endorsement of final Mylars, that the land identified as open space has been protected in perpetuity from development or any other use not specifically allowed by these Regulations. 
6.6.8 	The Commission may require an applicant to provide a written recommendation from the Griswold Inland Wetlands & Watercourses Conservation Commission (IW&WCC) regarding the most appropriate location and/or use of proposed open space(s). 
6.7 	Pedestrian Easement. In areas where the proposed street system does not conform to a convenient pattern of pedestrian circulation, particularly in the vicinity of parks, schools, playgrounds, commercial centers, or other semi-public places, the Commission may require the establishment of 10-foot easements for pedestrian ways. Concrete sidewalks four (4) feet in width are encouraged; but in lieu of sidewalks in residential areas, the Commission may require a flat, clear, walkable area on either side or both sides of a town road within the right–of–way. This walkable area should, at a minimum, have a four (4) foot paved width graded to provide a route with no more than five (5%) percent change in topography across its width and generally following the horizontal topography of the road right–of way. (8/10/09) 
6.8 	Reserve Strips. Reserve strips of land which, in the opinion of the Commission, shows intent on the part of the subdivider to control access to land dedicated or to be dedicated to public use shall not be permitted. When a subdivision proposes the extension of or the connection to an unimproved reserved street right-of-way, it shall be the responsibility of the subdivider to improve the entire length of said street extension or connection to the adjacent property line. (8/10/09) 
6.9 	Flooding Considerations. The Commission shall determine that proposed subdivisions (including manufactured home subdivisions) are reasonably safe from flooding. When a subdivision is proposed in A or AE zones on the Towns Flood Insurance Rate Map, July 18, 2011, or any subsequent revisions thereof, it shall be reviewed to assure the following: (7/11/11) 
6.9.1 	That all proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage within the flood-prone areas. 
6.9.2 	That all public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electricity and water systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage. 
6.9.3 	That adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
6.9.4 	That new and replacement water supply systems are designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems. 
6.9.5 	That new and replacement sanitary sewer systems are designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system or discharge from the systems into floodwaters. 
27 

6.9.6 	That on-site sewage disposal systems are located to avoid impairment of them or contamination from them during flooding. 
6.9.7 	That the flood-carrying capacity is maintained within any altered or relocated portion of any watercourse. 
6.9.8 	That all applications for subdivisions, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions, greater than fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres, whichever is the lesser, shall include with such applications base flood elevation data for that portion of the development located within the SFHA. (7/11/11) 
6.10 	Floodway Encroachments. Within the floodway, designated on the Flood Insurance Rate Map for the Town of Griswold, dated July 18, 2011, or any subsequent revision thereof, a copy of which is on file with the Commission, all encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements to existing structures, and other development, are prohibited unless certification, with supporting technical data, by a Connecticut registered professional engineer is provided by the applicant demonstrating, through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice, that such encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels during a 100-year flood. (7/11/11) 
SECTION 7 – IMPROVEMENTS 
7.1 	Streets. Streets shall be constructed in accordance with the Town of Griswold Road Ordinance. 
7.1.1 	The applicant will place easily identifiable stakes at even one hundred (100) foot stations along the centerlines of proposed streets prior to submission of the subdivision plan to facilitate evaluation of the plan by the Commission and the Board of Selectmen. 
7.2 	Drainage. Drainage features shall encourage, where appropriate, non–structural stormwater best management techniques as outlined in the Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection Stormwater Management Manual (2004) or as amended; and shall be in accordance with Standard Specifications for Roads, Bridges and Incidental Construction, Form 815 of the Connecticut Department of Transportation, except as otherwise provided by these Regulations or other applicable ordinances of the Town of Griswold. (8/10/09) 
7.3 	Monuments and Markers. Stone or reinforced concrete monuments shall be placed at all points of curvature or tangency, at all angle points on the street lines and at one front corner of each lot. Iron pipes or pins shall be placed at all other lot corners or angle points. 
7.3.1 	Monuments shall be not less than four (4) inches square and thirty (30) inches long with a brass or copper plug, drill hole or cross marking the center of the monument. They shall be set flush with or slightly above finished grade. Iron pipes shall be at least one-half (1/2) inch nominal inside diameter and thirty-six (36) inches long. The top of the pipes or pins shall normally be at least two (2) inches above finished grade. 
7.4 	Street Signs. Street signs are required at all intersections. Four-way intersections shall have two (2) sign posts located on diagonally opposite corners. T-intersections shall have one signpost. Each signpost shall identify both intersecting streets. 
28 

7.4.1 	The Town of Griswold shall prepare and install all street signs; however, the cost of preparation and installation shall be borne by the developer pursuant to applicable Town Fee Ordinance. (8/10/09) 
7.5 	Utilities. All utility lines will be located underground except that the Commission may approve overhead electrical and telephone lines in subdivisions not involving new streets or where physical conditions make underground installation impractical. Adequate conduit, which is considered to be at least one (1) inch diameter PVC, shall be installed with underground electric utilities to provide for future street lights. The Commission may permit overhead lines to be extended along a proposed street if such street is an extension of an existing street which has overhead lines and such extension involves a distance less than the existing street length. (9/28/90) 
7.5.1 	Water supply and distribution systems shall be installed in accordance with the specifications of the Jewett City Water Company or the Southeastern Connecticut Water Authority or the Connecticut Department of Health, whichever has jurisdiction. 
7.5.2 	All sewage shall be disposed of by methods approved by the Connecticut Departments of Environmental Protection or Health, in accordance with Section 19-13-B20 of the Connecticut Health Code. 
7.6 	Open Space. The Commission may require grading, seeding, planting, fencing and other reasonable improvements to the open space, if said open space or a portion thereof is to be used for active recreation purposes. The following regulations shall apply to all proposed open spaces within subdivisions throughout the Town of Griswold. (Entire Section Effective 8/18/05) 
7.6.1 	Method of Disposition. The Commission shall determine the most appropriate method of disposition after considering, among other things, the relationship of the subject area(s) and its specific characteristics to the Plan of Development and the objectives cited in Section 6.1, the desirability and suitability of public access and use; and the scope of the subdivision approval. The following disposition options may be utilized by the Commission (generically 
referred to as the “Development Restriction”)/ 
1. 	
Perpetual dedication to the Town of Griswold; 

2. 	
Perpetual dedication to the State of Connecticut; 

3. 	
Perpetual dedication to a nonprofit land-holding organization as defined in Connecticut General Statutes Section 47-6b; 

4. 	
Dedication to a Homeowner’s !ssociation-(see Section 7/6/4 and Section 7/6/8 of these 


Regulations) 
5. 	
Utilization of Conservation Easements, with or without public access; 

6. 	
Utilization of a recreation easement; 

7. 	
Private Ownership with the appropriate taking of Development rights; or 

8. 	
Any combination of the above or any suitable alternative approved by the Commission. 


29 

Any Conservation Easements or other Open Space Covenants or restrictions shall be subject to the approval of the Commission in form and content. 
7.6.2 	Evidence of Acceptance. If open space is to be owned by a nonprofit land-holding organization, the State of Connecticut, the Town of Griswold, or another entity, the application shall contain written evidence from the proposed entity satisfactory to the Commission, stating that it is willing to accept ownership of and responsibility for the preservation and maintenance (if required) of the open space. 
7.6.3 	Required Provisions. Regardless of the manner of ownership of the open space, the instrument of conveyance must include provisions satisfactory in form and substance to the Commission to ensure: 
1. 	
The continued use of such land for the intended purpose(s); 

2. 	
The continuity of proper maintenance for those portions of the open space requiring maintenance; 

3. 	
When appropriate, the availability of funds for such maintenance; 

4. 	
Adequate insurance protection; and 

5. 	
Recovery for loss sustained by casualty, condemnation or otherwise. 


7.6.4 	Homeowner’s !ssociation/ The ommission may, upon request of the subdivider, permit the ownership and maintenance of the open space and/or recreation area to be transferred to an association of property owners. Such transfer shall be in accordance with standards established by the Commission to include, but not limited to the following: 
1. 	
Establishes a mandatory participation in an association of property owners to maintain the land reservation for open space, park, and playground purposes with power to assess all members for all necessary costs; 

2. 	
Will be binding on all future property owners; 

3. 	
Will be perpetual; 

4. 	
Will not be affected by any change in zoning or land use; 

5. 	
May be enforced by the Town by appropriate legal action; and 

6. 	
Shall provide that if maintenance or preservation of the dedication no longer comply with the provisions of the document, the Town may take all necessary action to assure compliance and assess against the association all costs incurred by the Town for such purposes. 


After approval of the Town Attorney and the Commission, said document shall be filed by the subdivider in the Office of the Town Clerk. 
30 

7.6.5 	Boundary Lines. The boundary lines of all open space shall be set in the field and marked by permanent, readily-visible markers to be provided by the town and installed by the subdivider on durable posts at approximately 100 foot intervals and where such lines intersect any lot line, road, or perimeter line within the proposed subdivision and at such other points as may be required by the Commission to insure identification in the field. (8/10/09) 
7.6.6 	Recording. At the time the approved subdivision is filed, the applicant shall record on the Griswold Land Records all deeds and legal documents required to ensure the aforesaid guarantees.  
7.6.7 	Right to Enforce. A right to enforce the Development Restrictions or Conservation Easements shall be conveyed to: (8/10/09) 
1. 	
The Town of Griswold, the State of Connecticut or a nonprofit land-holding organization as defined in Connecticut General Statues Section 47-6b in cases where the open space is dedicated to an association or corporation of land owners; or 

2. 	
To the association or corporation of lot owners in cases where the open space is dedicated to the Town of Griswold, the State of Connecticut or a nonprofit land-holding organization. 


Any deed of conveyance shall contain language providing the holder of the Development Restriction with the right to obtain reimbursement for all costs it reasonably incurs, including attorney’s fees, in any action to enforce the Development Restriction in which it is the prevailing party. 
7.6.8 	Association Requirements. If the open space is to be dedicated to an association or corporation of lot owners, then the Commission may set additional requirements including, but not limited to the following: 
1. 	
Creation of the association or corporation prior to the sale of any lot; 

2. 	
Mandatory membership in the association or corporation by all original and subsequent lot owners; and 

3. 	
The association or corporation shall have the power to assess and collect from each lot owner a specified share of and, where necessary, provide reserves for the costs associated with maintenance, repair, upkeep, and insurance of the Open Space. 


7.7 	Clean-up. Upon suspension or completion of the work or any portion thereof, the developer or contractor shall remove from all public or private property all temporary structures, tools and equipment, rubbish or waste materials resulting from his operations. Tree stumps and boulders shall be buried along property lines with a minimum two (2) foot cover. Cut-down trees and brush shall be removed from the property. All ditches shall be filled; all sewers, drains, catch basins and manholes cleaned and flushed; streets, walks, curbs, and other structures cleaned and repaired and the whole work left in a neat condition. All unpaved areas within the street lines and excavated or filled areas on private property shall be graded, covered with suitable topsoil or loam, rolled, fertilized and seeded with a mixture conforming to Section M.13.04 of the State Highway Department Standard Specifications for Roads, Bridges, and Incidental Construction, Form 815. 
31 

7.8 	Inspection and Approval of Work. All subdivision improvements shall be inspected and approved. Inspections shall be made by the Board of Selectmen of all road and drainage features at such times as prescribed by the Town Road Ordinance. All other inspections shall be made by the Commission or its representative. All questions regarding the interpretation of plans and specifications shall be decided by the inspector. He may require additional working drawings from the applicant to facilitate inspection at any time during construction of improvements. 
7.9 	Revisions. Any revision of an approved or filed subdivision plan that changes the boundaries of any lot shall be submitted to the Commission for approval. 
7.10 	Bond Release. The Commission shall, upon written request from the developer and after consultation with the Board of Selectmen, approve the release of portions of a performance guarantee in the form of a cash bond or irrevocable letter of credit after clearly definable portions of the improvements have been completed in accordance with the approved subdivision plan. Such written request shall be accompanied by a certification of completion of these items in a statement signed by a professional engineer licensed to practice in Connecticut and by the Board of Selectmen. Not later than sixty-five days after receiving such written request, the Commission shall (A) release or authorize the release of any such performance guarantee or portion thereof, provided the commission or its agent is reasonably satisfied that the improvements for which such performance guarantee or portion thereof was posted have been completed, or (B) provide the person posting such performance guarantee with a written explanation as to the additional improvements that must be completed before such performance guarantee or portion thereof may be released. (1/26/90) (8/10/09) (03/21/2013) 
SECTION 8 – WAIVERS 
8.1 	Waivers. The Commission may waive a requirement of these Regulations, in whole or in part, by a three-quarters vote of all the members of the Commission in cases where conditions exist which affect the subject land and which are not generally applicable to other land in the area, except that no waiver shall be granted that would have a significant adverse affect on adjacent property or on public health and safety. No waiver shall be granted unless one of the following conditions exist: 
8.1.1 	The proposed subdivision includes land in more than one municipality. 
8.1.2 	Strict adherence to the requirements of these Regulations would result in the alteration or destruction of a significant or unique natural feature, such as a large tree, a watercourse, a wetland or a rock formation. 
8.1.3 	Strict adherence to the requirements of these Regulations would result in significant alteration of the natural land contour in a manner that would aggravate natural drainage or cause erosion and sedimentation problems that would be difficult to control or correct. 
8.1.4 	Strict adherence to the requirements of these Regulations would result in the completion of an improvement that is not likely to benefit the public in any way in the foreseeable future. 
8.1.5 	Strict adherence to the requirements of these Regulations would result in the immediate or eventual expenditure of public funds without commensurate public benefit. 
32 

8.2 	Authority for Waivers of Subdivision Requirements. Only the Commission may waive subdivision requirements as described in the above paragraph. No waivers or variances of subdivision requirements granted by another board or commission or Town official are legal or valid. (8/10/09) 
SECTION 9 – GENERAL 
9.1 	Amendments. The provisions of these Regulations may, from time to time, be amended, modified, changed, or repealed by the Commission in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 126, Section 8-25 of the General Statutes of the State of Connecticut. 
9.2 	Interpretation. In the interpretation and application, the provisions of these Regulations shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, and general welfare. Where these Regulations impose a greater restriction upon land, buildings, structures, or improvements than is imposed or required by such existing provisions of law, ordinance, contract, or deed, the provisions of these Regulations shall control. 
9.3 	Penalties. Any person, firm, or corporation making any subdivision of land without the approval of the Commission shall be fined not more than $200.00 for each lot sold or offered for sale or so subdivided. 
9.4 	Validity. If any chapter, section, paragraph, clause or provision of these Regulations shall be declared invalid, such invalidity shall apply only to the chapter, section, paragraph, clause or provision so invalidated, and the remainder of these Regulations shall be deemed valid and effective. 
9.5 	Effective Date. These Regulations amend and supersede previously adopted regulations for the subdivision of land in Griswold and originally effective on March 1, 1971. Revisions incorporated into this printing of these Regulations are effective February 1, 2008. 
9.6 	Temporary and limited moratoria from residential subdivisions/resubdivisions. (2/1/08) 
9.6.1 	Purpose: The purpose of this moratorium is to provide relief from considering larger subdivisions often involving proposed new town roads in regular scheduled meetings of the Commission so that they may consider and adopt through public hearings, modifications to the Subdivision Regulations that are the result of planned studies or discussion of goals recommended in the updated Plan of Conservation and Development effective July 30, 2007; 
9.6.2 	Applicability: During this temporary and limited moratorium, no new subdivision or resubdivision applications relating to parcels from the R-40, R-60 or R-80 zoning districts, dealing with the creation of a total of five or more lots (including the parent parcel), or any subdivision/resubdivision containing a new proposed town road or extension to a town road shall be received or acted upon by the Commission; 
9.6.3 	Effective Date/Term: This temporary moratorium will be effective on February 1, 2008 and remain in effect and extended for a term ending up to and including August 10, 2009. 
9.6.4 	Revisions to the term of the moratorium may be made for good cause through a similar public hearing process as created this section. 
33 

Applicant 
Attorney 
Building Lot 
Commission 
County Soil and Water Conservation District Dead-End Street 
Disturbed Area 
Erosion. 
First Selectman Improvements 
Land Surveyor Net Buildable Area 
Non–Buildable Area SECTION 10 – DEFINITIONS 
The record owner of the parcel of land to be subdivided or any person authorized to act for the owner by a written and signed statement from the owner to the Commission accompanying the application. 
An attorney admitted to bar of the State of Connecticut and in good standing with said bar. (8/10/09) 
Lot that meets all of the zoning district requirements or a lot for which variances have been granted; existed in its present configuration before the enactment of zoning; or a lot reduced in accordance with the Conservation Subdivision Design Standards (Section 6.3 of these Regulations). (8/10/09) 
The Planning and Zoning Commission of the Town of Griswold, Connecticut. 
The New London County Soil and Water Conservation District established under subsection (a) of Section 22a-315 of the General Statutes. 
A proposed street, or any extension of an existing street, or any combination or pattern of streets or extensions thereof having only one outlet to a through state or town street. 
An area where the ground cover is destroyed or removed leaving the land subject to accelerated erosion. 
The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by water, wind, ice or gravity. 
The First Selectman of the Town of Griswold, or his/her designee. 
Streets, bridges, curbs, gutters, sewers, water systems, culverts, catch basins, and other drainage features, monuments and markers, recreation facilities, soil erosion and sedimentation control measures, and any other structures or measures prescribed by these Regulations. 
A surveyor licensed in the State of Connecticut and in good standing. (8/10/09) 
A minimum contiguous buildable area containing no wetland soils, no topographic slopes over twenty (20%) percent, no shallow to bedrock soils, no bedrock outcrops, and electric or gas transmission offsite utility easements. (8/10/09) 
For the purposes of dedicating open space on a parcel to be subdivided in the same ratio of buildable to non–buildable area as over the entire parcel, non–buildable area shall be land that does contain wetlands soils or watercourses including intermittent watercourses, that does contain slopes of over twenty (20%) percent, that does contain shallow to bedrock soils or bedrock outcrops, and that does not contain soils favorable for development of public health code compliant septic and well installations. (8/10/09) 
34 

Plan  The plan of subdivision, including maps, profiles, and supporting documents as required by these Regulations.  
Pedestrian Easement  An easement along one or both sides of a local road where sidewalks have been deemed not practicable but some permanent provision for pedestrian movement along the side of the road outside of the travel lane has been required by the Commission.  See Sections 5.6 and 6.7 of these Regulations. (8/10/09)  
Re-subdivision  A change in a map of an approved or recorded subdivision or re-subdivision if such change (a) affects any street layout shown on such map, (b) affects any area reserved thereon for public use or (c) diminishes the size of any lot shown thereon and creates an additional building lot, if any of the lots shown thereon have been conveyed after the approval or recording of such map.  
Sediment  Solid material, either mineral or organic, that is in suspension, is transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by erosion  
Sidewalk  A cement pedestrian route alongside public roads or within parking lots suitable for pedestrian travel to be generally level with a width of 4 ft. and constructed of durable materials including but not limited to concrete or paving blocks. (8/10/09)  
Soil  Any unconsolidated mineral or organic material of any origin.  
Soil Erosion and  A scheme that minimizes soil erosion and sedimentation and includes but is not  
Sediment Control Plan  limited to a map and a narrative.  
Street  An improved right-of-way accepted for public use by lawful procedure and suitable for two-way automobile travel; or a proposed street shown on the subdivision plan under consideration or on one previously approved by the Commission.  
Street, Dead End  A proposed street, or any extension of an existing street, or any combination or pattern of streets or extensions thereof having only one outlet to a through state or town street.  
Subdivision  The division of a tract or parcel of land into three or more parts or lots subsequent to March 1, 1971, for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale or building development expressly excluding development for municipal conservation or agricultural purposes, and includes re-subdivision.  

35 

APPENDIX A 
TOWN ORDINANCE OF FEES FOR LAND USE APPLICATION PROCESSING AND REVIEW 

Land Use Ordinance 144 of the Town of Griswold pertaining to Land Use Application Processing and Review Fees, adopted 9/23/08 and made effective on 10/11/08. 144.030 Fee Schedule (03/30/09) 
§144.010 Fees Established. 
Pursuant to Section 8-1c of the Connecticut General Statutes there is established a schedule of fees for the processing of land use applications received by the Planning and Zoning Commission, Zoning Board of Appeals and Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Conservation Commission. The schedule of fees established shall supersede those fees presently charged by the land use commissions and boards as previously established in Section 143 and pursuant to any provision of the General Statutes or any Special !ct/ These fees are intended to cover a portion of the Town’s costs for processing and administrative handling of land use applications, including, but not limited to: legal advertisements regarding public hearings, decisions of a commission, and other matters requiring publication in a newspaper; other notifications or referrals required or authorized by applicable law; recording and transcribing, where necessary, of public hearings and meetings, the preparation of minutes and other documentation applicable to the application, and other clerical expenses; staff salaries and overhead expenses for staff to the commission, including officials of the Town for whom land use application review is only a part of his/her duties, such as the sanitarian, fire chief, etc.; Town Attorney fees in direct connection with legal advice, review of documents, and attendance at meeting, where deemed desirable, in connection with the application; inspection of construction and other work to insure compliance with approved permits and applicable regulations; keeping and updating of files and other documentation relative to the application; such other expenses as may be incidental to the processing of land use applications or subsequent research or review relating to land status requested by outside parties but involving documents or procedures within the Town of Griswold. 
§144.020 Definitions. 
For the purpose of this Chapter the following definitions shall apply: 
“ommission(s)” means one or all of the land use regulatory agencies of the Town of Griswold known as the Planning and Zoning Commission, Zoning Board of Appeals and Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Conservation Commission. 
“Processing of land use application(s)” means the actions of a commission, supported by staff employed by the Town of Griswold, independent contractors, or consultants, in receiving, reviewing and acting upon an application to conduct an activity regulated by said commission and including both pre-action reviews and post-approval supervision of work and inspection of activities permitted. 
“Improved land area” means any portion(s) of a development site not covered by buildings, but covered by parking, driveways, outdoor storage or loading areas, lawns, formal landscaped areas, or any other area not in its natural state. 
“Fixed !pplication Fees” shall mean those set forth in Section144.030, subsection A of this Chapter. 
“!dditional Expenses” shall mean those reimbursements set forth in Section 144/030, subsection  of this 
Chapter. 
!ny other term not defined in this Ordinance shall have the meaning set forth in the “definitions” section of any applicable regulations (e.g., the zoning regulations for zoning applications, the subdivision regulations for subdivision or resubdivision applications, etc.). 
1 

§144.030 Fee schedule. 
A. 	Fixed Application Fees. Commissions shall charge Fixed Application Fees for the processing of land use 
applications in accordance with the following schedule: 

Completed application forms along with the required fee are to be submitted to the 
Planning & Zoning Commission 
Planning and Community Development Department no later than ten (10) Business days prior to the meeting. Meetings are held on the second Monday of each month. 
Application Fee State Fee Total 
Zone Changes 

Text Amendment Flat Fee $375 + $60.00 = $435.00 Map Amendment Flat Fee $400 1 to 14 acres + $60.00 = Variable Map Amendment* $600 15 acres or more + $60.00 = Variable *PZC Commission may reduce the map amendment fee to the Flat Fee if the requested zone change is for a less 
intensive zone usage. 
Zoning Permits 
Residential $150 / unit + $60.00 = Variable Basic Review of Site Plan $250 + $60.00 = $310..00 Minor Change in Use or Site Plan for Existing 
$300 	+ $60.00 = $360.00 
Commercial /Industrial 
NewCommercial/IndustrialorSitePlanAmendment $400+$25/1,000sq.ft.** 

+ $60.00 = Variable 
of Existing Commercial /Industrial 
Home Occupation $250 + $60.00 = $310.00 
Food Vending Permits 
Weekend – Maximum of  3 days $25 N/A = $25.00 
Seasonal – Maximum of  6 weeks $75 N/A = $75.00 
Annual $250 N/A = $250.00 
Special Exceptions 

Residential (multifamily) $200 / unit + $60.00 = Variable New Commercial or Industrial $600+$25/1,000sq.ft.** + $60.00 = Variable Existing Buildings/Modifications $350+$25/1,000sq.ft.** + $60.00 = Variable 
** Charge per 1000 sq. ft. of buildings and outside active area proposed 
CGS Section 8-30 Zoning Appeals 	$500 + $50.00/unit + $60.00 Variable 
Subdivisions $300 / lot + $60.00 = Variable Minimum $350 Re-Subdivisions $350 / lot + $60.00 = Variable Minimum $400 
2 

Zoning Board of Appeals 	Completed application forms along with the required fee are to be submitted to the Planning and Community Development Department no later than three Thursdays prior to the meeting. Meetings areheldonthefirstWednesday of each month. 
Application Fee State Fee Total 
Variance 	$150.00 + $60.00 = $210.00 
Appeal of Zoning Enforcement Officer Order 	$150.00 + $60.00 = $210.00 
Automotive Location 	$150.00 + $60.00 = $210.00 
Inland Wetlands & Watercourses Completed application forms along with the required fee shall be submitted to the Conservation Commission Planning & Community Development Department no later than 15 days prior to the meeting. Meetings are held on the third Thursday of each month. 
Application Fee State Fee Total 
Basic Fee 1-family & 2-family residences or Administrative Approval $100.00 + $60.00 = $160.00 
BasicFee & 
Commercial multi-family residence per dwelling unit $ 50.00 + 	= Variable 
Statefee 
If Applicable add: 
+ BasicFee& 
Public Hearing 	$175.00 = Variable 
Statefee 
+ BasicFee& 
Wetlands Jurisdiction Review 	$ 75.00 = Variable 
Statefee 
+ BasicFee& 
Regulation Amendment 	$175.00 = Variable 
Statefee Subdivision: For each lot with wetlands or 
BasicFee& 
watercourses and/or in which activity is proposed in a wetland/ $ 50.00/lot + 	= Variable 
Statefee 
regulated area 
+ BasicFee& 
Commercial Activity 	$300.00 = Variable 
Statefee Total Variable 
B. Maximum Fee; Calculation of Fee. Except as provided in Paragraph C below, no application fee calculated in accordance with the preceding formulae shall exceed $20,000.00. Each applicant for any permit shall provide, at the time of application, the necessary data to permit the calculation of the application fee (such as square footage of buildings or outside storage or active display area requested, the proposed number of lots, or acreage involved in a zone change), and such information shall, where appropriate, be certified by a licensed land surveyor, professional engineer, or registered architect. Failure to file any application fee set forth in this ordinance shall be grounds for denial, without prejudice, of such application. 
C. Additional Reimbursable Costs. 
1. 	In addition to the fixed fees set forth in subsection A of this section, the commissions may collect payment for direct costs of materials and review services performed by other than town employees, including but not limited to: 
a. 	
specialized inspections; 

b. 	
third party reviews with professional certifications; 

c. 	
reviews by consultant Town Attorneys; 

d. 	
reviews by consultant Town Professional Engineers; 

e. 	
reviews by licensed Landscape Architects; 

f. 	
reviews by licensed Architects; 

g. 	
reviews by archeologist/cultural resource consultants; 

h. 	
reviews by certified soil scientists, wildlife biologists, or ecologists; 

i. 	
reviews by Licensed Environmental Professionals; 

j. 	
reviews by certified professional in stormwater quality; 

k. 	
legal, stenographic and transcription services associated with any type of land use application. 


3 

The Commission may require an applicant to provide certifications, inspections or professional consultant reports 
at the applicant’s expense/ It is intended that the fixed fees set forth in subsection ! do not cover such costs for 
additional expenses resulting from non-town staff reviews necessitated by land use applications. These additional expenses will be required where applicable for any permit application before any land use Board or Commission, regardless of whether a public hearing is required. This section is also applicable to all expenses incurred after an approval is issued in the event that action is needed to enforce compliance with specific conditions of approval or violation of regulations. 
D. 	Fees Not in Lieu of Bonds. The payment of fees shall not prohibit commissions from requiring performance or forfeiture bonds to ensure the successful completion of all work as may be prescribed in the respective land use regulations. 
§144.040 Exemptions 
All boards and agencies of the Town of Griswold, including the use of fire company properties for fire protection purposes, shall be exempt from the payment of fees established pursuant to this chapter.  Each board may in whole or in part exempt an application from the payment of any or all fees if said application is for low and moderate income housing or special needs housing. In addition, each commission shall be authorized, by majority vote, to reduce or waive application fees where (1) the application does not appear, upon initial examination, to require intensive staff review and (2) the applicant is a non-profit entity, which qualifies for tax-deductible charitable contributions under Regulations of the U.S. Internal Revenue Service. The commission may also credit all or a portion of application fees from previous application(s), which were denied or withdrawn, where the review work performed on the previous application(s) may be of benefit in reviewing the new application. Any commission exempting an application from payment of a fee, in whole or in part, shall state in the minutes of the meeting at which the plan was received the fee type exempted, the percentage exempt and reasons for granting the exemption. This exemption shall not prohibit a commission from requiring consultant reports, professional certification or conducting inspection to ensure conformance with land-use regulations. §144.050 Payment of fees 
A. Other Fees. The payment of a fee established in accordance with the provision of this chapter shall not relieve the applicant, owner or their agent from the payment of other fees that may be prescribed for a different type of land use application, or by another ordinance of the Town of Griswold. 
B. 	Fees Nonrefundable. All fees received by a commission as part of a land use application submission shall be nonrefundable. 
C. 	Method and Timing of Payment, Failure to Pay. All Fixed Application Fees shall be paid by cash, check or money order made payable to the Town of Griswold. Fees shall be paid at the time of application submission. The applicant shall be provided with invoices or other evidence of any Additional Expense(s), and reimbursement to the Town shall be made within thirty (30) days after presentation of such invoices or other evidence. Failure to comply with this subsection shall be grounds for denial of any application without prejudice, or revocation of any permit previously issued. Reimbursement of the Town under this subsection shall be a condition for the endorsement of any plan, the issuance of any final permit, or the issuance of any certificate of zoning compliance for an approved application, or the renewal of any periodic or temporary approval, as the case may be. 
4 

D. 	Post Approval Notices and Fees. The Town is authorized to place a notice of non-payment of review fees on the land records if any fees from pre-approval or post-approval non-staff reviews are not paid for a period of 90 days. 
§144.060 Periodic Updates of Fee Schedule 
The foregoing fees schedules are based upon an analysis of the expenses incurred, on average, in the processing of land use applications as of the date of passage of this Chapter. The First Selectman shall periodically examine the expenses incurred by the Town in the processing of land use applications, and shall make recommendations based on input from land use boards and commissions to the Board of Selectmen for adjustments to the foregoing fee schedules based upon current staffing, regulatory requirements, and other relevant factors. 
5 

Aquifer Protection Agency 

A Division of the 
Griswold Inland Wetlands Watercourses & Conservation Commission 

Municipal 
Aquifer Protection Area Regulations 

for the 
Town of Griswold 




Adopted: March 15, 2012 Effective date: April 01, 2012 Revised: 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 

SECTION PAGE 
1 Title and Authority.......................................................................................................................1 
2 Definitions ....................................................................................................................................2 
3 Delineation of Aquifer Protection Area Boundaries..................................................................8 
4 Prohibited and Regulated Activities ...........................................................................................9 
5 ActivitiesRegulatedbytheState..............................................................................................11 
6 Application for an exemption from prohibition or Regulation...............................................12 
7 General Registration, Permit Application and Transfer Procedures ......................................12 
8 Registration Requirements........................................................................................................13 
9 Permit Requirements.................................................................................................................15 
10 Public Hearings Regarding Permit Applications.......................................................................19 
11 BondandInsuranceRelevanttoPermitApplicants................................................................19 
12 BestManagementPractices..........................................................................................................19 
13 Other State, Federal and Local Laws.........................................................................................22 
14 Enforcement...............................................................................................................................22 
15 Amendments..............................................................................................................................24 
17 Conflict and Severance ..............................................................................................................24 
18 RegistrationandPermitApplicationFees................................................................................24 
19 EffectiveDateofRegulations....................................................................................................26 

–i– 
SECTION 1. Title and Authority 
(a) 	
Aquifers are an essential natural resource and a major source of public drinking water for the State of Connecticut. Use of groundwater will increase as the population grows and opportunities for new surface water supplies diminish due to the rising cost of land and increasingly intense development. At the same time, numerous drinking water wells have been contaminated by certain land use activities, and others are now threatened. To address this problem, Connecticut has established the Aquifer Protection Area Program (Connecticut General Statutes §22a-354a to §22a-354bb) to identify critical water supply aquifers and to protect them from pollution by managing land use. Protection requires coordinated responsibilities shared by the state, municipality and water companies to ensure a plentiful supply of public drinking water for present and future generations. It is therefore the purpose of these regulations to protect aquifer protection areas within the Town of Griswold by making provisions for: 

(1) 	
implementing regulations consistent with state regulations and An Act Concerning Aquifer Protection Areas, Connecticut General Statutes §22a-354a to §22a-354bb (“the Act”); 

(2) 	
delineating aquifer protection areas on the city/town zoning or inland wetland and watercourse areas maps; 

(3) 	
regulating land use activity within the aquifer protection area including: prohibiting certain new activities; registering existing regulated activities; and issuing permits for new regulated activities at registered facilities; and 

(4) 	
administering and enforcing these regulations. 



(b) 	
These regulations shall be known as the Aquifer Protection Area Regulations (the "APA Regulations") of the Town of Griswold. 

(c) 	
These regulations were adopted and may be amended, from time to time, in accordance with the provisions of §22a-354p of An Act Concerning Aquifer Protection Areas, the Connecticut General Statutes §22a-354a to §22a-354bb and the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies §22a-354i-1 through §22a-354i-10. 

(d) 	
The Inland Wetlands and Watercourses & Conservation Commission of the Town of Griswold is established as the Aquifer Protection Agency (the "Agency") in accordance with the "Ordinance for the Establishment of an Aquifer Protection Agency," (the "APA Ordinance") Chapter 6 effective 10/14/2004, and shall implement the purposes and provisions of the APA Ordinance and the Act. 

(e) 	
The Agency shall administer all provisions of the Act and shall approve or deny registrations, issue permits, issue permits with terms, conditions, limitations or modifications, or deny permits for all regulated activities in aquifer protection areas in the Town of Griswold pursuant to the Act. 


–1– 
Section 2. Definitions 
(f) 	As used in these regulations, the following definitions apply: 
(1) 	
"Affected water company" means “affected water company” as defined in §22a-354h of the Connecticut General Statutes; 

(2) 	
“Agency” means the board or commission authorized by the municipality under §22a­354o of the Connecticut General Statutes; 

(3) 	
“Agriculture” means “agriculture” as defined in the §1-1(q) of the Connecticut General Statutes; 

(4) 	
"Applicant" means, as appropriate in context, a person who applies for an exemption under §22a-354i-6 of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies, a permit under §22a-354i-8 of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies or a permit under Section 9 of the APA Regulations; 

(5) 	
"Application” means, as appropriate in context, an application for an exemption under §22a-354i-6 of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies, an application for a permit under §22a-354i-8 of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies or an application for a permit under Section 9 of the APA Regulations; 

(6) 	
"Aquifer protection area" means "aquifer protection area" as defined in §22a-354h of the Connecticut General Statutes and any extension of such area approved by the Commissioner pursuant to §22a-354i-4 of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies; 

(7) 	
"Area of contribution" means "area of contribution" as defined in §22a-354h of the Connecticut General Statutes and as mapped in accordance with §22a-354b-1 of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies; 

(8) 	
"Bulk storage facility" means property where oil or petroleum liquids are received by tank vessel, pipeline, railroad car or tank vehicle for the purpose of storage for wholesale distribution; 

(9) 	
“Certified Hazardous Materials Manager” means a hazardous materials manager certified by the Institute of Hazardous Materials Management and who is qualified by reason of relevant specialized training and relevant specialized experience to conduct audits of regulated activities to ensure compliance with applicable laws and identify appropriate pollution prevention practices for such activities; 

(10) 	
"Commissioner" means the commissioner of environmental protection, or his or her agent; 

(11) 	
"Domestic sewage" means "domestic sewage" as defined in §22a-430-3(a) the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies; 


–2– 
(12) 	
"Facility" means property where a regulated activity is conducted by any person, including without limitation any buildings located on the property that are owned or leased by that person; and includes contiguous land owned, leased, or for which there is an option to purchase by that person; 

(13) 	
"Floor drain" means any opening in a floor or surface which opening or surface receives materials spilled or deposited thereon; 

(14) 	
"Hazardous material" means (A) any hazardous substance as defined in 40 CFR 302.4 and listed therein at Table 302.4, excluding mixtures with a total concentration of less than 1% hazardous substances based on volume, (B) any hazardous waste as defined in §22a-449(c)-101 of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies, (C) any pesticide as defined in §22a-47 of the Connecticut General Statutes, or (D) any oil or petroleum as defined in §22a-448 of the Connecticut General Statutes; 

(15) 	
"Hazardous waste" means "hazardous waste" as defined in §22a-449(c)-101 of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies; 

(16) 	
"Industrial laundry" means a facility for washing clothes, cloth or other fabric used in industrial operations; 

(17) 	
"Infiltration device" means any discharge device installed below or above the ground surface that is designed to discharge liquid to the ground; 

(18) 	
"Inland wetland and watercourse areas map" means a map pursuant to §22a-42a of the Connecticut General Statutes; 

(19) 	
"ISO 14001 environmental management system certification" means a current ISO 14001 environmental management system certification issued by an ISO 14001 environmental management system registrar that is accredited by the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) -American Society for Quality (ASQ) National Accreditation Board (ANAB); 

(20) 	
"Level A mapping" means the lines as shown on Level A maps approved or prepared by the Commissioner pursuant to §22a-354c, §22a-354d or §22a-354z of the Connecticut General Statutes encompassing the area of contribution and recharge areas; 

(21) 	
"Lubricating oil" means oil that contains less than 1% chlorinated solvents and is used for the sole purpose of lubricating, cutting, grinding, machining, stamping or quenching metals; 

(22) 	
"Municipality" means "municipality" as defined in §22a-354h of the Connecticut General Statutes; 

(23) 	
"Owner" means the owner or lessee of the facility in question; 

(24) 	
"De-icing chemical" means sodium chloride, calcium chloride, or calcium magnesium acetate; 


–3– 
(25) 	
"Person" means any individual, firm, partnership, association, syndicate, company, trust, corporation, limited liability company, municipality, agency, political or administrative subdivision of the state, or other legal entity of any kind; 

(26) 	
"Pollution" means “pollution” as defined in §22a-423 of the Connecticut General Statutes; 

(27) 	
“Pollution prevention” means the use of processes and materials so as to reduce or minimize the amount of hazardous materials used or the quantity and concentration of pollutants in waste generated; 

(28) 	
"Professional engineer" means a professional engineer licensed in accordance with Chapter 391 of the Connecticut General Statutes, and who is qualified by reason of relevant specialized training and relevant specialized experience to conduct audits of regulated activities to ensure compliance with applicable law and identify appropriate pollution prevention practices for such activities; 

(29) 	
"Publicly Owned Treatment Works” means “publicly owned treatment works” as defined in §22a-430-3 of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies; 

(30) 	
"Public service company" means "public service company" as defined in §16-1 of the Connecticut General Statutes; 

(31) 	
“Public supply well" means “public supply well” as defined in §19-13-B51b of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies; 

(32) 	
"Recharge area" means “recharge area” as defined in §22a-354h of the Connecticut General Statutes and as mapped in accordance with §22a-354b-1 of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies; 

(33) 	
“Registered regulated activity” means a regulated activity which has been registered under §22a-354i-7 of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies or Section 8 of the APA Regulations, and is conducted at the facility identified in such registration; 

(34) 	
"Registrant" means a person, who or which, has submitted a registration for an existing regulated activity under §22a-354i-7 of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies or Section 4 of the APA Regulations; 

(35) 	
"Regulated activity" means any of the following activities, which are located or conducted, wholly or partially, in an aquifer protection area, except as provided for in §22a-354i-5(c) and §22a-354i-6 of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies, or Section 4 of the APA Regulations: 


(A) 	underground storage or transmission of oil or petroleum, to the extent such activity is not pre-empted by federal law, or hazardous material, except for (i) an underground storage tank that contains number two (2) fuel oil and is located more than five hundred (500) feet from a public supply well subject to regulation under §22a-354c or §22a-354z of the Connecticut General Statutes, 
–4– 
or (ii) underground electrical facilities such as transformers, breakers, or cables containing oil for cooling or insulation purposes which are owned and operated by a public service company, 
(B) 	
oil or petroleum dispensing for the purpose of retail, wholesale or fleet use, 

(C) 	
on-site storage of hazardous materials for the purpose of wholesale sale, 

(D) 	
repair or maintenance of vehicles or internal combustion engines of vehicles, involving the use, storage or disposal of hazardous materials, including solvents, lubricants, paints, brake fluids, transmission fluids or the generation of hazardous wastes, 

(E) 	
salvage operations of metal or vehicle parts, 

(F) 	
wastewater discharges to ground water other than domestic sewage and stormwater, except for discharges from the following that have received a permit from the Commissioner pursuant to §22a-430 of the Connecticut General Statutes: (i) a pump and treat system for ground water remediation, (ii) a potable water treatment system, (iii) heat pump system, (iv) non-contact cooling water system, (v) swimming pools, 

(G) 	
car or truck washing, unless all waste waters from such activity are lawfully disposed of through a connection to a publicly owned treatment works, 

(H) 	
production or refining of chemicals, including without limitation hazardous materials or asphalt, 

(I) 	
clothes or cloth cleaning service which involves the use, storage or disposal of hazardous materials including without limitation dry-cleaning solvents, 

(J) 	
industrial laundry activity that involves the cleaning of clothes or cloth contaminated by hazardous material, unless all waste waters from such activity are lawfully disposed of through a connection to a publicly owned treatment works, 

(K) 	
generation of electrical power by means of fossil fuels, except for (i) generation of electrical power by an emergency engine as defined by §22a-174-22(a)(2) of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies, or (ii) generation of electrical power by means of natural gas or propane, 

(L) 	
production of electronic boards, electrical components, or other electrical equipment involving the use, storage or disposal of any hazardous material or involving metal plating, degreasing of parts or equipment, or etching operations, 


–5– 
(M) 	
embalming or crematory services which involve the use, storage or disposal of hazardous material, unless all waste waters from such activity are lawfully disposed of through a connection to a publicly owned treatment works, 

(N) 	
furniture stripping operations which involve the use, storage or disposal of hazardous materials, 

(O) 	
furniture finishing operations which involve the use, storage or disposal of hazardous materials, unless all waste waters from such activity are lawfully disposed of through a connection to a publicly owned treatment works, 

(P) 	
storage, treatment or disposal of hazardous waste subject to a permit under §22a-449(c)-100 to §22a-449(c)-110, inclusive, of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies, 

(Q) 	
biological or chemical testing, analysis or research which involves the use, storage or disposal of hazardous material, unless all waste waters from such activity are lawfully disposed of through a connection to a publicly owned treatment works, and provided that on-site testing of a public supply well by a public water utility is not a regulated activity, 

(R) 	
pest control services which involve storage, mixing or loading of pesticides or other hazardous materials, 

(S) 	
photographic finishing which involves the use, storage or disposal of hazardous materials, unless all waste water from such activity are lawfully disposed of through a connection to a publicly owned treatment works, 

(T) 	
production or fabrication of metal products which involves the use, storage or disposal of hazardous materials including (i) metal cleaning or degreasing with industrial solvents, (ii) metal plating, or (iii) metal etching, 

(U) 	
printing, plate making, lithography, photoengraving, or gravure, which involves the use, storage or disposal of hazardous materials, 

(V) 	
accumulation or storage of waste oil, anti-freeze or spent lead-acid batteries which are subject to a general permit issued by the Commissioner under §22a­208(i) and §22a-454(e)(1) of the Connecticut General Statutes, 

(W) 	
production of rubber, resin cements, elastomers or plastic, which involves the use, storage or disposal of hazardous materials, 

(X) 	
storage of de-icing chemicals, unless such storage takes place within a weather-tight water-proof structure for the purpose of retail sale or for the purpose of de-icing parking areas or access roads to parking areas, 


–6– 
(Y) 	
accumulation, storage, handling, recycling, disposal, reduction, processing, burning, transfer or composting of solid waste which is subject to a permit issued by the Commissioner pursuant to §22a-207b, §22a-208a, and §22a-208c of the Connecticut General Statute, except for a potable water treatment sludge disposal area, 

(Z) 	
dying, coating or printing of textiles, or tanning or finishing of leather, which activity involves the use, storage or disposal of hazardous materials, 


(AA) 	production of wood veneer, plywood, reconstituted wood or pressure-treated wood, which involves the use, storage or disposal of hazardous material, and 
(BB) 	pulp production processes that involve bleaching; 
(36) 	
"Release" means "release" as defined in §22a-133k-1 of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies; 

(37) 	
"State aquifer protection regulations" means §22a-354i-1 to §22a-354i-10, inclusive, of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies; 

(38) 	
"Storage" means the holding or possession of any hazardous material; 

(39) 	
"Storage tank" means a stationary device which is designed to store hazardous materials, and is constructed of non-earthen materials including without limitation concrete, steel, fiberglass or plastic; 

(40) 	
"Topographic feature" means an object, whether natural or man-made, located on the earth surface and of sufficient size that it appears on a 1:24,000 scale topographic quadrangle map drawn by the United States Geological Survey; 

(41) 	
"Underground" when referring to a storage tank or storage tank component means that ten percent or more of the volumetric capacity of such tank or component is below the surface of the ground and that portion which is below the surface of the ground is not fully visible for inspection; 

(42) 	
“Vehicle” or "vehicles" means a “vessel” as defined by §15-170 of the Connecticut General Statutes, and any vehicle propelled or drawn by any non-muscular power, including without limitation an automobile, aircraft, all-terrain vehicle, tractor, lawn mower or snowmobile; 

(43) 	
"Waters” means “waters” as defined in §22a-423 of the Connecticut General Statutes; 

(44) 	
"Well field" means “well field” as defined in §22a-354h of the Connecticut General Statutes; and 

(45) 	
"Zoning district map" means any map showing zoning districts prepared in accordance with maps adopted pursuant to §8-3 of the Connecticut General Statutes. 


–7– 
SECTION 3. Delineation of Aquifer Protection Area Boundaries 
(a) 	
The zoning, planning, or planning and zoning commission shall delineate the aquifer protection areas on the Town of Griswold zoning district map or, if zoning district maps do not exist, the inland wetland and watercourse areas map adopted pursuant to §22a-42a the Connecticut General Statutes. Such delineation shall consist of the combined areas of contribution and recharge areas as shown on Level A maps approved or prepared by the Commissioner. 

(1) 	
Such boundaries shall be delineated within one hundred twenty (120) days after being notified by the Commissioner that an aquifer protection area is located partially or entirely within the Town of Griswold. 

(2) 	
Notice of such delineation shall be published in a newspaper having substantial circulation in the affected area. Such notice shall include at least the following: 

(A) 	
a map or detailed description of the subject aquifer protection area; and 

(B) 	
the name, telephone number, and address of a representative of the Agency who may be reached for further information. 





(b) 	
In order to clarify the location of an aquifer protection area boundary, the Agency may apply to the Commissioner to extend such boundary to coincide with the nearest property line, municipal boundary or topographic feature pursuant to §22a-354i-4 of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies. Such extension shall, at a minimum, fully encompass the aquifer protection areas bounded by the approved level A mapping but shall not exceed the distance necessary to clarify the location of the aquifer protection area or to facilitate the administration of regulations pertaining thereto. An aquifer protection area boundary may not be extended without prior written approval of the Commissioner. 


(1) 	Any request by the Agency to the Commissioner for extension of an aquifer protection area boundary shall include at least the following: 
(A) 	
A map to scale delineating (i) the aquifer protection area boundary mapped under Section 3(a) of the APA regulations and (ii) the proposed extension of the aquifer protection area boundary; 

(B) 	
A certification by the chairperson or duly authorized agent of the Agency that notice of such request has been provided to all owners of property within the proposed extended aquifer protection area and all affected water companies in accordance with the following: 

(i) 
Such notice shall include at least the following: 


(aa) 	A map showing the aquifer protection area boundaries and the proposed extension of such boundaries, 
(bb) 	the name, address, and telephone number of a representative of the Agency who may be contacted for further information, and 
–8– 
(cc) 	a statement that any person may, not later than thirty (30) days after said notification, submit to the Agency written comments on such proposed boundary extension; 
(ii) Such notice shall be effectuated by the following: 
(aa) 	Delivery of notice by certified mail to those individuals and entities identified in Subsection (b)(1)(B) of this Section, or 
(bb) 	the publication of a notice in a newspaper having substantial circulation in the affected area; and posting of notice near the proposed boundaries of the subject aquifer protection area of at least four signs each of which shall be at least four square feet in size (2' x2'); and 
(C) 	A summary of comments received by such Agency regarding the proposed boundary extension and the Agency’s response. 
(2) 	Not later than sixty (60) days after receiving the Commissioner's written approval of a request to extend an aquifer protection area boundary, the Agency shall cause such boundary to be delineated in accordance with Subsection (a) of this Section. 
(c) 	
No person may challenge the boundaries of the aquifer protection area under the APA Regulations unless such challenge is based solely on a failure by the Agency to properly delineate the boundaries in accordance with §22a-354n of the Connecticut General Statutes. 

(d) 	
A map of the location and boundaries of the aquifer protection areas, or regulated areas, shall be available for inspection in the Office of the Town Clerk or the Agency. 

(e) 	
If the Level A mapping is amended in accordance with §22a-354b-1(i) or §22a-354b-1(j) of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies, the Agency shall cause the amended aquifer protection area boundary to be delineated in accordance with Subsections (a) or (b) of this Section. 


SECTION 4. Prohibited and Regulated Activities 
(a) 	
All regulated activities are prohibited in aquifer protection areas, except as specified in Subsection (b) of this Section. 

(b) 	
The following regulated activities are not prohibited in aquifer protection areas: 

(1) 	
a registered regulated activity which is conducted in compliance with §22a-354i-9 of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies or Section 12 of the APA Regulations; 

(2) 	
a regulated activity which has received a permit issued pursuant to §22a-354i-8 of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies or Section 9 of the APA Regulations; and 




–9– 
(3) 	a regulated activity which is on any municipally owned site undergoing remedial action pursuant to 40 CFR 271 at the time the applicable aquifer protection area is designated on a municipal zoning district map or inland wetland map, provided: (1) no such regulated activity substantially commenced or was in active operation for the five-year period preceding the date that the applicable aquifer protection area is designated on a municipal zoning district map or inland wetland map, and (2) any person who engages in such regulated activity within the ten-year period commencing on the date that such applicable aquifer protection area is designated on a municipal zoning district map or inland wetland map registers such regulated activity on a form prescribed by the Commissioner of Environmental Protection and in accordance with the provisions of section 22a-354i-7 of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies. 
(c) 	The following are not regulated activities: 
(1) 	
Any activity conducted at a residence without compensation; 

(2) 	
any activity involving the use or storage of no more than two and one-half (2.5) gallons of each type of hazardous material on-site at any one time, provided the total of all hazardous materials on-site does not exceed fifty-five (55) gallons at any one time; 

(3) 	
any agricultural activity regulated pursuant to §22a-354m(d) of the Connecticut General Statutes; 

(4) 	
any activity provided all the following conditions are satisfied: 

(A) 	
such activity takes place solely within an enclosed building in an area with an impermeable floor, 

(B) 	
such activity involves no more than 10% of the floor area in the building where the activity takes place, 

(C) 	
any hazardous material used in connection with such activity is stored in such building at all times, 

(D) 	
all waste waters generated by such activity are lawfully disposed through a connection to a publicly owned treatment works, and 

(E) 	
such activity does not involve (i) repair or maintenance of internal combustion engines, including without limitation, vehicles, or equipment associated with such vehicles, (ii) underground storage of any hazardous material, or (iii) above ground storage of more than one hundred and ten (110) gallons of hazardous materials; 



(5) 	
any activity solely involving the use of lubricating oil provided all the following conditions are satisfied: 


(A) 	such activity does not involve cleaning of metals with chlorinated solvents at the facility, 
– 10 – 
(B) 	
such activity takes place solely within an enclosed building in an area with an impermeable floor, 

(C) 	
any hazardous material used in connection with such activity is stored in such building at all times, and 

(D) 	
such activity does not involve: (i) repair or maintenance of internal combustion engines, including without limitation, vehicles, or equipment associated with such vehicles, (ii) underground storage of any hazardous material, or (iii) above ground storage of more than one hundred ten (110) gallons of such lubricating oil and associated hazardous waste; and 


(6) 	any activity involving the dispensing of oil or petroleum from an above-ground storage tank or tanks with an aggregate volume of two thousand (2000) gallons or less provided all the following conditions are satisfied: 
(A) 	
such dispensing activity takes place solely on a paved surface which is covered by a roof, 

(B) 	
the above-ground storage tank(s) is a double-walled tank with overfill alarms, and 

(C) 	
all associated piping is either above ground, or has secondary containment. 


(d) 	Determination of a non-regulated activity 
(1) 	
Any person proposing to carry out a non-regulated activity, as set forth in Section 4(c) of these regulations, in an aquifer protection area shall, prior to commencement of such activity, notify the Agency or its duly authorized agent on a form provided by the Agency. Such form shall provide sufficient information to enable the Agency or its duly authorized agent to properly determine that the proposed activity is a regulated activity or a non-regulated activity within the aquifer protection area. 

(2) 	
If such activity is determined to be a non-regulated activity, then no further action under the APA Regulations is necessary. 


SECTION 5. Activities Regulated by the State 
(a) 	
The Commissioner shall exclusively regulate activities within aquifer protection areas that are specified in §22a-354p(g) of the Connecticut General Statutes. The Agency shall regulate all other regulated activities. 

(b) 	
Any person conducting regulated activities that are within the authority of the Commissioner shall submit a registration or obtain a permit or exemption from the Commissioner prior to engaging in such activity. The Commissioner shall process applications for those regulated activities. 


– 11 – 
(c) 	The Agency may submit an advisory decision to the Commissioner for consideration on any permit regulated under this Section in accordance with the Connecticut General Statutes §22a­354p(g). 
SECTION 6. Application for an exemption from prohibition or Regulation 
(a) 	
The owner or operator of a regulated activity may seek an exemption from the Commissioner pursuant to §22a-354i-6 of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies. Any person seeking an exemption from the Commissioner shall concurrently submit a copy of the application for an exemption to the Agency and any affected water company. 

(b) 	
The Agency may submit written comments to the Commissioner on any exemption regulated under this Section in accordance with §22a-354i-6(c) of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies within sixty (60) days of the agency receipt of copy of the application. 


SECTION 7. General Registration, Permit Application and Transfer Procedures 
(a) 	
All applications for permits and registrations shall contain sufficient information for a fair and informed determination of the issues. The Agency may request additional information from the applicant for this purpose. 

(b) 	
The day of receipt of a registration, permit application or transfer form shall be the day of the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Agency, immediately following the day of submission of the application to the Agency or its duly authorized agent, or thirty-five (35) days after such submission, whichever is sooner. 

(c) 	
At any time during the review period, the Agency may require the applicant or registrant to provide additional information about the regulated activity. Requests for additional information shall not stay the time limitations for registrations and permits as set forth in Sections 8 and 9 of the APA Regulations. 

(d) 	
All permit applications and registrations shall be open for public inspection. 

(e) 	
Incomplete permit applications and registrations may be denied without prejudice. 

(f) 	
No permit or registration issued under Sections 8 or 9 of the APA Regulations shall be assigned or transferred except with written approval by the Agency. 

(g) 	
The Agency shall notify the town clerk of any adjoining municipality of the pendency of any application, petition, appeal, request or plan concerning any project on any site in which: (1) any portion of the property affected by a decision of such agency is within five-hundred feet of the boundary of the adjoining municipality; (2) a significant portion of the traffic to the completed project on the site will use streets within the adjoining municipality to enter or exit the site; (3) a significant portion of the sewer or water drainage from the project on the site will flow through and significantly impact the drainage or sewerage system within the adjoining municipality; or 


(4) water runoff from the improved site will impact streets or other municipal or private 
– 12 – 
property within the adjoining municipality. Such notice shall be made by certified mail, return receipt requested, and shall be mailed within seven days of the date of receipt of the application, petition, request or plan. Such adjoining municipality may, through a representative, appear and be heard at any hearing on any such application, petition, appeal, request or plan. 
SECTION 8. Registration Requirements 
(a) 	
Any person engaged in a regulated activity which substantially commenced, or was in active operation within the past five (5) years, or with respect to which a municipal building permit was issued, either (A) before the effective date of the state aquifer protection regulations, or (B) before the date an applicable aquifer protection area is designated on a municipal zoning district map or inland wetland and watercourse areas map, whichever occurs later, or for any municipally owned site undergoing remedial action pursuant to 40 CFR 271, any person who engages in a regulated activity within the ten (10) year period commencing on the date the applicable aquifer protection area is designated on a municipal zoning district map or inland wetlands map, shall register the activity in accordance with this Section unless such person has pending an application for an exemption pursuant to §22a-354i-6 of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies. 

(1) 	
The Commissioner shall process registrations for those regulated activities specified in §22a-354p(g) of the Connecticut General Statutes. The Agency shall process registrations for all other regulated activities. 

(2) 	
If the regulated activity is not specified in §22a-354p(g) of the Connecticut General Statutes, the person engaged in such activity shall submit a registration to the Agency not later than one hundred eighty (180) days after adoption of regulations pursuant to §22a-354p of the Connecticut General Statutes, or the designation the aquifer protection area pursuant to §22a-354i-2 of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies, whichever occurs later. Any municipally owned site undergoing remedial action pursuant to 40 CFR 271, the person engaged in such regulated activity shall submit a registration within the ten (10) year period commencing on the date the applicable aquifer protection area is designated on a municipal zoning district map or inland wetlands map. Any person submitting a registration pursuant to the requirements of this subsection shall simultaneously file a copy of the registration with the Commissioner, Commissioner of Public Health and the affected water company. 



(b) 	
All registrations shall be provided on a form prescribed by the Agency and shall be accompanied by the correct registration fee in accordance with Section 18 of the APA Regulations. Such registration forms may be obtained from the office of the Agency. Such registration forms shall include at least the following information in writing or on maps or drawings: 


(1) The name, business telephone number, street address and mailing address of the: 
(A) 	Registrant; if the registrant is a corporation or limited partnership, the full name of the facility and such corporation or limited partnership as registered with the Connecticut Secretary of State, and any officer or governing or managing body of any partnership, association, firm or corporation, 
– 13 – 
(B) 	
owner of such facility if different than the registrant, and 

(C) 	
manager or operator overseeing the operations of such facility; 


(2) 	
the location of such facility, using street address or other appropriate method of location, and a map showing the property boundaries of the facility on a 1:24,000 scale United States Geological Survey topographic quadrangle base; 

(3) 	
an identification of the regulated activity or activities conducted at the facility, as described in Section 2(a)(35) of the APA Regulations, which regulated activity or activities shall consist of any regulated activity which substantially commenced, was in active operation, or with respect to which a municipal building permit was issued within the past five years; and 

(4) 	
a certification by the registrant that the subject regulated activity is in compliance with the best management practices set forth in Section 12(a) of the APA Regulations, as follows, signed after satisfying the statements set forth in the following certification: 


"I have personally examined and am familiar with the information submitted in this registration and all attachments, and I certify, based on reasonable investigation, including my inquiry of those individuals responsible for obtaining the information, the submitted information is true, accurate and complete to the best of my knowledge and belief. I understand that any false statement made in this document or certification may be punishable as a criminal offense under §53a-157b of the Connecticut General Statutes and any other applicable law.” 
(c) 	
When deemed necessary to protect a public supply well subject to regulation under §22a-354c or §22a-354z of the Connecticut General Statutes, the Agency may: 

(1) 	
require, by written notice, any registrant to submit for review and written approval a storm water management plan prepared in accordance with Section 12(b) of the APA Regulations. If so required, the storm water management plan shall be implemented by the registrant immediately upon its approval; or 

(2) 	
require, by written notice, any registrant to submit for review and written approval the materials management plan prepared in accordance with Section 12(a) of the APA Regulations. If so required, the materials management plan shall be implemented by the registrant immediately upon its approval. 



(d) 	
If the Agency determines that a registration is incomplete, it shall reject the registration and notify the registrant of what additional information is required and the date by which it shall be submitted. 

(e) 	
If the registration is determined to be complete, and the regulated activity is eligible for registration, the Agency shall send written notification of such registration to the registrant. Such registration shall be determined to be complete and eligible if the registrant has not otherwise received a notice of rejection from the Agency, not later than one hundred and eighty 


(180) days after the date the registration is received by the Agency. 
– 14 – 
(f) 	
The following general provisions shall be included in the issuance of all registrations: 

(1) 	
The Agency has relied in whole or in part on information provided by the registrant and if such information subsequently proves to be false, deceptive, incomplete or inaccurate, the registration may be modified, suspended or revoked; 

(2) 	
all registrations issued by the Agency are subject to and do not derogate any present or future rights or powers of the Commissioner, Agency, or municipality, and convey no rights in real estate or material nor any exclusive privileges, and are further subject to any and all public and private rights and to any federal, state, and municipal laws or regulations pertinent to the subject land or activity; 

(3) 	
a complete registration shall expire five (5) years from the date of receipt of such registration by the Agency; 

(4) 	
the registrant shall apply to the Agency to renew the registration on a form prescribed by the Agency for a facility prior to expiration of such registration; and 

(5) 	
If a registered regulated activity is out of business or inactive when registration renewal is required, a five (5) year allowance shall be in effect from the date the registration expires. If the registrant has not applied to renew the registration within five (5) years of the date the registration expires, the facility is no longer eligible for registration. 



(g) 	
If a regulated activity which is eligible for registration in accordance with Subsection (a) of this Section fails to be registered or if the registrant of an active registered activity fails to apply for renewal prior to expiration, the Commissioner or municipal aquifer protection agency, as appropriate, may accept a late registration at their discretion, subject to the limitations in Subsection (f)(5) of this Section. 

(h) 	
Any person wishing to assume the benefits under a registration for regulated activities shall apply to transfer such registration on a form prescribed by the Agency and submitted to the Agency. 


SECTION 9. Permit Requirements 
(a) 	
Any person may apply for a permit to add a regulated activity to a facility where a registered regulated activity occurs. 

(b) 	
The Agency shall process permit applications for those registrants that have registered pursuant to Section 8 of the APA Regulations. The Commissioner shall process permit applications for regulated activities specified in §22a-354p(g) of the Connecticut General Statutes and for those registrants that have registered pursuant to §22a-354i-7(b)(1) of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies. 

(c) 	
Action shall be taken on permit applications within sixty-five (65) days after the completion of a public hearing or in the absence of a public hearing within sixty-five (65) days from the date of receipt of the application. The applicant may consent to one or more extensions of either of these timeframes, provided the total extension of all such periods is sixty-five (65) days or less. 


– 15 – 
(d) 	An application for a permit shall be made on a form prescribed by the Agency and shall be accompanied by the correct application fee in accordance with Section 18 of the APA Regulations. Such permit application forms may be obtained from the office of the Agency. Simultaneously with filing an application, the applicant shall send a copy of the application to the Commissioner, the Commissioner of Public Health and the affected water company. An application shall include the following information: 
(1) 	
The information as required for a registration under Section 8(b) of the APA Regulations shall be provided for the proposed regulated activity; 

(2) 	
a confirmation and certification that the existing and proposed activity: 

(A) 	
remains and shall remain in compliance with Section 12(a) of the APA Regulations, 

(B) 	
shall not increase the number of underground storage tanks used for storage of hazardous materials, and 

(C) 	
remains and shall remain in compliance with all local, state, and federal environmental laws; 



(3) 	
a materials management plan in accordance with Section 12(a) of the APA Regulations; 

(4) 	
a storm water management plan in accordance with Section 12(b) of the APA Regulations; 

(5) 	
the following environmental compliance information with respect to environmental violations which occurred at the facility where the regulated activities are conducted, within the five years immediately preceding the date of the application: 

(A) 	
any criminal conviction involving a violation of any environmental protection law, 

(B) 	
any civil penalty imposed in any state or federal judicial proceeding, or any penalty exceeding five thousand dollars imposed in any administrative proceeding, and 

(C) 	
any judicial or administrative orders issued regarding any such violation together with the dates, case or docket numbers, or other information which identifies the proceeding. For any such proceeding initiated by the state or federal government, the Agency may require submission of a copy of any official document associated with the proceeding, the final judgment or order; 



(6) 	
any additional information deemed necessary by the Agency regarding potential threats to the ground water and proposed safeguards; and 

(7) 	
the following certification signed by the applicant and the individual responsible for preparing the application, after satisfying the statements set forth in the certification: 


– 16 – 
"I have personally examined and am familiar with the information submitted in this document and all attachments, and I certify, based on reasonable investigation, including my inquiry of those individuals responsible for obtaining the information, the submitted information is true, accurate and complete to the best of my knowledge and belief. I understand that any false statement made in the submitted information is punishable as a criminal offense under §53a-157b of the Connecticut General Statutes and any other applicable law.” 
(e) 	
The Commissioner, any affected water company or the Commissioner of Public Health may, not later than thirty (30) days after receiving a copy of an application for a permit under this Section, submit to the Agency written comments on such application. The Agency shall give due consideration to any such comments, and shall provide a copy of the decision to the Commissioner, the affected water company and the Commissioner of Public Health. 

(f) 	
To carry out the purposes of the Act, the Agency may grant an application as filed, grant it upon such terms, conditions, limitations or modifications necessary, or deny it. The Agency shall state upon the record the reason for its decision. 

(g) 	
The Agency may hold a public hearing on an application for a permit in accordance with Section 10 of the APA regulations. 

(h) 	
The Agency shall not issue a permit unless a complete application has been received and the applicant demonstrates to the Agency's satisfaction that all requirements of this Section of the APA regulations have been satisfied and all of the following standards and criteria have been met: 

(1) 	
the proposed regulated activity shall take place at a facility where a registered regulated activity occurs; 

(2) 	
the proposed regulated activity shall not increase the number, or storage capacity of underground storage tanks used for hazardous materials except for the replacement of an existing underground storage tank in accordance with Section 12(a)(3) of the APA Regulations; 

(3) 	
the materials management plan and storm water management plan have been satisfactorily prepared in accordance with Sections 12(a) and 12(b) of the APA Regulations; 

(4) 	
the applicant has submitted a confirmation and certification that all regulated activities remain and shall remain in compliance with all local, state and federal environmental laws in accordance with Subsection (d)(2) of this Section; 

(5) 	
the applicant’s compliance record does not indicate (A) that any noncompliance resulted from indifference to or disregard for the legal requirements, (B) an unwillingness or inability to devote the resources necessary to comply and remain in compliance, or (C) that instances of noncompliance have led to serious environmental harm, harm to human health or safety, or a substantial risk of such harm; 




– 17 – 
(6) 	
the proposed regulated activity shall be conducted in accordance with Section 12 of the APA Regulations; 

(7) 	
the existing regulated activity is being conducted in accordance with Section 12 of the APA Regulations; and 

(8) 	
the certification required under Subsection (d)(7) of this Section has been signed by the applicant and the individual responsible for preparing the application. 


(i) 	
The Agency may impose reasonable conditions or limitations on any permit issued under this Section to assure protection of the ground water, including, but not limited to the following: 

(1) 	
best management practices in addition to those set forth in Section 12 of the APA Regulations; and 

(2) 	
ground water monitoring. 



(j) 	
The following general provisions shall be included in the issuance of all permits: 

(1) 	
the Agency has relied in whole or in part on information provided by the applicant and if such information subsequently proves to be false, deceptive, incomplete or inaccurate, the permit may be modified, suspended or revoked; 

(2) 	
all permits issued by the Agency are subject to and do not derogate any present or future rights or powers of the Commissioner, Agency, or municipality, and convey no rights in real estate or material nor any exclusive privileges, and are further subject to any and all public and private rights and to any federal, state, and municipal laws or regulations pertinent to the subject land or activity; 

(3) 	
the permit shall expire ten (10) years from the date of issuance of such permit by the Agency; and 

(4) 	
a person shall apply to the Agency to renew the permit on a form prescribed by the Agency prior to expiration of such permit. Such renewal shall be granted upon request by the Agency unless a substantial change in the permitted activity is proposed, or enforcement action with regard to the regulated activity has been taken, in which case, a new permit application shall be submitted and reviewed in accordance with the provisions of this Section. 



(k) 	
The Agency shall notify the applicant or permittee within fifteen (15) days of the date of the decision by certified mail, return receipt requested, and the Agency shall cause notice of its order in issuance or denial of a permit to be published in a newspaper having a general circulation in the municipality in which the aquifer protection area is located. 

(l) 	
A permittee may request a modification of a permit from the Agency. Such request shall be on a form prescribed by the Agency, and shall include the facts and reasons supporting the request. The Agency may require the permittee to submit a new application for a permit or renewal in lieu of a modification request. 


– 18 – 
(m) 	A person wishing to assume the benefits under a permit for regulated activities shall apply to transfer such permit on a form prescribed by the Agency and submitted to the Agency. 
SECTION 10. Public Hearings Regarding Permit Applications 
(a) 	
If the Agency decides to hold a public hearing regarding an application for a permit to conduct a regulated activity within an aquifer protection area, such hearing shall commence no later than sixty-five (65) days after the receipt of such application. 

(b) 	
Notice of the hearing shall be published at least twice at intervals of not less than two (2) days, the first not more than fifteen (15) days and not fewer than ten (10) days, and the last not less than two (2) days before the date set for the hearing in a newspaper having a general circulation in each city/town where the affected aquifer, or any part thereof, is located. 

(c) 	
The Agency shall send to any affected water company, at least ten (10) days before the hearing, a copy of the notice by certified mail, return receipt requested. Any affected water company may, through a representative, appear and be heard at any such hearing. 

(d) 	
All applications, maps and documents relating thereto shall be open for public inspection. 

(e) 	
At such hearing any person or persons may appear and be heard. 

(f) 	
The hearing shall be completed within thirty-five (35) days of its commencement. 

(g) 	
The applicant may consent to an extension of the time frames in Subsections (a) or (f) of this Section, provided the total extension of all such periods, including any extensions provided in Section 9(c), totals sixty-five (65) days or less. 

(h) 	
In reaching its decision on any application after a public hearing, the Agency shall base its decision on the record of that hearing. Documentary evidence or other material not in the hearing record shall not be considered by the Agency in its decision. 

(i) 	
The applicant or permittee shall be notified of the Agency’s decision in accordance with Section 9(k) of the APA Regulations. 


SECTION 11. Bond and Insurance Relevant to Permit Applicants 
(a) 	
An applicant may be required to file a bond as a condition of the permit. 

(b) 	
Any bond or surety shall be conditioned on compliance with all provisions of these regulations and the terms, conditions and limitations established in the permit. 


SECTION 12. Best Management Practices 
(a) 	Every regulated activity shall be conducted in accordance with the following: 
– 19 – 
(1) 	
hazardous materials may be stored above ground within an aquifer protection area only in accordance with the following conditions: 

(A) 	
hazardous material shall be stored in a building or under a roof that minimizes storm water entry to the hazardous material storage area, except that a roof is not required for a bulk storage facility as defined in Section 2 of the APA Regulations, 

(B) 	
floors within a building or under a roof where hazardous material may be stored shall be constructed or treated to protect the surface of the floor from deterioration due to spillage of any such material, 

(C) 	
a structure which may be used for storage or transfer of hazardous material shall be protected from storm water run-on, and ground water intrusion, 

(D) 	
hazardous material shall be stored within an impermeable containment area which is capable of containing at least the volume of the largest container of such hazardous material present in such area, or 10% of the total volume of all such containers in such area, whichever is larger, without overflow of released hazardous material from the containment area, 

(E) 	
hazardous material shall not be stored with other hazardous materials that are incompatible and may create a hazard of fire, explosion or generation of toxic substances, 

(F) 	
hazardous material shall be stored only in a container that has been certified to meet state or federal specifications for containers suitable for the transport or storage of such material, 

(G) 	
hazardous material shall be stored only in an area that is secured against un­authorized entry by the public, and 

(H) 	
the requirements of this subdivision are intended to supplement, and not to supersede, any other applicable requirements of federal, state, or local law, including applicable requirements of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976; 



(2) 	
no person shall increase the number of underground storage tanks used to store hazardous materials; 

(3) 	
an underground storage tank used to store hazardous materials shall not be replaced with a larger tank unless (A) there is no more than a 25% increase in volume of the larger replacement tank, and (B) the larger replacement tank is a double-walled tank with co-axial piping, both meeting new installation component standards pursuant to §22a-449(d)-1(e) and §22a-449(d)-102 of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies, and with interstitial monitoring; 

(4) 	
no person shall use, maintain or install floor drains, dry wells or other infiltration devices or appurtenances which allow the release of waste waters to the ground, unless such 


– 20 – 
release is permitted by the Commissioner in accordance with §22a-430 or §22a-430b of the Connecticut General Statutes; and 
(5) 	a materials management plan shall be developed and implemented in accordance with the following: 
(A) 	
a materials management plan shall contain, at a minimum, the following information with respect to the subject regulated activity: 

(i) 	
a pollution prevention assessment consisting of a detailed evaluation of alternatives to the use of hazardous materials or processes and practices that would reduce or eliminate the use of hazardous materials, and implementation of such alternatives where possible and feasible, 

(ii) 	
a description of any operations or practices which may pose a threat of pollution to the aquifer, which shall include the following: 


(aa) 	a process flow diagram identifying where hazardous materials are stored, disposed and used, and where hazardous wastes are generated and subsequently stored and disposed, 
(bb) 	an inventory of all hazardous materials which are likely to be or will be manufactured, produced, stored, utilized or otherwise handled, and 
(cc) 	a description of waste, including waste waters generated, and a description of how such wastes are handled, stored and disposed, 
(iii) 	the name, street address, mailing address, title and telephone number of the individual(s) responsible for implementing the materials management plan and the individual(s) who should be contacted in an emergency, 
(iv) 	
a record-keeping system to account for the types, quantities, and disposition of hazardous materials which are manufactured, produced, utilized, stored, or otherwise handled or which are discharged or emitted; such record-keeping system shall be maintained at the subject facility and shall be made available thereat for inspection during normal business hours by the Commissioner and the municipal aquifer protection agency, and 

(v) 	
an emergency response plan for responding to a release of hazardous materials. Such plan shall describe how each such release could result in pollution to the underlying aquifer and shall set forth the methods used or to be used to prevent and abate any such a release; 

(B) 	
when a materials management plan is required under either Section 8(c) or 9(d) 


– 21 – 
of the APA Regulations, such materials management plan shall be completed and certified by a professional engineer or a certified hazardous materials manager, or, if the facility where the regulated activity is conducted has received and maintained an ISO 14001 environmental management system certification, then the registrant may complete and certify the materials management plan; and 
(C) 	the materials management plan shall be maintained at the subject facility and shall be made available thereat for inspection during normal business hours by the Commissioner and the municipal aquifer protection agency. 
(b) 	The development and implementation of a storm water management plan required for regulated activities in accordance with Sections 8(c) and 9(d) of the APA Regulations, shall be as follows: A storm water management plan shall assure that storm water run-off generated by the subject regulated activity is (i) managed in a manner so as to prevent pollution of ground water, and (ii) shall comply with all of the requirements for the General Permit of the Discharge of Storm Water associated with a Commercial Activity issued pursuant to §22a-430b of the Connecticut General Statutes. 
SECTION 13. Other State, Federal and Local Laws 
(a) 	
Nothing in these regulations shall obviate the requirement for the applicant to obtain any other assents, permits or licenses required by law or regulation by the Town of Griswold, State of Connecticut and the Government of the United States including any approval required by the Connecticut Department of Energy and Environmental Protection and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and the United States Environmental Protection Agency. Obtaining such assents, permits or licenses are the sole responsibility of the applicant. 

(b) 	
No person shall conduct any regulated activity within an aquifer protection area which requires zoning or subdivision approval without first having obtained a valid certificate of zoning or subdivision approval, special permit, special exception or variance, or other documentation establishing that the proposal complies with the Town of Griswold zoning or subdivision regulations. 


SECTION 14. Enforcement 
(a) 	
The Agency may appoint a duly authorized agent to act in its behalf with the authority to issue notices of violation or cease and desist orders. 

(b) 	
If the Agency or its duly authorized agent finds that any person is conducting or maintaining any activity, facility or condition which violates any provision of these regulations, the Agency or its duly authorized agent may: 


(1) 	Issue a notice of violation. 
– 22 – 
(A) 	
The notice of violation shall state the nature of the violation, the jurisdiction of the Agency, and the necessary action required to correct the violation including without limitation halting the activity in the aquifer protection area. 

(B) 	
The Agency may request that the person appear at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Agency to discuss the unauthorized activity, and/or provide a written reply to the notice or file an application for the necessary permit or registration. Failure to carry out the action(s) directed in a notice of violation may result in issuance of an order under Subsection (2) of this Section or other enforcement proceedings as provided by law. 


(2) 	
Issue a written order. 

(A) 	
Such order shall be issued by certified mail, return receipt requested to such person conducting such activity or maintaining such facility or condition to cease such activity immediately or to correct such facility or condition. The Agency shall send a copy of such order to any affected water company by certified mail, return receipt requested. 

(B) 	
Within ten (10) days of the issuance of such order the Agency shall hold a hearing to provide the person an opportunity to be heard and show cause why the order should not remain in effect. Any affected water company may testify at the hearing. The Agency shall consider the facts presented at the hearing and, within ten (10) days of the completion of the hearing, notify the person by certified mail, return receipt requested, that the original order remains in effect, that a revised order is in effect, or that the order has been withdrawn. 



(3) 	
Suspend or revoke registration or permit. 

(A) 	
The Agency may suspend or revoke a registration or a permit if it finds, after a hearing, that the registrant or permittee has not complied with the terms, conditions or limitations set forth in the registration or the permit. Prior to revoking or suspending any registration or permit, the Agency shall issue notice to the registrant or the permittee, personally or by certified mail, return receipt requested, setting forth the facts or conduct that warrants the intended action. 

(B) 	
The Agency shall hold a hearing to provide the registrant or permittee an opportunity to show that it is in compliance with its registration or permit. The Agency shall notify the registrant or permittee of its decision by certified mail within fifteen (15) days of the date of its decision. The Agency shall publish notice of a suspension or revocation in a newspaper having general circulation in the Town of Griswold. 




(c) 	
An order issued pursuant to Subsection (b)(2) of this Section shall be effective upon issuance, shall remain in effect until the Agency affirms, revises, or withdraws the order, and shall not delay or bar an action pursuant to Subsection (b)(3) of this Section. 

(d) 	
A court may assess criminal and or civil penalties to any person who commits, takes part in, or 


– 23 – 
assists in any violation of any provision of the APA regulations in accordance with §22a-354s(b) and §22a-354s(c) of the Connecticut General Statutes. 
SECTION 15. Amendments 
(a) 	
These regulations may be amended, changed or repealed in accordance with §22a-354p(b) of the Connecticut General Statutes. 

(b) 	
If a complete application is filed with the Agency which is in conformance with the APA regulations as of the date of its filing, the permit issued shall not be required to comply with any changes in regulations taking effect on or after the filing date. The provisions of this Section shall not apply to the establishment, amendment, or change of the boundaries of the aquifer protection area or to any changes in the APA Regulations necessary to make the regulations consistent with Chapter 446i of the Connecticut General Statutes as of the date of the Agency’s decision. 


Section 16. Appeals 
(a) 	Appeal of the Agency’s regulation, order, decision or action shall be made in accordance with §22a-354q of the Connecticut General Statutes. 
SECTION 17. Conflict and Severance 
(a) 	
If there is a conflict between the provisions of the APA Regulations, the provision that imposes the most stringent standards shall govern. The invalidity of any word, clause, sentence, section, part, subsection, subdivision or provision of these regulations shall not affect the validity of any other part that can be given effect without such valid part or parts. 

(b) 	
If there is a conflict between the provisions of the APA Regulations and the Act, the provisions of the Act shall govern. 


SECTION 18. Registration and Permit Application Fees 
(a) 	
All fees required by these regulations shall be submitted to the Agency by certified check or money order payable to Town of Griswold at the time the registration or permit application is filed with the Agency. 

(b) 	
No registration or permit application shall be granted or approved by the Agency unless the correct registration/application fee is paid in full or unless a waiver has been granted by the Agency pursuant to Subsection (f) of this Section. 

(c) 	
The registration or permit application fee is nonrefundable. 

(d) 	
Registration or permit application fees shall be based on the following schedule: 


– 24 – 
Fee Schedule  
Facility Size  
Small (< 1 acre)  Medium (1-5 acres)  Large (> 5 acres)  
Registrations:  
Industrial  $100  $200  $300  
Commercial  $100  $200  $300  
Other  $100  $200  $300  

Fee Schedule (continued)  
Facility Size  
Small (< 1 acre)  Medium (1-5 acres)  Large (> 5 acres)  
Permits:  
Industrial  $100  $200  $300  
Commercial  $100  $200  $300  
Other  $100  $200  $300  
Materials Management Plan Reviews  $100  $200  $300  
Storm water Management Plan Reviews  $100  $200  $300  
Public Hearing  $200  $200  $200  
Facility Inspection/Monitoring  $100  $150  $200  
Regulation Petition  $100  $100  $200  
Transfer Fee  $50  $50  $50  

(e) 	
Boards, commissions, councils and departments of the Town of Griswold are exempt from all fee requirements. 

(f) 	
The registrant or applicant may petition the Agency to waive, reduce or allow delayed payment of the fee. Such petitions shall be in writing and shall state fully the facts and circumstances the Agency should consider in its determination under this Section. The Agency may waive all or part of the application fee if the Agency determines that: 

(1) 	
the activity applied for would clearly result in a substantial public benefit to the environment or to the public health and safety and the registrant or applicant would reasonably be deterred from initiating the activity solely or primarily as a result of the amount of the registration or permit application fee; or 

(2) 	
the amount of the registration or permit application fee is clearly excessive in relation to the cost to the City/Town for reviewing and processing the application. 



(g) 	
Extra Assessments 


In the event that additional expenses, including but not limited to outside consultants, experts, or legal advisors are incurred in processing the registration or permit application the 
– 25 – 
applicant/registrant may be assessed an additional fee not to exceed $ 5,000 to cover said costs. Said fees are to be estimated by the duly authorized agent and submitted with the application fee and held until the application is completely processed after which time any residual funds pertaining to this assessment are to be returned to the applicant/registrant. 
For the purpose of this assessment, an “outside consultant” means a professional who is not an employee of the Town of Griswold including but not limited to engineering, environmental, hydrogeology and hazardous materials management professionals. 
(h) The Agency shall state upon its record the basis for all actions under this Section. 
SECTION 19. Effective Date of Regulations 
The APA Regulations, APA boundaries and amendments thereto, shall become effective upon (1) the Commissioner’s determination that such regulations are reasonably related to the purpose of ground water protection and not inconsistent with the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies §22a-354i-1 through §22a-354i-10 and (2) filing in the Office of the Town Clerk. 
Adopted Date: March 15, 2012 
Effective Date: 
Revision Date: 
– 26 – –– 









