


CITY OF GROTON



ZONING REGULATIONS




































Planning and Zoning Commission Effective - December 1, 2016
Recently Amended to September 2,2020
 
Page intentionally blank
 

Welcome!


These Regulations have been organized in a way that will hopefully make it easy for you to find the information you are looking for.

One of the first things to do might be to determine the zon ing district(s) that the property is located
within. The zoning map can be found here:


http://cityofgroton .com/ped

Then, to help you find the information you seek, the Regulations are organized around the following major themes:

							
THEME		SECTIONS			DESCRIPTION		
Regulatory Basics	1.	Regulatory Basics
2.	Words And Terms	Basic information about interpreting and applying the Regulations.	
Zones and Uses and Standards	3.	Residence Zones
4.	Business And Industrial Zones
5.	Special Zones
6.	Use-Related Provisions	Information specific  to different zones and uses	
General Standards and Requirements	7.	Standards
8.	Special Provisions	Standards related to development
activities	
Procedures	9.  Administrative  Provisions	How applications will be processed	

Users of these Regulations may find the following resources helpful:


People
•	Groton City Planner
•	Building and Zoning Official
•	Planning and Zoning Commission
•	Zoning Board of Appeals

Other Regulations I Maps
•	Inland Wetlands  Regulations http://cityofgroton .com/government ­
services/departments/building-and -zoning/
•	Subdivision  Regulations http://cityofgroton .com/ped/regulations-and -maps/
•	City Ordinances http://cityofgroton .com/government -services/boards-and­ commissions/ordinances/
•	GIS  mapping http://gis.groton-ct.gov/


Other Information
•	City website www .cityofgroton .com
•	Assessment information
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS	PDF Users may easily navigate this document using
Bookmarks in the navigation pane


1.	REGULATORY  BASICS
 
1.1.	Authority	1-1
1.2.	Purposes	1-1
1.3.	Jurisdiction	1-1
1.4.	Zoning Districts and Zoning Map	1-2
1.5.	Construction of Regulations	1-2
1.6.	Validity and Severability	1-4
1.7.	Effective Date	1-4
2.	WORDS AND TERMS
2.1.	Basic Usage	2-1
2.2.	Definitions	2-3
3.	RESIDENCE ZONES
3.1.	Overview	3-1
3.2.	Purpose	3-1
3.3.	Permitted Principal Buildings, Structures and Uses	3-2
3.4.	Permitted Accessory Buildings, Structures and Uses	3-4
3.5.	Dimensiona l Standards	3-6
4.	BUSINESS AND INDUSTRIAL ZONES
4.1.	Overview	4-1
4.2.	WBR - Waterfront Business Residence District.	4-2
4.3.	FCD - Five Corners District	4-9
4.4.	GC - General Commercia l Zone	4-14
4.5.	IT - Industrial I Technology Zone	4-19
4.6.	TC - Technology Campus Zone	4-23
5.	SPECIAL ZONES
5.1.	Overview	5-1
5.2.	ROS- Recreation Open Space	5-2
5.3.	CAM - Coasta lArea Management Overlay Zo ne	5-4
5.4.	FP - Flood Protection Overlay Zone	5-7
5.5.	POD - Planned Development Districts	5-24
6.	USE-RELATED PROVISIONS
6.1.	Overview	6-1
6.2.	Multi-Family Standards	6-1
6.3.	Rear Lots	6-4
6.4.	.	Home-Based Businesses	6-5
6.5.	Day Care	6-6
6.6.	Bed and Breakfast Establishments	6-7
6.7.	Gasoline Stations, Ve hicle Dealerships,Ve hicle Repair and Service	6-9
6.8.	Ha Ifway Houses	6-10
6.9.	Comm unity Residentia I Counseling Facilities (CRCFs)	6-11
6.10.	Vocationa I Training Facility	6-12
6.11.	Specialized Classrooms	6-14
6.12.	Boat Club, Beach Club and Marina	6-15
6.13.	Telecommunication  Facilities	6-16
6.14.	Historic/Institution a I Ad a ptive Reuse	6-20
7.	STANDARDS
7.1.	Parking and Loading Regulations	7-1
7.2.	Sign Regulations	7-12
7.3.	Earthwork and the Importing and  Exporting Of Earth Products	7-18
7.4.	Corner Visibility	7-19
7.5.	Access Drives, Accessways and Access Management.	7-20
7.6.	Outdoor Lighting	7-22
7.7.	Storm water Management.	7-26
7.8.	Performance Standards	7-27
8.	SPECIAL PROVISIONS
8.1.	Frontage Required	8-1
8.2.	Dimensiona I Exceptions	8-1
8.3.	Non-Conforming Uses, Structures and Lots	8-2
8.4.	Design Considerations	8-5
9.	ADMINISTRATIVE  PROVISIONS
9.1.	Pre-Application Reviews	9-1
9.2.	Zoning I BuiIding Permit	9-2
9.3.	Site Pian Application	9-4
9.4.	Special Permit Application	9-11
9.5.	Text Amendment Application	9-19
9.6.	Zone Cha nge App Iication	9-23
9.7.	Zoning Board of Appea Is	9-27
9.8.	Administration and Enforcement	9-31
9.9.	Procedura I Details	9-32
 
APPENDIX A: SITE PLAN REQUIREMENTS APPENDIX B: COASTAL SITE PLAN REQUIREMENTS APPENDIX C: ZBA APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS CHRONOLOGY OF TEXT AMENDMENTS
 
Authority

1.	REGULATORY BASICS


1.1.	Authority


The Planning and Zoning Commission of the City of Groton,Connecticut, in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 124 of the Connecticut General Statutes (CGS), as amended, has adopted and established the following Zoning Regulations for the City of Groton, Connecticut.


1.2.	Purposes


In accordance with CGS Section 8-2, as amended,these Regulations are adopted to :


1.	Promote the orderly development of the City in accordance with the Plan of Conservation and
Development;


2.	.	Lessen congestion in the streets;


3.	Secure safety from fire, panic, flood and other dangers;


4.	Promote health and the general welfare;


5.	Provide adequate light and air;


6.	Prevent the overcrowding of land;


7.	Avoid undue concentration of population;  and


8.	Facilitate the adequate provisio n for transportation, water, sewera ge, schools, parks and other
public requirements.


1.3.	Jurisdiction


These regulations apply to all areas within the jurisdictional limits of the City of Groton including all buildings, land and water areas, unless otherwise prohibited by federal or state law .
 
Zoning Districts and Zoning Map

1.4.	Zoning Districts and Zoning Map


1.4.A	Zoning Map


1.		In order to accomplish the purposes of these Regulations, the City is divided into zoning districts as enumerated within these Regulations .

2.	The location and boundaries of said zones are set forth on the map entitled, "Zoning Map of the City of Groton" which is filed in the office of the City Clerk.

3.	.	Such zoning map, with all explanatory matter thereon, is hereby declared to be a part of these Regulations as fully as if set out herein.

1.4.B	Interpretation of District Boundaries


1.	The zone boundary lines are intended generally to follow the centerlines of streets and similar rights-of-way,rivers, lot lines, or City boundary lines,all as shown on the Zoning Map; but where a zone boundary line does not follow such a line, its position shall be determined by how such boundary is depicted on said Zoning Map.

2.	In case of uncertainty as to the true location of a zone boundary line in a particular instance, the determination thereof shall be made by the Planning and Zoning Commission.


1.5.	Construction of Regulations


1.5.A	Permitted and Prohibited Uses


1.	No land, premises, building or structure shall be used or occupied,in whole or in part, for any purpose other than as permitted by these Regulations for the zone in which the land, premises, building or structure is located.

2.	All uses or occupancy of land, premises, building or structure shall be in conformity with the Regulations for that zone in which such land, premises, building or structure is located.

3.	Any use not permitted within a zoning district by these Regulations shall be deemed to be prohibited within such district.
 
Construction of Regulations

1.5.B	Permitted and Prohibited Buildings and Structures


1.	No building or structure shall be erected, raised, moved, extended,enlarged, or altered for any purpose unless permitted by these Regulations for the zone in which the building or structure is located.

2.	All construction shall be in conformity with the Regulations provided for that zone in which such building or structure is located.

3.	Any building or structure not permitted within a zoning district by these Regulations shall be deemed to be prohibited within such district.

1.5.C	Minimum  Requirement


In their interpretation and applicat ion, the provisions of these Regulations shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety and comfort, convenience and general welfare unless the context clearly indicates that the provision is intended to be a maximum limitation .

1.5.D	Reduction of Lot Area or Dimension


1.	No lot or parcel shall be divided, subdivided or re-subdivided unless all parcels and lots meet all of the requirements for the zone in which they are located.

2.	No lot or parcel shall be so reduced,divided,or created that the area, width or other dimensions of any of the lots or parcels or any required yard setbacks or required open areas of any of the lots or parcels shall be less than prescribed by these Regulations.

3.	No building or structure or other site improvement shall be established, altered, modified, or enlarged such that the building coverage or lot coverage exceeds that which is prescribed by these Regulations .

1.5.E	In Case of Conflict


1.	These Regulations are not intended to interfere with:
a.	Any existi ng provisions of public law or ordinance ;

b.	Any rules, regulations, or permits to the use of buildings or premises; or

c.	Any private easements, covenants or other agreements between parties.


2.	However, where these Regulations impose a greater restriction upon the use of buildings or premises or upon the height of buildings or require larger yard setbacks, courts, or other standards than are imposed or required by other provisions of law or ordinance or by other rules, regulations or permits or by easements, covenants or agreements, the provisions of these Regulations shall control.
 
Validity and Severability

1.6.	Validity and Severability


1.	If any Section, paragraph,subd ivision, clause or prov ision of these Regulations is adjudged to be invalid,such adjudication sha ll apply only to the Section, paragraph,subdivision,clause or provision so adjudged,and the remainder of these Regulations sha ll be deemed valid and effective.

2.	All regulations and ordinances and parts thereof previously adopted for the City of Groton and in conflict herewith are hereby repealed.


1.7.	Effective Date

1.	Zon ing Regulations were origina lly adopted in the City of Groton in 1975 and became effective
on May 15, 1975.


2.	These Regulations and any amendments hereto sha ll become effective, as provided by law, upon enactment by the Planning and Zoning Commission of the City of Groton,Connecticut.
 
WORDS AND TERMS
Basic Usage

2.	WORDS AND TERMS


2.1.	Basic Usage


2.1.A	Basic Rules


1.	In the construction, interpretation, application,use and enforcement of these Regulations, the rules, terms, and definitions contained in this Section shall be observed and applied,except where the context clearly indicates otherwise.

2.	In the construction, interpretation, application, use and enforcement of these Regulations, words or terms not defined in this Section shall be interpreted by the Commission . In making any such interpretation, the Commission may:
a.	Consider the meaning that will give the regulation its most reasonable application;

b.	Consider the common meaning of the word or term; and/or

c.	Consult one or more of the following:
i.	The State Building Code, as amended.
ii.	The Connecticut General Statutes,as amended.
iii.	The Illustrated Book of Development Definitions (Rutgers University, Center for
Urban Policy Research (Piscataway, NJ), as amended.
iv.	Black's Law Dictionary.
v.	A comprehensive general dictionary.


3.	In the construction, interpretation, application, use and enforcement of these Regulations, the following rules shall apply:
a.	.	The word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary.

b.	The word "may" is permissive .

c.	Words used in the singular may include the plural, and the plural the singular.

d.	Words used in the present tense may include the future tense.

e.	Words which are specifically masculine or feminine shall be interpreted as interchangeable.

f.	Any official, agency,commission, board or department identified in these Regulations is that of the City of Groton, unless otherwise specified .
 
Basic Usage

2.1.B	Common Terms


In the construction, interpretation, application, use and enforcement of these Regulations, commonly used terms shall be interpreted as follows:

1.	The word 11 lot11  includes the words 11 plot11 , (/site" and 11 parcel11 •

 
2.	The words irzone 11
 
11 zoning district 11
 
and 11 district 11   have the same meaning.
 

3.	The phrase "used for" includes the phrases "arranged for", "designed for", "intended for",
 
"maintained for" and 11 occupied for 11
 
and vice versa.
 

4.	The phrase "these Regulations" refers to the entire Zoning Regulations of the City of Groton.


5.	The word "Section" refers to a section of these Regulations, unless otherwise specified.


6.	The word "person" or "applicant" includes any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, association, organization or other legal entity.

7.	The word "building" includes the word "structure", and any part thereof.

 
8.	The word 11 built11    includes the words 11 erected 11
11 enlarged 11
 
11  constructed 11
 
11  reconstructed 11
 
11 altered 11         or
 
•


9.	The "City" means the City of Groton, Connecticut.


10.	The "State" means the State of Connecticut.


11.	The "Commission" means the Planning and Zoning Commission of the City of Groton, unless otherwise specified.

12.	The phrase "Zoning Map" means the latest officially adopted Zoning Map of the City of Groton.
 

2.2.	Definitions


For the purpose of these Regulations, except as otherwise stated or as the context may otherwise require, the following words shall be defined as follows :

Accessory - See "Principal vs Accessory " in Section 2.2 of these Regulations.


Agriculture -As defined in CGS Section 1-l(q), the cultivation of the soil, dairying,forestry, raising or harvesting any agricultural or horticultural commodity, including the raising, shearing, feeding, caring for,training and management of livestock,including horses, bees, poultry, fur -bearing animals and wildlife, and the raising or harvesting of oysters, clams, mussels,other molluscan shellfish or fish;the operation, management ,conservation, improvement or maintenance of a farm and its buildings, tools and equipment, or salvaging timber or cleared land of brush or other debris left by a storm, as an incident to such farming operations;the production or harvesting of maple syrup or maple sugar,or any agricultural commodity, including lumber, as an incident to ordinary farming operations or the harvesting of mushrooms, the hatching of poultry, or the construction, operation or maintenance of ditches, canals, reservoirs or waterways used exclusively for farming purposes; handling, planting, drying, packing, packaging,processing,freezing,grading,storing or delivering to storage or to market, or to a carrier for transportation to market,or for direct sale any agricultural or horticultural commodity as an incident to ordinary farming operations, or,in the case of fruits and vegetables, as an incident to the preparation of such fruits or vegetables for market or for direct sale. See "Aquaculture ", "Farm ", and "Farming " in Section 2.2 of these Regulations.

Amusement Center -A bus iness establishm e nt containing more than three amusement devices.


Amusement Device - A machine that is controlled and operated by the insertion of a coin or token or electronic remuneration and intended for the amusement or recreation of a patron, including, but not limited to, baseball and football games, pinball games, electronic video games, and other similar games . Such devices shall be considered accessory an establishment provided there are three or fewer devices.

Animal Hospital- Any lot on which four or more dogs or cats or other animals, six months or older,are available for sale, boarded for compensation, or kept for medica l treatment.

Animated Sign- See "Sign-Related Terms" in Section 2.2 of these Regulations.


Antenna -A device used to receive or transmit telecommunications or radio signals. Such signals shall include, but not be limited to, radio,telev ision, cellular te lephone, paging, personal communication serv ices (PCS), and microwave communication s. Examples include panels, microwave dishes, and single poles known as whip antennae.

Apartment - A room or suite of two or more rooms within a multi-unit structure which is rented or occupied as the home or residence of an individual,family,or household.
 

Aquaculture -The farming of the waters of the state and tidal wetlands and the production of protein food, including fish, oysters, clams, mussels and other molluscan shellfish, on leased, franchised and public underwater farm lands. See "Agriculture", "Farm", and "Farming."

Assisted Living -See "Institutional Residential Facilities" in Section 2.2 of these Regulations.

Banners- See  "Sign-Related Terms" in Section 2.2 of these Regulations.

Basement -See "Story-Related Terms" in Section 2.2 of these Regulations.

Bed and Breakfast Establishment - See "Lodging Facilities" in Section 2.2 of these Regulations.

Boarding House - See "Residential Lodging Facilities" in Section 2.2 of these Regulations.

Boarding, Rooming, or Lodging Unit - See "Residential Lodging Facilities" in Section 2.2 of these Regulations.

Board I Passenger I Vehicle Ferry- See "Ferry and Boat-Related Terms" in Section 2.2 of these Regulations.

Buffer or Buffer Strip -A strip of landscaped land along a property line which, with the exception of required utility installations, shall be free of any building or use.



Building vs Structure


Building -A structure having a roof supported by columns or walls which is permanently affixed to the ground for the housing or enclosure of persons, animals, or property. The definition shall include any independent units into which a building is divided by party walls.
•	The connection of two buildings by means of an open porch, breezeway, passageway, carport, or other such open structure, with or without a roof, shall not be deemed to make them one building, except in the case of a private garage so attached to a dwelling.
•	The term "building" shall not include mobile homes or trailers.


Structure -Anything constructed or erected which requires location on the ground or attachment to something having a location on the ground. Except as otherwise indicated, "structures" as used in these Regulations shall be deemed to include buildings, swimming pools, open entries, pier signs, and fences or walls,. See Section 5.3.D of these Regulations for the definition of structure for floodplain management purposes.



Building - See "Building vs Structure" in Section 2.2 of these Regulations.

Building, Accessory - See "Principal vs Accessory" in Section 2.2 of these Regulations.


Building Group -Two or more principal buildings located on a single lot.
 




Building Height


Building Height - The vertical distance measured from average level of the ground along the street facade of the building to:
•	The highest point of the roof beams in the case of flat roofs;
•	To the average height of the gable in the case of pitched roofs; or
•	To the highest point of the building where no roof beams ex ist or there are structures wholly or partly above the roof.

Flat Roof	Pitched Roof


 
Roof Beam
t..
C)
"Qi
::c:
C)
c:
·!?	Flat
.co.	Roof
Average Grade Along Front Wall
 






Gable Roof


Average Grade Along Front Wall
 



Building, Principal - See "Principal vs Accessory "in Section 2.2 of these Regulations .

Building Setback Line - See "Setback " in Section 2.2 of these Regulations .


Business Services - Establishments prima rily engaged in rendering business-type serv ices including but not limited to banks,credit unions,loan companies, and other financial institutions, real estate and insurance agencies, utility offices,government , and printers.

Cellar - See "Story-Related Terms" in Section 2.2 of these Regulations .
 

Certified Massage Therapy- In accordance with CGS Section 20-206a(d), as may be amended, the systematic and scientific manipulation and treatment of the soft tissues of the body:
•	By use of pressure, friction, stroking, percussion, kneading, vibration by manual or mechanical means; and
•	By a therapist certified by the state of Connecticut as having met at least one of the following requirements:
o	Successful completion of a course of study that provides 500 or more classroom hours at a school of  massage therapy accredited by the American Massage Therapy Association; or
o	Successful completion of 70 classroom hours at a school of massage therapy accredited by the American Massage Therapy Association in addition to prior medical training including a Bachelor of Science degree in nursing, physical therapy, chiropractic science, osteopathy, or medicine.

Child Day Care Center - See "Day Care-Related Terms" in Section 2.2 of these Regulations.


Clubs, Lodges, and Associations -A recognized organization duly formed or existing under the laws of the State of Connecticut which has been established and is operated for a recreational, social, fraternal, religious, political, or athletic purpose whose facilities and activities are available only to the members and guests, and specifically excluding any organization whose chief activity is carried on primarily for business or gain unless specifically approved or authorized by the Commission.

Coastal Resources -As defined in CGS Section 22a-93, the coastal waters of the state, their natural resources, related marine and wildlife habitat and adjacent shorelands, both developed and undeveloped, that together form an integrated terrestrial and estuarine ecosystem.

Commission -The Planning and Zoning Commission of the City of Groton.

Community Residential Counseling Facility  - See "Institutional Residential Facilities" in Section 2.2 of these Regulations.

Condominium -A form of ownership in which more than one owner has control over a certain property jointly with one or more persons.

Congregate Housing - See "Institutional Residential Facilities" in Section 2.2 of these Regulations.

Convalescent Home, Nursing Home, or Rest Home -See "Institutional Residential Facilities" in Section
2.2	of  these Regulations.


Cooperative -A form of ownership in which more than one stockholder of a corporation has control over a certain property jointly with one or more other stockholders.

Corner Lot- See "Lot-Related Terms" in Section 2.2 of these Regulations.
 


Coverage-Related Terms


Building Coverage - The portion or percentage of a lot occupied or intended to be occupied by all buildings and structures on such lot as enclosed by the walls of all buildings on a lot, together with the area enclosed by the columns of all covered porches and similar roofed structures.  For the purposes of calculating building coverage, fences,landscape walls,and retaining walls shall not be included

Lot Coverage - See "Building Coverage " in Section 2.2 of these Regulations .




Building Coverage
Porch	-
Walkway	(-/)
 
Raised
 
Building
 
Deck	Footprint


Concrete Patio	Stone
Patio	Driveway

 

Outbuilding Footprint
 
Chimney	(
 


Day Care-Related Terms


Day Care-A program of supplementary care to people outside their own homes on a regular basis for a part of the twenty-four hours in one or more days in the week, generally excluding overnight hours.

Adult Day Care-Day care provided to adults unable to take care of themselves and/or in need of assistance.

Child Day Care -Day care provided to children, including nursery school and pre-school programs.



Day Care Center -A location which offers or provides day care to more than twelve related or unrelated people outside their own homes on a regular basis.

Family Day Care Home {Child)-A private family home caring for not more than six children, including the provider's own children not in school full time, where the children are cared for not less than three or more than twelve hours during a twenty-four-hour period and where care is given on a regularly recurring basis except that care may be provided in excess of twelve hours but not more than seventy-two consecutive hours to accommodate a need for extended care or intermittent short-term overnight care. During the regular school year, a maximum of three additional children who are in school full time, including the provider's own children, shall be permitted, except that if the provider has more than three children who are in school full time, all of the provider's children shall be permitted; This definition shall not be deemed to represent an intensification of use of a property.

Family Day Care Home {Adult)-A private family home caring for not more than six people, including the provider's own adult relatives where the people are cared for not less than three or more than twelve hours during a twenty-four-hour period and where care is given on a regularly recurring basis.

Group Day Care Home -A location which offers or provides day care:
•	to not fewer than seven or more than 12 related or unrelated people; or
•	That meets the definition of a family day care home except that it operates in a facility other than a private family home.
 

Developable Land -With regard to limitations on the number of lots in a subdivision in a residential zone, the amount of developable land is determined by the following methodology:

1.	Take the "gross area" of the property.

2.	Deduct the area of easements, rights-of-way, and other areas restricted from development use to determine the "available area".

3.	Calculate each of the following:


Minimum Open Space Area

In accordance with Section 3.05.5 of the Subdivision Regulations, multiply the "gross area" of the property by the open space set­ aside percentage.

Express the result in square feet or acres.
























4.	Determine which result ("resource-restricted area" or "minimum open space area" is larger) and deduct this from the "available area" to result in "developable area."

Development -Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, the construction of buildings or structures; the construction of additions, alterations or substantial improvements to buildings or structures; the placement of buildings or structures; mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment; the storage, deposition, or extraction of materials; and the installation, repair or removal of public or private sewage disposal systems or water supply facilities.
 

Drinking Establishment - An establishment where the primary activity is the sale of alcoholic beverages at retail for consumption on the premises under a permit from the Liquor Control Commission for a cafe or tavern.

Drive-In Establishment -A business establishment so developed that its principal retail or service character is dependent on providing a driveway approach or parking spaces for motor vehicles so as to either serve patrons while in the motor vehicle or permits consumption in the motor vehicle of food or beverage obtained by a patron from said business establishment, (e.g., restaurants, service stations, cleaners, banks, theaters, etc.).

Drop Box-An outdoor receptacle used to receive donations or contributions which has not been specifically approved or authorized by the City Planner or by the Commission.



Dwelling-Related  Terms


Dwelling -A building, or portion thereof, other than a Quonset hut, Nielson hut, or similar portable buildings used exclusively for residential occupancy, including one-family, two-family, and multi­ family dwellings.

Dwelling Unit-A dwelling, or portion thereof, providing a single housekeeping unit with complete living, sleeping, cooking, and eating facilities, including bathroom facilities.



One-Family Detached Dwelling- A dwelling accommodating one dwelling unit and having no party walls or walls in common with an adjacent house or houses.

One-Family Semi-Detached Dwelling- A one-family dwelling having one vertical party wall in common with an adjacent house, the two houses together accommodating but two dwelling units, one on either side of the vertical party wall.

Two-Family Detached Dwelling- A dwelling accommodating two dwelling units and having no vertical party wall or walls in common with an adjacent house or houses.

Multiple-Family Dwelling-A dwelling in which three or more families dwell independently, each occupying one or more bedrooms and kitchen.
 

Eating Establishment - See "Restaurant in Section 2.2 of these Regulations.


Family-Any number of individuals occupying a dwelling unit and living and cooking together as a single not-for-profit housekeeping unit, with all rooms used in common.  Occupants of an Institutional Residential Facility as that term is used in these Regulations shall not be considered to constitute a family.

Family Day Care Home -See "Day Care-Related Terms" in Section 2.2 of these Regulations.


Farm -A property used for farming including the farm buildings, and accessory buildings thereto, nurseries, orchards, ranges, greenhouses, hoop-houses and other temporary structures or other farming structures used primarily for the raising and, as an incident to ordinary farming operations, the sale of agricultural or horticultural commodities.

Farming - See "Agriculture" in Section 2.2 of these Regulations.



Ferry And Boat-Related Terms

Board/ Passenger/ Vehicle Ferry-A ferry boat which carries passengers and vehicles on trips which have separate origin and destination points, one or both of which are within the City of Groton.

Passenger Ferry-A ferry boat intended to carry passengers only and not vehicles on trips which have separate origin and destination points, one or both of which are within the City of Groton.

Tour/ Sportfishing Boat -Boats which carry passengers on recreational trips, when the trip has an origin point within the City of Groton.




Flood-Related Terms

See "Flood-Related Terms" in Section 5.3.D of these Regulations.
 

Floor Area -The floor area of a building is the sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of all buildings on the lot, measured from the exterior faces of exterior walls or from the centerline of walls separating two buildings. Floor area shall include the area of basements when used for residential, commercial, or industrial purposes, but need not include a cellar or portion of a basement used for incidental storage or housing of mechanical or central heating equipment.

Functionally-Dependent  Facility -See "Water Dependent" in Section 2.2 of these Regulations.


Garage, Private -An accessory building, or portion of a principal building, used for the storage of vehicles as an accessory use.

Garage, Vehicle Repair, and/or Service -A facility used for repairing, overhauling, removing, adjusting, replacing, assembling, or disassembling any parts of any motor, engine, or vehicle.

Gasoline Station - Any lot, building, or part thereof, used for the sale of gasoline or other petroleum, and which may include facilities for lubrication, washing, or otherwise servicing vehicles, but not including any painting.

Grandfathered - See "Non-Conforming-Related Terms" in Section 2.2 of these Regulations.

Group Day Care Home -See "Day Care-Related Terms" in Section 2.2 of these Regulations.

Habitable Room - A room or enclosed floor space used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking, or eating purposes, excluding kitchenettes or dining bays less than 60 square feet in area, bathrooms, water closet compartments, laundries, pantries, foyers, or communicating corridors, closets, storage spaces, and basements.
Halfway House - See "Institutional Residential Facilities" in Section 2.2 of these Regulations. Half-Story-See "Stary-Related Terms" in Section 2.2 of these Regulations. Historic/Institutional Adaptive Reuse -
The reuse of an existing building owned by the City or Town of Groton, the State of Connecticut or an
institution that is of historic, architectural, or aesthetic significance to a use that is not otherwise allowed in the zone.
 


Home-Based  Business


Home-Based Business -- The use of a portion of a dwelling for business purposes by the resident occupants which use is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of such dwelling unit for dwelling purposes when such use does not change the residential character thereof.

Home Office -- The use of a dwelling for occasional business use (as part of employment typically occurring elsewhere) or a home-based business involving no employees and minimal visits to the premises by non-residents.

Home Occupation, Minor -- The use of a dwelling for a home-based business (which shall not involve more than one (1) non-resident employee) involving no more than five (5) patron, client, or associate visits per week.

Home Occupation, Major -- The use of a dwelling for a home-based business when it involves:
•	Two (2) or more non-resident employees;
•	Or six or more patron, client, or associate visits per week; or
•	Classroom, studio, or outdoor teaching activity not normally permitted in the district.


A home-based business might include dressmaking and millinery, or might include consultation by such professions as physicians, dentists, lawyers, clergymen, architects, musicians, engineers, teachers, insurance agents, or real estate brokers.

Barbershops; beauty parlors; beauticians; manufacturing; commercial woodworking; animal hospitals; dance studios; mortuaries; tea rooms; restaurants; metal working; automobile, boat or other vehicle repair or painting; and other uses as may be determined by the Commission are specifically excluded from the definition of home-based business.



Hospital -A building licensed by the State Department of Health having facilities, medical staff, and all necessary personnel to provide diagnosis, care, and treatment of a wide range of acute conditions or chronic disease, including injuries.

Hotel - See "Lodging Facilities" in Section 2.2 of these Regulations.
 


Institutional Residential Facilities


Assisted Living - A residential environment consisting of private residential units and/or a managed group living environment primarily for persons who are fifty-five years of age or older where nursing services and assistance with activities of daily living is provided to help maintain a maximum level of independence.

Community Residential Counseling Facility  - A residential building or group of buildings in which counselors and staff members provide counseling, rehabilitation, evaluation, and/or other supportive services to a maximum of sixteen resident persons in lodging units, excluding dependents, seeking to arrest, reverse, or ameliorate a problem or disorder, including the compulsive use of alcohol or drugs, pursuant to an organized and structured program.

Included in this definition are facilities for women and/or children who have suffered physical abuse in a domestic relationship, as well as those facilities not exempted under CGS Section 8-3e.

This definition shall not include correctional institutions, halfway houses, group homes, or other community correction programs under the jurisdiction of the State of Connecticut Department of Correction pursuant to CGS Section 18-100, as may be amended, or court-ordered treatment programs under CGS Sections 19a-127e through 19a-127h, as may be amended.

Congregate Housing - A residential environment consisting of independent living assisted by congregate meals, housekeeping and services for residents, for persons sixty-two years old or older, who have temporary or periodic difficulties with one or more essential activities of daily living such as feeding, bathing, grooming, dressing or mobility.

Convalescent Home, Nursing Home, or Rest Home -.An institution licensed by the State Department of Health having facilities and all necessary personnel to provide services of a personal nature, nursing care under medical supervision, and direction to carry out non-surgical treatment, and dietary procedures for chronic diseases or convalescent stages of acute disease or injuries.

Halfway House -A building or group of buildings containing a residential or non-residential program, as the case may be, in which counselors and staff members provide supervision, counseling, rehabilitation, evaluation, and/or other support services to a maximum of sixteen resident persons under the jurisdiction of the State of Connecticut Department of Correction, the State of Connecticut Judicial Department, or the State of Connecticut Department of Health and Addiction Services, pursuant to the Connecticut General Statutes.



Institution or institutional Use -
A facility that provides a public service and is operated by a public or public/private group that is nonprofit in nature.
 

Junkyard or Motor Junk Business -The term "junk yard" shall be construed to include any "junkyard," "motor vehicle junk business," and "motor vehicle junk yard," as defined in State Statutes, any place of business or of outside storage or deposit, whether in connection with another business or not, which has stored or deposited two or more unregistered vehicles which are no longer intended or in condition for legal use on the public highways, or used parts of vehicles or old iron, metal, glass, paper, cordage, or other waste material or discarded second-hand material which has been a part,
or intended to be a part, of any vehicle, the sum of which parts or material shall be equal in bulk to
two or more vehicles. Said term shall also include any place of business or of outside storage or deposit of vehicles for parts or for use of the metal for scrap and where it is intended to burn materials which are part of a vehicle or cut up of the parts thereof.

Landscaped/ Landscaping-The term landscaped or landscaping shall mean an area appropriately graded and with the exception of ledge and natural rock outcropping shall be at least covered with grass, ground cover, evergreen plantings, and any additional plantings required by the Regulations or the Commission. See "Buffer or Buffer Strip"  See "Screening, Complete Visual" in Section 2.2 of these  Regulations.

Licensed Medical Marijuana Dispensary - A pharmacist licensed pursuant to Chapter 400j of the Connecticut General Statutes, who the Department of Consumer Protection has licensed to acquire, possess, distribute, and dispense marijuana pursuant to sections 1to15, inclusive, of "An Act Concerning the Palliative Use of Marijuana".

Licensed Medical Marijuana Producer - A person or organization that is licensed as a producer by the Connecticut Department of Consumer Protection under section 10 of an "An Act Concerning the Palliative Use of Marijuana and whose purpose is to cultivate marijuana for palliative use and selling, delivering, transporting or distributing such marijuana only to licensed dispensaries under sections 1 to 15, inclusive of the above Act.



Lodging Facilities


Bed and Breakfast Establishment -An owner-occupied building and property (i.e., the principal residence of the owner) having six or fewer guest rooms without separate kitchen facilities, in which overnight accommodations and breakfast only are provided to guests for a fee.

Hotel -A building providing transient lodging for the general public with or without meals and intended for public accommodation, and so designed that normal access and egress are controlled from a central point, and further, that no provisions are made for cooking in any lodging room.

Motel -A building or group of buildings providing transient lodging for the general public, having a private outside entrance for each room or suite of rooms, and for each of which rooms or suite of rooms off-street parking spaces are provided on the premises, and further, that no provision is made for cooking in any lodging room.
 
Section 2.2
WORDS AND TERMS
Definitions
 

Effective December 11 2016
 




lot-Related Terms


lot -A plot or parcel of land:
•	under the same ownership,
•	occupied or capable of being occupied by a principal building (or group of principal buildings, where so allowed) and the accessory buildings or uses customarily incident thereto, and
•	including such areas, setbacks, and yards as are required by these Regulations.



lot-Types

 
Corner lot-A front lot abutting upon two or more streets at their intersection.

Front lot-A lot having the required lot width on a street.

Rear lot-A lot in which the buildable area is located generally to the rear of other lots having frontage on the same street.

Through lot-A lot, other than a corner lot, which has frontage on two or more streets.
 



Street




















(pie-shape)
 


 
Front lot
 


Front Lot (Irregular)
 

Rear Lot
 





(continued}
 


lot line locations


Lot Line -Any property line bounding a lot.

 
Street Line -The dividing property line between a street
accepted by the City of
Groton or approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission  under the Subdivision Regulations and
the lot.
 




Street

etline	Streethne



'i 0'
 

t Lot
 
3. • Front Lot
 
Front Lot Line -On a rear lot, the lot line which is adjacent to the accessway leading to the
 
ner)	(corner)



•tlme	Side Lot
 




tine
 
rear lot and which is most closely parallel to the street providing access.

Rear Lot Line -The lot line generally opposite to the street line; if the rear lot line is less than 10 feet in length, or if the lot comes to a point in the rear, the rear lot line shall be deemed to be a line parallel to the street line, not less than 10 feet in length, lying farthest from the street line.
 
Side Lot Linc



Front Lot
(through)


Side Lot Lme
Side lot line

Front Lot
(pie-shape)
 





i











Front Lot
(irregular)
 

•"
"













Rear Lot
 

Side Lot Line -A lot line other than a "street line" or a "rear lot line."
 



Acce sway	Side lot Line
 


(continued)
 


Lot Measurements


Lot Area - The gross horizontal area contained within the property lines of the lot.


Lot Coverage -See "Coverage-Related Terms" in Section 2.2 of these Regulations.


Lot Depth - The mean distance from the street line of the lot measured in the general direction of the
sidelines of the lot.


Lot Width - The horizontal distance between side lot lines measured parallel to the street line and along the front yard setback line.


Lot Width

 
J  '	Rear Lot

Lot
 


...._
 
Width	Front Yiird	,,..-
Corner Lot	Setback

Lot
Widt h

"E ...	Front Lot
5
"'	Lot	...._
Width	I  Front Yard ,,,....
 

'\.
 
"	Selbac-k	 	
 



 
Front Yard
Setback
 







Lot
Widt h
 

Mean High Watermark-The average height of the tide measured and recorded during any given day or cycle period.

Micro-Brewery-Distillery-Winery -A facility manufacturing and/or producing beer, wine, and/or spirits and including the packaging of such alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises for retail or wholesale sales, or a combination thereof.

Motel - See "Lodging Facilities" in Section 2.2 of these Regulations.

Nightclub I Lounge I Dance Hall -A space in a building providing facilities for dancing and/or entertainment, and which may or may not be operated in conjunction with a restaurant/ eating establishment or a drinking establishment.



Non-Conforming-Related  Terms


Non-Conforming-A condition or situation that is not in conformance with a requirement of these Regulations.

Pre-Existing Non-Conforming -A condition or situation which existed lawfully on the effective date of these Regulations or any amendment thereto, and which fails to conform to one or more of the applicable provisions or requirements of these Regulations or such amendment thereto.

"Grandfathered" -A term used to describe a pre-existing non-conforming situation.



Non-Conforming Lot -A lot which does not conform to these Zoning Regulations for any prescribed lot requirements, such as lot area, width, or depth.

Non-Conforming Structure - A structure or building which does not conform to these Zoning Regulations for any prescribed structure or building requirement, such as front, side, or rear yard setback; building height, or building coverage; lot area per dwelling unit; dwelling units per building; parking and loading spaces; etc.

Non-Conforming Use -A use, whether of a building, structure, or lot, or combination thereof, which does not conform to the use regulations of the zoning district in which it is located.
 

Open Space -An area of land which is either naturally vegetated, is landscaped, or is developed and maintained for recreation or conservation purposes.

Open Space, Usable -That portion of the ground space on the same lot and contiguous to the principal building which is either landscaped or developed and maintained for recreation or conservation purposes. Usable open space shall not include those portions of a lot that are utilized for off-street parking or loading, driveway or building purposes. Usable open space shall not include those portions of a lot deemed unusable for recreation or conservation purposes by the Planning and Zoning Commission because of severe or dangerous topographic or soil conditions. (as used in the "Multi-Family Standards" section of the Regulations)

Parking Lot -An area other than a street used for the parking of registered vehicles.

Passenger Ferry- See "Ferry and Boat-Related Terms" in Section 2.2 of these Regulations.


Personal Services - Establishments primarily engaged in providing services involving the care of a person or their personal goods or apparel including but not limited to barbershops, beauty salons,
shoe repair, health clubs, certified massage therapy, laundromats, tailor, dressmaking, and millinery.


Premises -A lot, plot, or parcel of land, including the buildings or structures thereon.
 



Principal vs Accessory


Principal Use -The primary or predominant use or activity of a lot, building, structure, or property.
See also "Accessory Use"

Accessory Use -A use of land, building, or structure which is clearly incidental to, and customarily in connection with and located on the same lot with the principal building or use. See also "Principal Use"


Parameters  For Being  "Accessory"


Customary-Something commonly practiced, used, or observed such that it is considered conventional and typical rather than unusual.

Incidental - Something likely to ensue as a minor consequence of another activity or something that happens as a minor part or result of something else.

Subordinate -Something inferior, smaller, fewer, and of less importance or impact or something placed in or occupying a lower class, rank, or position.

Principal Building/ Structure -A building in which is conducted the main or principal use of the lot on which said building is located. The connection of another building or structure to the principal building or structure by means of an open porch, breezeway, passageway, carport, or other such open structure, with or without a roof, shall not be deemed to make such other building or structure part of the principal building or structure, except in the case of a private garage so attached to a dwelling. See also "Accessory Building/Structure" in Section 2.2 of these
Regulations.

Accessory Building/ Structure - A building or structure which is customarily incidental and clearly subordinate to the principal building and/or use on the same property. The connection of a building or structure to the principal building or structure by means of an open porch, breezeway, passageway, carport, or other such open structure, with or without a roof, shall not be deemed to make such other building or structure part of the principal building or structure, except in the
case of a private garage so attached to a dwelling. See also "Principal Building" in Section 2.2 of
these Regulations.
 

Rear Lot- See "Lot-Related Terms" in Section 2.2 of these Regulations.

Rear Lot Line - See "Lot-Related Terms" in Section 2.2 of these Regulations.


Recreational Vehicle -A vehicle which is: a) built on a single chassis; b) measures 400 square feet or less at the largest horizontal projections; c) designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable; and, d) designed primarily not for use a permanent dwelling, but a temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.

Repair Services - Establishments providing repair of electronic devices, office equipment, furniture, and similar items including but not limited to radio, television, and electrical appliances, upholstery shops, and shoe repair shops, but excluding automotive repair or services, major repair of boats or marine equipment, or machinery repair.


Residential lodging Facilities

Boarding House -A dwelling providing unsupervised and uncounseled living situations in which meals, or rooms and meals, are provided for compensation to more than one, but fewer than sixteen persons other than members of the family of the proprietor.

Boarding, Rooming, or Lodging Unit -A building or portion thereof providing a single housekeeping unit in an unsupervised and uncounseled setting, with living and sleeping facilities, including bathroom facilities, but excluding cooking and eating facilities.

Rooming House -A building providing unsupervised and uncounseled living situations in which rooms are rented for compensation to more than one (1), but fewer than sixteen (16), persons other than members of the family of the proprietor. The serving of meals or provision for cooking is prohibited.


Restaurant I Eating Establishment-An establishment in a permanent building, kept, used, maintained, and advertised as a place where meals are regularly served to the general public.

Retail Business -An establishment engaged in selling goods or merchandise to the general public for personal or household consumption. This may include but is not limited to apparel stores, drug stores, grocery, meat and seafood stores, antique shops, music shops, sporting goods stores, hobby shops, gift shops, and book, stationery, magazine, candy and tobacco shops; but excludes the sale of gasoline, motor vehicles, and heavy equipment.

Rooming House - See "Residential- Lodging Facilities" in Section 2.2 of these Regulations.
 

Screening, Complete Visual -A type of screening which affords a year-round effect and through which the screened object is totally obscured. Complete visual screening should consist of fences, walls, screen planting, or combinations, such as compact evergreen planting designed to provide 80% or more continuous opacity beginning at least twelve months after installation, when viewed horizontally from between 2 and 10 feet above average ground level provided such plants are maintained to provide such opacity on an on-going basis.

Setback-The minimum horizontal distance from any street or lot line to any building, structure, or use, measured in a straight line from and perpendicular to such street or lot line (i.e. - from the property line inward). See also "Yard" in Section 2.2 of these Regulations.

SF - Square feet.



Sign-Related Terms


Sign -An illustration or display of any kind, attached or erected in any manner and displayed out-of­ doors in view of the general public for recognized advertising purposes. The term sign shall include a directly illuminated sign erected inside the window display area of a building, as well as outside flags or banners, but shall not include a non-illuminated, on-premises sign erected inside the window display area of a building.



Animated Sign-Any sign or source of light, or part thereof, which flashes, alternates, rotates, moves, or in any way simulates motion, exclusive of time and temperature signs.

Banners-Attention generating devices of various shapes, sizes and colors that are typically made of, but not limited to, flexible materials such as fabric, cloth, nylon, canvas, that do not typically include a rigid frame and are intended to hang overhead from a pole, bracket, or similar device attached to a fixed object such as a light pole or building.

Commercial Advertising or Off-Premises Sign -Any sign owned or operated by any person, firm, or corporation engaged in the business of outdoor advertising for compensation for the use of such signs, or any sign advertising a commodity or activity not sold, produced, or conducted on the premises.

Directional Sign -A sign intended to direct the way to a place or activity or to point toward a place or activity.

Double-Face Sign- A sign containing the same advertisement on both sides of the supporting structure.

(continued}
 


Sign-Related Terms (continued)


Flashing Sign-Any sign, the illumination of which is not kept constant in intensity at all times, and/or which exhibits sudden or marked changes in such light intensity or color effect, exclusive of time and temperature signs.

Ground or Free-Standing Sign-A sign supported by one or more uprights or braces in or above the ground.

Illuminated Sign -A sign which is illuminated by either internal or external lighting devices or sources. Indirectly Illuminated Sign-A sign which is illuminated by external lighting devices or sources only.
Identification, On-Premises, or Point-of-Sale Sign -Any sign advertising a commodity sold or produced on or a business conducted on the premises where the sign is located.

Projecting Sign - A sign which is affixed to an exterior wall of any building and extending more than 15 inches beyond the building walls or parts thereof.

Wall Sign -A sign which is affixed to the exterior walls of any building and projecting not more than 15 inches from the building wall or parts thereof. Wall signs shall also include illuminated signs erected inside window display areas of a building.



Sign Area -The number of square feet contained within a single contiguous perimeter enclosing the extreme limits of the actual sign surface.  Structural members and supports required by the Building Code and not bearing advertising matter and not forming an integral part of the display shall be excluded from the sign area. The allowable area of a double face sign shall be computed on the one side only.

Number Of Signs- For the purpose of determining the number of signs, a sign shall be considered to be a single display surface or display device containing elements organized, related, and composed to for a unit. Where matter is displayed in a random manner without organized relationship of elements or where there is reasonable doubt about the relationship of elements, each element shall be considered to be a single sign.



Specialized Classrooms - Classroom or instructional  space intended to provide instruction  in specific subjects, including, but not limited to, engineering,  drafting, accounting,  or trades for adults not involving  any offensive  odor, noise, vibration, smoke, particulate matter, dust or other objectionable  effects,  and other studio-style classrooms for the purpose  of providing instruction in dance, art, theater, yoga, martial arts, music, etc.  No meal service, overnight activities, or outdoor activities shall occur on-site.  Office and storage space that supports the primary instructional  use is allowed.
 
Effective December 1, 2016	Section 2.2
WORDS AND TERMS
Definitions



Story-Related Terms


Story - That part of a building between any floor and the floor above, or in its absence, the ceiling or roof above unless such part is a cellar or a half-story . (Note that a basement is a story but a cellar is not a story. See Section 5.3.D of these Regulations for the definition of basement for floodplain management purposes.)



Cellar - A portion of a building located partly or wholly underground where the ceiling is not more more than 3.0 feet above the average level of finished grade adjoining the exterior walls of the street fa ade.

Half-Story - - Any area under the pitched roof at the top of a building where:
•	The floor is not more than 2 feet below the plate; and
•	Less than 60% of the area of the floor is used for rooms, baths, or toilets.


Story	Not A Story




Attic



 
More than 60% of
the floor area is used for rooms, baths, or toilets
 
Not more than 60% of the floor area is used for rooms, baths, or toilets
 




Floor




 

Street
Facade
 
I	Ceiling
-	Basement
 

Street
Facade   j	Celling
..<.,3•.. ....
 


---.
Cellar
 
I	.......... ......	.. ......... - -
 

...  ..
 
Ceiling is more than 3' above
average grade along street facade
 
Ceiling is less than 3' above
average grade along street facade
 

Street -Any right-of-way used for streets, roads, highways, avenues, boulevards, lanes, or other vehicular access ways.

Street, Private -Any street other than a public street.


Street, Public -Any street officially accepted by the City of Groton, as approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission under the Subdivision Regulations of the City of Groton.

Street Facade -The exterior wall surface of a building which is visible from and generally parallel to the street providing access and/or the mailing address.

Street Line - See "Lot-Related Terms" in Section 2.2 of these Regulations.

Structure - See "Building vs Structure" in Section 2.2 of these Regulations.

Structural Alteration -Any change in or addition to the structural or supporting members of a building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams, or girders.

Structural Fill - Screened earth material engineered to meet specific gradients of particle size, geotechnical conditions and controlled compaction rates to support the foundation or slab of a building or structure or of a paved surface.

Swimming Pool -Any "swimming pool" as defined and regulated in "The Public Health Code of the State of Connecticut," as amended.

Taxi Services Facility-A commercial site where licensed taxis are parked and maintained and from which are dispatched only from site.

Telecommunication Facility - Towers and/or antennae and accessory structures and equipment used in receiving or transmitting telecommunications or radio signals from a mobile communication source and transmitting those signals to another wireless site, and other communication source or receiver or to a central switching computer which connects the mobile unit with land based telephone lines.

Terrace - A structure not more than 18 inches in height above average grade on any side and located on the ground with no structural supports other than a subsurface base material.

Through Lot-See "Lot-Related Terms" in Section 2.2 of these Regulations.

Tour I Sportfishing Boat -See "Ferry and Boat-Related Terms" in Section 2.2 of these Regulations.
 
Effective December 1, 2016	Section 2.2
WORDS AND TERMS
Definitions

Use -The specific purpose for which a lot or building is designed, arranged, intended to be used, or for which it is or may be occupied or maintained. The terms permitted use, special use, or its equivalent shall not be deemed to include any non-conforming use. See "Principal vs Accessory"

Use, Accessory- See "Principal vs Accessory" in Section 2.2 of these Regulations.

Usable Open Space -See "Open Space, Usable" in Section 2.2 of these Regulations.


Vehicle-Any motor vehicle as defined by the General Statutes of the State of Connecticut, as amended. Vehicle Dealership -A facility or lot primarily used for merchandising vehicles.
Vocational Training Facility-A facility established to provide instruction and training for school to work transition to physically and developmentally disabled persons (14 years or older) providing school to work transition programs and instruction and guidance in one or more of the following areas: daily living, personal and social adjustment, self-care, work habits and skills, speech and language development. Such a facility shall not provide any residential or overnight care or accommodations or medical treatment facility providing inpatient or outpatient services of any kind. Such a facility
may offer a recreational program involving activities that are social, athletic or purely diversionary in
nature.



Water Dependent-Related  Terms


Water-Dependent- Uses or facilities which require direct access to, or location in, marine or tidal waters and which therefore cannot be located inland, including, but not limited to, marinas, recreational and commercial fishing and boating facilities, waterfront dock and port facilities, water-based recreational uses, navigation aids, basins and channels, industrial uses dependent upon waterborne transportation, or requiring large volumes of cooling or process water which cannot reasonably be located in an inland site and uses which provide general public access to marine or tidal waters.

Functionally-Dependent Facility -A facility which cannot be used for its intended purpose unless it is located in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities. The term does not include seafood processing facilities, long-term storage,
manufacturing, sales or service facilities. See "Water Dependent" in Section 2.2 of these
Regulations.
 

Yard- An area on the same lot with a principal building or buildings extending outward from the building to the property line or street line of the lot. See also "Setback " in Section 2.2 of these Regulations.

Yard, Front - The yard between any street fa ade(s) of the principal building or buildings and any street line of the lot,extending across the full width of the lot. For a corner lot in a residential zone, each street frontage shall be considered a front yard.

Yard, Rear -The yard between the rear wall of the most rear principal building and the rear line of the lot, extending across the full width of the lot. For a corner lot in a residential zone, one yard, other than a front yard, shall be deemed to be a rear yard and any other yards shall be deemed
to be s ide yards .


Yard,Side - The yard between the principal building or buildings and the side line(s), extending between the front yard and the rear yard or,w here no rear yard is required,to the rear line of the lot.



Yard Locations



 


Rear
Yard







Minimum Side Yard Setback Minimum.-    :- .­
Rear	Principal
Yard	Building
Setback ' Location

 




Minimum Side Yard Setback
 
Front
Yard












Minimum Front Yard Setback
 


Zoning/ Building Permit - A rev iew process conducted by the Zoning and Building Official to determine whether a building, structure, use, or activity meets the requirements of these Regulations at the time the review is conducted .
 
Overview



3.	RESIDENCE ZONES


3.1.	Overview



Each of the uses listed in Section 3 of these Regulations is also subject to the requirements of Section 7 of these Regulations including but not limited to:
1.	Parking;
2.	Signage;
3.	Earth removal and filling;
4.	Access drives and corner visibility; and
5.	Performance standards.




3.1.	Purpose


1.	The various residential districts within the City are intended to provide suitable areas for residential use and development appropriate to the environmental characteristics of the land and the character of the neighborhood.

2.	The differentiation among the residential districts is intended to provide for variety in the size and density of residential neighborhood s and a diversity of housing opportunities after consideration of soil types, terrain, and infrastructure capacity.

3.	The residential districts may allow for certain non-residential uses when it can be demonstrated that they are compatible with nearby residential uses and preserve neighborhood character and property values .

 
 
Permitted Principal Buildings,Structures and Uses

3.2.	Permitted Principal Buildings, Structures and Uses



The following tables identify which uses are permitted in which residential zoning districts by which type of permit.

The locations of the zoning districts are depicted on the zoning map. The abbreviat ions used for the zoning districts are as follows:
•	R-12	R-12 Residence Zone
•	R-8	R-8 Residence Zone
•	R-5.l	R-5. Residence Zone
•	R-5.2	R-5.2 Residence Zone
•	RM	Multi-Family Residence Zone


The "checkmark" symbol in the table indicates that the use is allowed in that zone by the type of permit indicated in accordance with the standards outlined in these Regulations.



No "checkmark" means the use is not permitted in that zone by that type of permit.  Check the other tables since a use may be permitted through a different type of permit.



3.2.A	No Permit Required

		R-12		R-8		R-5.1		R-5.2		RM	
1.	Open space land or conservation areas.	0	0	0	0	0
2 .	Parks and playgrounds.	0	0	0	0	0

3.2.B	Zoning/ Building Permit Required (Staff)

		R-12		R-8		R-5.1		R-5.2			RM	
1.    One-family detac hed dw elling.	0	0	0	0	0
2 .	One-family semi-detached dw elling.				0	0
3.	Two-family detach ed dwe llings.				0	0
 
Permitted Principal Buildings, Structures and Uses

 
3.2.C	Site Plan Approval Required (Commission)




 	Te lecommunication Facilities, subject to the 	
requirements of Section 6.12 of these Regulations.
 



•••••
 
3.2.D	Special Permit Approval and Site Plan Approval Required (Commission)


R-12	R-8	R-5.1	R-5.2	RM

1.	Multi-family dwellings and multi-family dwellings in groups subject to the requirements of Section 6.1 of these Regulations.
2.	Rooming, boarding or lodging houses.	0
3.	Congregate housing and/or assisted living facilities.	0
4.	Convalescent, nursing or rest homes.	0
5.	.	Hospitals. 	0

6.	Day care centers subject to the requirements of Section
6.4 of these Regulations.
7.	Public and private schools.	0	0	0	0	0
8.	Public utility rights-of-way and str uctures.	0	0	0	0	0
9.	Public building or facility.	0	0	0	0	0
10. Churches and places of religious worship.	0	0	0	0	0
11.	Cemeteries.	0	0	0	0	0
12.	Club, lodge or association.	0

13. Boat clubs, beach clubs and marinas su bject to the
requirements of Section 6.11 of these Regulations.

14.	Vocational Training Facilities for persons with physica l and deve lopmental disa bilities subject to the requirements of Section 6.9 of these Regulations.

15.	Community Residential Counseling Facilities,subject to the requirements of Section 6.8 of these Regulations
16.	Halfway houses, subject to the requirements of Section
6.7 of these Regulations
 
Permitted Accessory Buildings, Structures and Uses

3.3.	Permitted Accessory Buildings, Structures and Uses


3.3.A	General Provisions


1.	No accessory building or structure shall be built on any lot on which there is not a principal building.

2.	Accessory buildings or structures in all residential districts shall be subject to the following:
a.	No accessory building or structures shall be permitted in any front yard or any required
side yard setback.
b.	All accesso ry buildings and structures shall be located at least 6 feet from any principal
building situated on the same lot.
c.	Accessory buildings, structures, or uses in any rear yard shall not be closer than 4 feet from any side or rear property line.
d.	The total of all accessory buildings and structures shall not occupy more than 40% of the required rear yard setback wherein they are located.
e.	No free-standing accessory building or structure shall exceed 15 feet in height, unless otherwise permitted by these Regulations .

3.3.B	No Permit Required

		R-12		R-8		R-5.1		R-5.2		RM	
1.    Accessory uses that are customary, subordinate, and incidental to a principal use permitted by Section 3.2 .A or Section 3.2.B.	0	0	0	0	0
2.     The keeping of domesticated a nimals as pets but not an animal   hospital.	0	0	0	0	0
3.  The kee ping of horses or similar livestock animals with one such animal permitted per three acres of land.	0	0	0	0	
4.	Home office when conducted in accordance with
Sectio n 6.3.	0	0	0	0	0
5.	Family day care home.	0	0	0	0	0
6.	Retaining walls less than three feet (3') in height.	0	0	0	0	0
7.   Other fences or w alls not over 7 feet in height (yard setbacks shall not apply but shall comply with corner visibility requirements).	0	0	0	0	0
8.  Sale of alcoholic beverages when accessory to an approved club, lodge or association .	0				
9.	Special events when accessory to an authorized club, lodge or association provided that any state or loca l permits are obtained .	0	0	0	0	
 
Permitted Accessory Buildings, Structures and Uses

3.3.C	Zoning/ Building Permit Required (Staff)

	R-12			R-8		R-5.1			R-5.2		RM	
1.  Accessory struct ures that are customary, subordinate, and incidental to a principal use permitted by Section
3.2.A,Section 3.2.B, Section 3.2.C, or Section 3.2.D.	0	0	0	0	0
2 .	Private garages for up to three motor ve hicles.	0	0	0	0	
3.	Tool shed, garden house, playhouse, tennis court,or
swimming pool.	0	0	0	0	
4.   Tennis court fences	0	0	0	0	0
5.	Minor home occupations when conducted in
accordance with Sectio n 6.3.	0	0	0	0	0
6 .	Retaining walls three feet {3') or more in height .	0	0	0	0	0

 
3.3.D	Site Plan Approval Required (Commission)




Group daycare homes to subject to the requirements of Section 6.4.
 



•••••
 
3.3.E
 
Special Permit Approval and Site Plan Approval Required (Commission)
 

R-12	R-8	R-5.1	R-5.2	RM

1.	Major home occupations or any home-based business not conducted in accordance wit h Section 6.3.
2.	Bed and breakfast estab lishments, subject to the requirements of Section 6.5 of these Regulations.
3.	Private garages for more four or more motor ve hicles.	0	0	0	0	0

4.	Fences or free-standing wa lls over 6 feet in height which do not meet yard setback or corner vis ibility requirements .
5.	The keeping of horses or sim ilar livestock animals on a
parcel with less than three acres of land per a nimal.

6.	Buildings,structure s and uses accessory to multi-family residential use including but not limited to a laundry center, community meeting room, resident mail room.
 

3.4.	Dimensional Standards


3.4.A	R-12 District


R-12 District

Permitted Uses	Special Permit Uses

Minimum Lot Area	12,000 square feet	100,000 square feet
Maximum Number Of Lots In A Subdivision	Developable Land I 12,000 SF	Limited by minimum lot size

Minimum Lot Width	100 feet	lSO feet
Minimum Lot Depth	no requirement		200 feet

Minimum Front Yard Setback	30 feet	SO feet
Minimum Side Yard Setback	10 feet	SO feet, but not required for a side yard abutting navigable water
Minimum Rear Yard Setback	30 feet	SO feet, but not required for a rear yard abutting navigable water

Maximum Building Coverage (Note 2)	20%	20%

I Maximum  Bldg. Height	3S feet	3S feet


Notes -	1.	Section 8.3 of the Regulations may provide flexibility related to some of these dimensional standards .

2.   See Section 6.2 for requirements related to rear lots
 

3.4.B	R-8 District

R-8 District

Minimum Lot Area	8,000 square feet
Maximum Number Of Lots In A Subdivision	Developable Land I 8,000 SF

I Minimum Lot Width	75 feet


Minimum Front Yard Setback	
25 feet
Or
Average setback line observed by buildings on same side of street
between two intersecting streets, whichever is lesser
Minimum Side Yard Setback	8 feet
Minimum Rear Yard Setback	25 feet
Or
25% of lot depth,whichever is lesser

Maximum Building Coverage (Note 2)	25%

I Maximum Building Height	35 feet


Notes -	1.	Sectio n 8.3 of the Regulations may provide flexibility related to some of these dimensional standard s.

2.	See Section 6.2 for requirements related to rear lots
 

3.4.C	R-5 .1District

R-5.1 District

Minimum Lot Area	5,000 square feet
Maximum Number Of Lots In A Subdivision	Developable Land I 5,000 SF

I Minimum Lot Width	50 feet

Minimum Front Yard Setback	25 feet Or
Average setback line observed by buildings on same side of street
between two intersecting streets, whicheve r is lesser
Minimum Side Yard Setback	4 feet
Minimum Rear Yard Setback	25 feet
Or
25% of lot depth,whichever is lesser

None required where rear yard Abuts navigable waters

Maximum Building Coverage {Note 2)	25%

I Maximum Building Height	35 feet


Notes -	1.	Section 8.3 of the Regulations may provide flexib ility related to some of these dimensional sta ndards.

2.	See Section 6.2 for requirements related to rear lots
 

3.4.D	R-5.2 District


R-5.2 District

Minimum Lot Area	5,000 square feet per dwelling unit
Maximum Number Of Lots
In A Subdivision	Developable Land I 5,000 SF

I Minimum Lot Width	50 feet

Minimum Front Yard Setback	25 feet
Or
Average setback line observe d by buildings on same side of st reet between two intersecting streets, w hichever is lesser
Minimum Side Yard Setback	4 feet
Minimum Rear Yard Setback	25 feet
Or
25% of lot depth, w hichever is lesser

I Maximum Building Coverage	25%

I Maximum Building Height	35 feet


Notes -	1.	Section 8.3 of the Regulations may provide flexibility related to some of these dimensional standards.

2.	See Section 6.2 for requirements related to rear lots
 

3.4.E	R-M District

RM District

Minimum Lot Area	40,000 square feet
Or
4,000 square feet per dwelling unit, whichever  is greater

When calculating the minimum lot requirements of a project, no more than 30% of the lot area can be made up of regulated wetlands or steep (over 20%) slopes.
Maximum Number Of Lots In A Subdivision	Determined by minimum lot size

j Minimum Lot Width	100 feet


Minimum Front Yard Setback	
25 feet
Minimum Side Yard Setback	25 feet
Minimum Rear Yard Setback	25 feet

I Maximum Building Coverage	25%


j  Maximum Building Height	35 feet


Notes -	1.	Section 8.3 of the Regulations may provide flexibility related to some of these dimensional standard s.
 
Overview



4.	BUSINESS AND INDUSTRIAL ZONES


4.1.	Overview



Unless othe rwise specified herein, each of the uses listed in Section 4 of these Regulations is also
subject to the requirements of Section 7 of these Regulations including but not limited to :
1.	Parking;
2.	Signage;
3.	Earth removal and filling;
4.	Access drives and corner visibility; and 5.	Performance standards .



Thames Street	Five Corners















Industrial/ Technology	Technology Campus
 

4.1.	WBR - Waterfront Business Residence District


4.1.A	Purpose and Objectives


The Waterfront Business Residence District as delineated on the Zoning Map is intended to encourage a mixture of land uses that will enhance the unique qualities of the Thames Street area w ith emphasis on waterfront access and water-dependent and related uses and retention of the historic character and scale of the "Groton Bank." The overall intent is to promote and enhance this area as a walkable, pedestrian-friendly area with a variety of uses on sites and in buildings contributing to a vibrant village atmosphere.  Due to the unique characteristics if this area and the varying property configurations, the Regulations are intended to allow for flexibility in a number of regulatory standards provided that the development objectives and design guidelines are achieved .

Development within the Waterfront Business Residence District shall be consistent with the following objectives:

1.	Public access to the Thames River is a major consideration in the Waterfront Business Residence District and establishment/ extension of a continuous rive rfront walkway is encouraged as is establishment of boat slips .

2.	Preservation and creation of views from public access to the riverfront strongly is encouraged .


3.	Maintenance of the character and ambience of the area is strongly encouraged. Rehabilitation of structures, where feasible , is encouraged to preserve and enhance the historic and diverse qualities of the Thames Street area.

4.	Water-dependent uses are specifically encouraged to locate along the rive r as primary uses or in
combination with other permitted uses.


5.	Development within the Waterfront Business Residence District shall be consistent with the City of Groton Plan of Conservation and Development and the Thames Street Study as adopted by the Planning and Zoning Commission.

4.1.B	Village District Declared


In accordance with CGS Section 8-2j and as recommended in the 2008 Plan of Conservation and Development, the Waterfront Bus iness Residence District is hereby declared to be a "village district" in order to protect the distinctive character , landscape and historic structures within the district.
 

4.1.C	Principal Uses Permitted By Site Plan Approval (Commission or City Planner)


1.	Any use permitted by Site Plan approval (Commission) in the R-5.2 Residence Zone subject to
the same restrictions and controls of the R-5.2 Residence Zone.


2.	Retail businesses as defined in these Regulations.


3.	Restaurants and eating establishments including on-premises drinking of alcoholic beverages when accessory to an eating establishment.

4.	.	Business services.


5.	Business and professional offices.


6.	Personal service establishments as defined in these Regulations.


7.	Dry cleaning and laundry pickup stat ions where the processing is done elsewhere.


8.	Repair serv ices as defined in these Regulations but spec ifically excluding boat repair, marine repair, machinery repair, outside repair, and the like.

9.	Retail sa le or  rental of boating, fishing, diving, and bathing supp lies and equipment  provided that any outside storage or display of products or equipment  is expressly approved by the Commission.

10.	A sail loft or ships chandlery .


11.	Telecommunication facilities, subject to the requirements of Section 6.12 of these Regulations .


12.	Artist's studios and galleries .


13.	Mixed use building(s) containing a combination of dwelling units and permitted businesses and service uses provided that, in a mixed-use building fronting on a public street, dwelling units shall be limited to areas above the first floor .
 

4.1.D	Principal Uses Permitted By Special Permit Approval and Site Plan Approval (Commission)


1.	Any use permitted by Special Permit Approval and Site Plan Approval (Commission) in the R-5.2 Residence Zone subject to the same restrictions and controls of the R-5.2 Residence Zone.

2.	Hotels and motels on lots having a minimum area of 20,000 square feet and a minimum width of 100 feet.

3.	Bed and breakfast establishments, subject to the requirements of Section 6.5 of these Regulations.

4.	.	Mortuary and funeral homes.


5.	Multi-family dwellings subject to the requirements of Section 6.1of these Regulations.


6.	Yacht clubs and marinas .


7.	Boat docks, slips, piers and wharves for yachts and pleasure boats or for boats for hire carrying passengers on excursions,pleasure, or fishing trips,or for vessels engaged in fishery or shell fishery .

8.	Dockside facilities for dispensing fuel,restroom and laundry facilities to serve overnight patrons.


9.	Boat and marine engine sales and display provided that any out.side storage or display of products or equipment  is expressly approved  by the Commission.

10.	The rental of boats provided that the location of any outside storage is expressly approved by the Commission .

11.	Museums with nautical themes.


12.	Public building or facility .


13.	Principal or accessory buildings and facilities for the storage, distribution, and wholesale or retail sale of fresh seafood, subject to the following requirements:
a.	The use shall be water dependent.
b.	No outside storage or handling of seafood or waste products shall be permitted, other than delivery and loading.
c.	No canning, drying or other type of industrial-type processing of seafood shall be
permitted.
d.	The use shall be an integral component of a commercial seafood operation, comprised of, but not necessarily limited to, seafood handling, commercial fishing, small marine/boat landing, and such other related and permitted uses.
e.	A minimum lot size of 1acre shall be required.
 

4.1.E	Permitted Accessory Buildings, Structures and Uses


1.	Accessory buildings and uses which are clearly subordinate and customarily incidental to and located on the same lot with the principal use, and that will not be haza rdous to the public health, safety, and welfare.

2.	Temporary outdoor events subject to approval by the City Planner and Police Department and provided that placement of merchandise or other objects does not obstruct the sidewalk ,affect public safety, or unreasonably reduce parking.

4.1.F	Additional Requirements


1.	Permitted uses do not include drive-in establishments or uses with drive-in facilities.


2.	A building may contain a combination of permitted uses, howeve r; if one of the uses is
residential,then such residential use is limited to areas above the first floor .


3.	Any building to be converted,ex panded,or modified shall be in (or improved to) an acceptable
state of repa ir and modernization, including la ndscaping and paving.
 

4.1.G	Dimensional Standards

WBR District

 

Minimum Lot Area
 
4,000 square feet per lot or 5,000 square feet per dwelling unit, whichever is greater
 

I Minimum Lot Width	40 feet

 

Minimum Front Yard Setback




Minimum Side Yard Setback
 
10 feet or the average setback line obse rved by buildings on same side of street between two intersecting streets, whichever is less.

No requirement but there shall be a minimum side yard setback of
10 feet where :
•	The property is used for a residential use other than a
mixed use building;
•	The property is used for a business use and abuts a single- family residentia l lot or a residential district.

There shall be a minimum rear yard setback of 20 feet. New
 
Minimum Rear Yard Setback	construction at the foundation line shall be at least 20 feet from the
Thames River at mean high water level.


I Maximum Building Coverage	50%


 

Maximum Building Height
 
25 feet
(May be modified as provided in Section 4.1.H.)
 

 



Maximum Building Width
 
The tota l cumu lative width of building, structure, fences, or wa lls more than 42 inches in height above the finished grade which are located adjacent to the Thames River shall not occupy more than 40% of the width of a parcelas measured along a line parallel to and 20 feet from the river
(May be modified as provided for in Section 4.1.H.)
 


Notes -	1.	Section 8.3 and Section 4.1.1 of the Regulations may provide flexibility related to some of these dimensional standards.
 

4.1.H	Possible Modifications to Dimensional Standards


1.	Building Height - The Commission may, by Special Permit, allow for an increase of maximum building height up to a maximum of 35 feet when doing so wi ll help to achieve the purposes, objectives, and design considerations in the Waterfront Business Residence District.

2.	Building Width -The Commission may, by Special Permit, allow for an increase of maximum building width when doing so will help to achieve the purposes, objectives, and design considerations in the Waterfront Business Residence District.

4.1.1	Parking and Loading Requirements


Since the Waterfront Business Residence District is important to the city's character and because its physical integrity must be enhanced, and further because it is desirable to utilize existing buildings as fully and as efficiently as possible, parking for uses within the District may be provided as follows:

1.	The Commission may, by Special Permit, reduce the parking requirements in Section 7.1 of these Regulations by up to 50 percent for uses within the Waterfront Business Residence District if the developer provides such spaces either:

a.	On-street in locations deemed acceptable to the Commission; or

b.	On the subject property in a configuration w hich makes such spaces available to the general public; or

c.	On other property in the vicinity provided such spaces are:
•	Subject to a deed restriction binding the owner and his/her heirs and assigns to maintain the required number of spaces either (1) throughout the existence of the use to which they are accessory, or (2) until such spaces are provided elsewhere, and
•	Configured to make such spaces available to the general public.


2.	If such spaces are reserved for a specific use or are not configured to make such spaces available to the general public, the Commission may allow the parking required by Section 7.1 of these Regulations to be provided either:

a.	On the site which they serve; or

b.	On other property in the vicinity provided that:
•	Said spaces are within 750 feet walking distance of the lot or use wh ich they serve .
•	Such spaces shall be in the same ownership as the use which they serve or sha ll be subject to a deed restr iction binding the owner and his/her heirs and assigns to maintain the required number of spaces either (1) throughout the ex istence of the use to which they are accessory, or (2) until such spaces are provided elsewhere.
 

3.	Payment of a fee-in-lieu of parking to the City to be put into a dedicated fund for the creation of parking within the Thames Street area.

4.	A combination of the above.



4.1.J	Design Considerations


As part of the review of any application in the Waterfront Business Residence District, the Commission
shall consider:


1.	The purposes of this Section;


2.	The design considerations set forth in Section 8.4 of these Regulations, especially since the WBR
District has been designated as a "village district" as authorized by CGS Section 8-2j;


3.	Any design considerations set forth in the Special Permit review (Section 9.4) section of these
Regulations;


4.	.	Any design guidelines set forth in the Municipal Coastal Program adopted by the Commission;
and


5.	Additional considerations shall include:

a.	The extent to which new buildings and additions or modifications to existing buildings are harmonious with the overall character of the district and the heritage of Groton Bank and its seaside New England presence in terms of scale, massing, articulation, and architectural features.

b.	The extent to which views from adjacent public streets through the property to the
water are protected or enhanced.

c.	The extent to which the design of buildings as viewed from the water and the
relationship of development to the waterfront enhances the overall area.

d.	The extent to which public access to the river's edge, including new bulkheading or
docking facilities , is provided or facilitated .

e.	The extent to which the configuration of traffic circulation,parking, sidewalks, landscaping, signage, and other improvements contribute to the maintenance and enhancement of an attractive, inviting, and pedestrian-friendly area.
 

4.2.	FCD - Five Corners District


4.2.A	Purpose


The purpose of the Five Corners District as delineated on the Zon ing Map is to reinforce and enhance the Five Corners area as a mix ed-use and pedestrian-friendly focal point within the City of Groton,to establish opportunities for new development at an appropriate scale and intensity, and to provide for appropriate transitions to adjacent uses and neighborhoods.

4.2.B	Village District Declared


In accordance w ith CGS Sect ion 8-2j and as recommended in the 2008 Plan of Conservation and Development,the Five Corners District is hereby declared to be a "village district" in order to protect and promote a distinctive character and landscape within the district.

4.2.C	Principal Uses Permitted By Site Plan Approval (Commission or City Planner)


1.	Mixed use building(s) containing a combination of dwelling units and permitted businesses and service uses provided that, in a mixed-use building fronting on a public street, dwelling units shall be limited to areas above the first floor.

2.	Buildings containing a combination  of business and/or service uses permitted by Site Pla n
Approval.


3.	Retail businesses as defined in these Regulations.


4.	Eating and/or drinking establishments .


5.	Business service esta blishments .


6.	Business and professional offices.


7.	Personal service establishments as defined in these Regulations.


8.	Dry c leaning and laundry pickup stations where the processing is done elsewhere .


9.	A rtist's studios and galleries.


10.	Telecommunication facilities,subject to the requirements of Section 6.12 of these Regulations .
 

4.2.D	Principal Uses Permitted By Special Permit Approval and Site Plan Approval (Commission)


1.	Multi-fam ily buildings provided that any such buildings do not front directly on a street and are located to the rear of a building fronting directly on a street and containing business uses on the street level.

2.	Parking lots and garages in accordance w ith Section 7.1.


3.	Clubs, lodges,or associations.


4.	Public buildings.


5.	Public utility buildings and facilities.


6.	Mixed use building(s) that allow dwelling units in conjunction with any principal use permitted by Section 4.2 .B and or 4.2.C ("live - work" opportunities) provided that dwelling units shall be limited to areas above the first floor .

4.2.E	Permitted Accessory Buildings, Structures and Uses


1.	Accessory buildings and uses which are clearly subordinate and customarily incidental to and located on the same lot with the principal use, and that will not be hazardous to the public health,  safety,and welfare .

2.	Micro-brewery-distillery -winery as an accessory  use to a restaurant or drinking establishment
provided that:
a.	.	Such use shall only be authorized through Special Permit Approval and Site Plan
Approval by the Commission .
b.	The combined gross floor area of the principal use and the accessory use shall not
exceed 3,000 SF .
c.	The area devoted to production shall not exceed twenty-five (25%) percent of the gross
floor area.
d.	Parking for both the principal use and the accessory use shall be established in accordance with Section 7.1.
e.	The Commission may limit the hours that the micro-brewery-disti llery-winery operation is open to the public to the same hours as the principal use.
f.	Production shall be limited to not more than 10,000 barrels annually in the case of beer,
and/or not more than 10,000 gallons annually of wine or s pirits,or a combination
thereof.
g.	Prior to a zoning compliance permit being issued, the Applicant sha ll demonstrate compliance with State and Federal laws and regulations, and sha ll have obtained all permits required thereunder .

3.	Temporary outdoor events subject to approval by the City Planner and Police Department and provided that placement of merchandise or other objects does not obstruct the sidewalk,affect public safety, or unreasonably reduce parking.
 

4.2.F	Dimensional Standards

FCD District

I Minimum Lot Area	4,000 square feet

I Minimum Lot Width	No  requirement

Minimum Front Yard Setback	No requirement except there shall be a minimum sidewalk width of 10 feet from the edge of the curb.
Maximum Front Yard Setback	10 Feet
Minimum Side Yard Setback	8 feet where the lot abuts a residential zone

Otherwise no requirement .
Minimum Rear Yard Setback	15 feet where the lot abuts a residential zone

Otherw ise no requirement.

I Maximum Building Coverage	50%

I Maximum Building Height	45 feet 	


Notes -	1.	Section 8.3 of the Regulations may provide flexibility related to some of these dimensional sta ndards.
 

4.2.G	Parking and Loading Requirements


Since the Five Corners District is important to the city's character and because its physical integrity must be enhanced, and further because it is desirable to utilize new and existing buildings as fully and as efficiently as possible,parking for uses within the District may be provided as follows:

1.	On street parking is encouraged and the Commission may, by Special Permit, reduce the parking requirements in Section 7.1 of these Regulations by up to 50 percent for non-residential uses within the Five Corners District if the developer provides such spaces on-street in locations deemed acceptable to the Commission .

2.	Off-st reet parking, when provided, shall be located to the side and rear of buildings and sha ll be buffered or shielded from the sidewalk by a solid wall or hedge.

3.	The Commission may, by Special Permit, reduce the parking requirements in Section 7.1 of these Regulations by up to 33 percent for non-residential uses within the Five Corners District if the developer  provides such spaces either:

a.	On the subject property in a configuration which makes such spaces available to the
general public; or

b.	On other property in the vicinity provided such spaces are:
•	Subject to a deed restriction binding the owner and his/her heirs and assigns to maintain the required number of spaces either (1) throughout the existence of the use to which they are accessory, or (2) until such spaces are provided elsewhere, and
•	Configured to make such spaces available to the general public.


4.	.		If such spaces are reserved for a specific non-residential use or are not configured to make such spaces available to the general public, the Commission may allow the parking required by Section 7.1 of these Regulations to be provided either:

a.	.	On the site which they serve; or

b.	On other property in the vicinity provided that:
•	Said spaces are within 500 feet walking distance of the lot or use which they serve.
•	Such spaces shall be in the same ownership as the use which they serve or shall be s ubject to a deed restriction binding the owner and his/her heirs and assigns to maintain the required number of spaces either (1) throughout the existence of the use to which they are accessory,or (2) until such spaces are provided elsewhere .

5.	Payment of a fee-in-lieu of parking to the City to be put into a dedicated fund for the creation of
parking within the Five Corners area.


6.	A combination of the above .
 

4.2.H	Design Considerations


As part of the review of any application in the Five Corners District, the Commission sha ll consider:


1.	The purposes of this Section;


2.	The design considerations set forth in Section 8.4 of these Regulations especially since the FCD has been designated as a "village district" as authorized by CGS Sect ion 8-2j;

3.	Any design considerations set forth in the Special Permit review (Section 9.4) section of these Regulations;and

4.	.	The extent to which :
a.	.	The design of new buildings and additions or modifications to existing buildings shall be harmonious with the desire to create a mixed-use and pedestrian-friendly focal point reflecting Groton' overall architecture and its seaside New England presence in terms of scale, massing, articulation, a nd architectural features.

b.	The configuration of traffic circulation, parking,sidewalks , landscaping,signage , and other improvements contribute to the desire to create a mixed-use and pedestrian­ friendly focal point reflecting Groton' overall architecture and its seaside New England presence.

c.	Drive-in establishments or uses with drive-in facilities and any entrance or exit driveways interrupt the creation of a pedestrian-friendly street.
 
GC- General Commercial Zone

4.3.	GC - General Commercial Zone


4.3.A	Purpose


The purpose of the General Commercial Zone is to maintain and enhance areas containing commercial
uses that help to meet the needs of people who live, work, and visit Groton.


4.3.B	Principal Uses Permitted By Zoning/ Building Permit (Staff)


1.	Farmer's market as a temporary use, a seasonal use, or a permanent use.


4.3.C	Principal Uses Permitted By Site Plan Approval (Commission or City Planner)


1.	Retail businesses as defined in these Regulations.


2.	A licensed medical marijuana dispensary.


3.	Automotive supply stores.


4.	Eating and/or drinking establishments including the serving of alcoholic beverages, either as a principal or accessory use.

5.	Business services, including but not limited to banks, credit unions, loan companies and other
financial institutions, real estate and insurance agencies, utility offices, government.


6.	Business and professional offices .


7.	Personal service establishments as defined in these Regulations.


8.	Dry cleaning and laundry pickup stations where the processing is done elsewhere .


9.	Group daycare homes and child daycare centers subject to the requirements of Section 6.4.


10.	Repair services as defined in these Regulations but specifica lly excluding boat repair, marine repair, machinery repair,outside repair, and the like.

11.	Computer centers.


12.	Telecommunication fac ilities, subject to the requirements of Section 6.12 of these Regulations.


13.	Artist's studios and galleries.


14.	Cultural/Historic Memorial Parklet of 5 acres or less of passive recreation with no active recreation or commercial uses, permanently accessib le to the public; temporary or special events are permitted subject to approval by staff.
 

4.3.D	Principal Uses Permitted By Special Permit Approval and Site Plan Approval (Commission) 1.	Hotels and motels.
2.	Boarding, rooming, or lodging houses.


3.	Bed and breakfast establishments, subject to the requirements of Section 6.5 of these Regulations.

4.	Gasoline stations, motor vehicle dealerships, and motor vehicle repair and/or service garages, and other similar automotive uses, as defined by State Statute subject to the conditions set forth in Section 6.6 of these Regulations.

5.	Drive-in type establishments , including but not limited to, restaurants, car washes, beverage distributors, banks, theaters, and other similar establishments primarily designed to provide drive-in facilities .

6.	Retail sale of alcoholic liquor.


7.	Commercial recreation and entertainment facilities,including but not limited to billiard rooms, bow ling alleys, skating rinks, sw imming pools, night clubs, theaters, amusement centers,and other s imilar facilities .

8.	Mixed use buildings containing dwelling units and permitted businesses and services provided bus iness and service uses, excluding offices, shall only be permitted on the first floor and/or basement levels; and no mixed building shall contain more than two dwelling units.

9.	Parking lots and garages in accordance with Section 7.1 of these Regulations.


10.	Clubs, lodges,or association s.


11.	Public buildings.


12.	Public utility buildings and facilities.


13.	Mortuary and funeral homes.
 
Ge-General Commercial Zone

14.	A boatyard for building, storing, repairing,selling, or servicing boats which may include the following as an accessory use: office for the sale of marine equipment or products, dockside facilities for dispensing fuel, restroom and laundry facilities to serve overnight patrons. Furthermore, adequate lanes must be provided to allow access and egress throughout the boatyard for fire trucks .

15.	Docks and other marine-related facilities .


16.	Taxi services faci lity.


17.	Commun ity Residential Counsel ing Facilities, in accordance with Section 6.8 of these
Regulations.


18.	Halfway houses, in accordance with Section 6.7 of these Regulations.


19.	Vocational Training Facilities for persons with physical and developmental disabilitie s in accordance with Section 6.9 of these Regulations.

20.	Micro-brewery-distil lery-winery as a principal use provided that:

a.	.	Suc h use(s) shall not occupy more than 3,000 SF of floor area for production.

b.	Such facility may include a tasting/retail area in total not to exceed twenty -five percent
(25%) of the gross floor area .

c.	The Commission may limit the hours that the micro-b rewery-distille ry-winery operation
is open to the public.

d.	Production shall be limited to not more than 10,000 barrels annually in the case of beer, and/or not more than 10,000 ga llons annually of wine or spirits, or a combination thereof .

e.	The facility shall maintain production records which sha ll be subject to inspection by the Zoning and Building Official for complia nce with the forego ing provis ions.

f.	Prior to a zoning compliance permit being issued,the App licant sha ll demonstrate compliance w ith State and Federal laws and regulations, and sha ll have obtained a ll permits required thereunder .
 

4.3.E	Permitted Accessory Buildings, Structures and Uses


1.	Other accessory buildings and uses which are clearly subordinate and customarily incidental to and located on the same lot with the principal use, and that will not be hazardous to the public health, safety, and welfare.

2.	Accessory accommodations for watchmen, caretakers, or custodians in conjunction with a
principal use on the same premises.


3.	Assembling,converting, altering, finishing,cleaning, or other similar processing of products which is clearing incidental and customarily subordinate to a principal use, and where goods so produced and/or processed are sold from or used on the premises; provided the area used for such purposes shall be within a completely enclosed building.

4.	Accessory outside storage of equipment, merchandise, materials, and supplies which is clearly subordinate and customarily  incidental to a principal use and where goods so stored are sold from or used on the premises; provided that the area used for outside storage shall be effectively  screened by appropriate structures, fencing, walls, or landscaping of suitable type, density, and height.

5.	Micro-brewery-distillery-winery  as an accessory  use to a restaurant or drinking establishment
provided that:

a.	.	Such use shall only be authorized through Special Permit Approval and Site Plan
Approval by the Commission.
b.	The combined gross floor area of the principal use and the accessory use shall not
exceed 3,000 SF.
c.	The area devoted to production shall not exceed twenty-five (25%) percent of the gross floor area .
d.	Parking for both the principal use and the accessory use shall be established in
accordance with Section 7.1.
e.	The Commission may limit the hours that the micro-brewery-distillery-winery operation is open to the public to the same hours as the principal use.
f.	Production shall be limited to not more than 10,000 barrels annually in the case of beer,
and/or not more than 10,000 gallons annually of wine or spirits,or a combination
thereof .
g.	The facility shall maintain production records which shall be subject to inspection by the
Zoning and Building Official for compliance with the foregoing provisions.
h.	Prior to a zoning compliance permit being issued, the Applicant shall demonstrate compliance with State and Federal laws and regulations, and shall have obtained all permits required thereunder.

6.	Temporary outdoor events subject to approval by the City Planner and Police Department and provided that placement of merchandise or other objects does not obstruct the sidewalk, affect public safety, or unreasonably reduce parking.
 
Section 4.3
BUSINESS AND INDUSTRIAL ZONES
GC - General Commercial Zone
 

Effective December 1, 2016
 

4.3.F	Dimensional Standards

General Commercial District

I Minimum Lot Area	4,000 square feet

I Minimum Lot Width


Minimum Front Yard Setback	
No requirement, except w hen provided, there shall be a minimum
front ya rd setback of 15 feet .
Minimum Side Yard Setback	No requirement, exc ept
8 feet w here the lot abuts a residential zone
Minimum Rear Yard Setback	15 feet w here the lot abuts a residential zone

Otherwise no requirement, except w hen provided,there shall be a
minimum rear yard setback of 15 feet
I Maximum Building Coverage	70% 	

I Maximum Building Height	35 feet


Notes -	1.	Section 8.3 of the Regulations may provide flex ibility related to some of these dimensional standards.
 

4.4.	IT- Industrial I Technology Zone


4.4.A	Purpose


The purpose of the Industrial/ Technology Zone is to provide for appropriate locations and standards for industrial-type uses and technology -related uses.

4.4.B	Principal Uses Permitted By Site Plan Approval (Commission or City Planner)


1.	Scientific and research laboratories and similar uses devoted to research design and/or experimentation.

2.	Computer centers and similar technology-related uses.


3.	Offices for business, financial, professional,and similar office-type uses.


4.	The manufacturing, fabricating, assembling or processing of goods and products. 5.	Warehousing and wholesaling and storage .
6.	Building equipment, merchandise, material and supply business.


7.	Printing and publishing establishments .


8.	Metal, woodworking and other similar shops.


9.	Repair services as defined in these Regulations but specifically excluding boat repair, marine repair, machinery repair,outside repair,and the like.

10.	Stone and monument works.


11.	Parking garages and lots in accordance with Section 7.1of these Regulations.


12.	Telecommunications facilities, subject to the requirements of Section 6.12 of these Regulations.


13.	Licensed medical marijuana producer .


14.	Other use similar to a permitted use or uses.
 

4.4.C	Principal Uses Permitted By Special Permit Approval and Site Plan Approval (Commission)


1.	Principal outside storage yards and uses, including, but not limited to, petroleum storage facilities, building and contractors' equipment, merchandise, materials and supplies, but not including junkyards; provided that the area used for outside storage shall be completely visually screened.

2.	Trucking terminal fac ilities for handling freight or material with or without  maintenance facilities, including accessory trucking facilities; provided that such facilities, including any truck entrance, exit, driveways, maneuvering, parking or loading area, shall not be located or operated within a distance of 500 feet of any Residential Zone measured in a straight line between such facility and said boundary . Trucking terminal facilities shall not be construed to include clearly subordinate and customary incidental delivery department or off-street loading facilities operated by business concerns for their own use.

3.	Public buildings, use and facilities.


4.	Public utility buildings and facilities.


5.	Railroad rights-of-way and stations .


6.	Gasoline stations, motor vehicle dealerships, and motor vehicle repair and/or service garages, and other similar automotive uses, as defined by State Statute subject to the conditions set forth in Section 6.6 of these Regulations.

7.	Docks and other marine-related facilities .


8.	A boatyard for building, storing,repairing,selling, or servicing boats which may include the following as an accessory use: office for the sale of marine equipment or products, dockside facilities for dispensing fuel, restroom and laundry facilities to serve overnight patrons. Furthermore, adequate lanes must be provided to allow access and egress throughout the boatyard for fire trucks.

9.	Vocational Training Facilities of persons with physical and developmental disabilities subject to the requirements of Section 6.9 of these Regulations.

10.	Mixed use building(s) that allow dwelling units in conjunction with any principal use permitted by Section 4.4.B and or 4.4.C ("live - work" opportunities) provided that dwelling units shall be limited to areas above the first floor.
 

4.4.D	Permitted Accessory Buildings, Structures and Uses


1.	No accessory building or structure shall be built on any lot on which there is not a principal building.

2.	Garages for storage and maintenance and utility shops for the upkeep and repair of buildings and structures and service; central heating and power plants for furnishing heat and electricity energy;training schools for employees, buildings for the storage of documents,records and personal property;communication facilities and clinics; and dining and recreational facilities ,to be used for company purposes only and not by the general public.

3.	Any accessory buildings and uses clearly s ubordinate and customarily incidental to and located on the same lot with any of the foregoing uses shall be permitted in the same manner as the principal building.

4.	Group day care and child day care subject to Site Plan approval and Section 6.4 of these Regulations .

--Continued nex t page--
 

4.4.E	Dimensional Standards

Industrial/ Technology District

I Minimum Lot Area	40,000 square feet

Minimum Lot Width	100 feet
Minimum Lot Depth	200 feet

Minimum Front Yard Setback	30 feet	Where the required yard setback line is adjacent to or across from the street from any residential zone, each yard setback shall be equalto the height of the outer face wall of any building adjacent to the subject yard
Minimum Side Yard Setback	15 feet, not required for the portion of the lot abutting navigable water	
Minimum Rear Yard Setback	30 feet, not required for the
portion of the lot abutting
navigable water	

Minimum  Buffer  Strip		Unless modified by the Commission by Special Permit due to the provision of comparable screening, a landscaped strip 25 feet wide providing complete visual screening shall be provided along lot lines
that abut or are across the street from any residential zone.

I Maximum Building Coverage	70%


Maximum Building Height	75 feet

The Commission may, by Special Permit,authorize a building height above 75 feet w hen such additional height is needed for a spec ific manufacturing process or operational consideration.


Notes -	1.	Section 8.3 of the Regulations may provide flexibility related to some of these dimensional sta ndards.
 

4.5.	TC - Technology Campus Zone


4.5.A	Purpose


The purpose of the Technology Campus Zone is to provide for appropriate locations and standards for office and research-type uses with some other light industrial uses allowed in appropr iate areas .

4.5.B	Principal Uses Permitted By Site Plan Approval (Commission or City Planner)


1.		Research centers and laboratories and similar uses whose principal activity shall be for any type of research, engineering testing, laboratory work and pilot development, devoted to design and/or experimentation, and processing and fabricating incidental thereto providing no materials or finished products sha ll be manufactured , processed or fabricated on said premises for sale, except such as are incidental to said research, design, or experimentation conducted on said premises.

2.	Computer centers and similar technology-related uses.


3.	Business, financial, professional or governmenta l offices.


4.	Parking garages and lots in accordance with Section 7.1of these Regulations.


5.	Telecommunication facilities, subject to the requirements of Section 6.12 of these Regulations.


6.	Other use similar to a permitted use or uses.


4.5.C	Principal Uses Permitted By Special Permit Approval and Site Plan Approval (Commission)


1.	Light manufacturing,fabricating, finishing,processing and assembly where such use or activities shall be confined within completely enclosed buildings with the exception of off-street parking and loading spaces.

2.	Warehousing and storage .


3.	Building equipment, merchandise, material and supply businesses.


4.	Public buildings, uses and facilities.


5.	Public utility buildings a nd structures.


6.	Railroad rights-of-way and stations.


7.	Mixed use building(s) that allow dwelling units in conjunction with any principal use permitted by Section 4.5 .B and or 4.5.C ("live - work" opportunities) provided that dwelling units shall be limited to areas above the first floor .
 
TC -Technology Campus Zone

4.5.D	Permitted Accessory Buildings, Structures and Uses


1.	No accessory building or structure shall be built on any lot on which there is not a principal building.

2.	Any accessory buildings and uses clearly subordinate and customarily incidental to and located on the same lot with any of the foregoing uses sha ll be permitted in the same manner as the principal  building or use.

3.	Eating establishments accessory to a permitted principal use.


4.	Garages for storage and maintenance and utility shops for the upkeep and repair of buildings and structures and service; central heating and power plants for furnishing heat and electrical energy; training schools for employees; buildings for the storage of documents, records and personal property; communication facilities to be used for company purposes only and not by the general public.

5.	Group day care and child day cares accessory to a permitted principal use subject to Site Plan approval and Sect ion 6.4 of these Regulations.



--Continued next page--
 

4.5.E	Dimensional Standards

Technology Campus District

IMinimum Lot Area	80,000 square feet 	

Minimum Lot Width	200 feet
Minimum Lot Depth	300 feet


Minimum Front Yard Setback	
SO feet	
Where the required yard setback
Minimum Side Yard Setback	lS feet	line abuts or is across from the
street from any residential zone, ea ch yard setback shall be equal to the height of the outer face wall of any building adjacent to

Minimum Rear Yard Setback	
SO feet	
		the subject yard

Minimum  Buffer  Strip		Unless modified by the Commission by Special Permit due to the provision of comparable screening, a landscaped strip 2S feet wide providing complete visual screening shall be provided along lot lines
that abut or are across the street from any residential zone.

I Maximum Building Coverage	40%

I Maximum Building Height	7S feet


Notes -	1.	Section 8.3 of the Regulations may provide fle xibility related to some of these dimensional standards.
 


5.	SPECIAL ZONES


5.1.	Overview


Each of the uses listed in Section 5 of these Regulations may also subject to the requirements of Section 7 of these Regulations including but not limited to:
1.	Parking;
2.	Signage;
3.	Earth removal and filling;
4.	Access drives and corner visibility; and
5.	Performance standards.




Eastern Point Beach	Shennecossett Golf














Coastal Area	Floodplain
 
ROS – Recreation Open Space

5.2.	ROS – Recreation Open Space

5.1.A	Purpose

The Recreation Open Space zone is intended to provide for recreation and open space uses and to allow for public buildings and uses in appropriate areas.

5.1.B	Permitted Uses

1.	Nature trails, arboretums, land reserves, and other areas of natural scenic beauty.

2.	Parks, playgrounds and recreation facilities including, but not limited to, public swim or beach club, golf course and/or athletic field.

3.	Officially designated historic sites or buildings.

5.1.C	Principal Uses Permitted By Special Permit Approval And Site Plan Approval (Commission)

1.	Municipal and other public buildings, including educational institutions with 2,000 square feet or more floor area.

2.	Restaurants, snack bars, concession stands, or any other facilities for the dispensing of food and/or non-alcoholic beverages, provided that they are accessory to a permitted principal use.

3.	Telecommunication facilities, subject to the requirements of Section 6.12 of these Regulations.

5.1.D	Permitted Accessory Uses

1.	Swimming pools, bleachers, grandstands, and other permanent recreational facilities, provided that such facilities shall be located at least 100 feet from the nearest residence zone.

2.	Offices and buildings for the storage and use of equipment necessary to maintain the principal use.

3.	Bathrooms and other public facilities provided that such facilities are accessory to and necessary for the principal use.

4.	Parking only as an accessory to the principal use.
 
ROS – Recreation Open Space


5.1.E	Dimensional Standards

ROS District (1)

Minimum Lot Area	40,000 square feet

Minimum Lot Width	100 feet

Minimum Front Yard Setback	50 feet
Minimum Side Yard Setback	50 feet
Minimum Rear Yard Setback	50 feet except that a rear yard setback shall not be required for the portion of the lot abutting navigable water

Maximum Building Coverage	10%

Maximum Building Height	35 feet


Notes -	1.	Section 8.3 of the Regulations may provide flexibility related to some of these dimensional standards.
 

5.3.	CAM - Coastal Area Management Overlay Zone

5.2.A	Purpose

This Section of the Regulations is adopted for the purpose of managing activities within the coastal area and implementing the provisions of Chapter 444 of the Connecticut General Statutes (CGS Sections 22a- 90 through 22a-115).

5.2.B	Zone Location

The Coastal Area Management Overlay Zone applies to all areas within the coastal boundary, as defined by CGS Section 22a-94, and as adopted and delineated on the Coastal Boundary Map for the City of Groton on file in the office of the City Clerk.

5.2.C	Applicability

Except as may be exempted in Section 5.2.E below, all buildings, uses and structures fully or partially within the Coastal Area Management Overlay Zone shall be subject to the coastal site plan review requirements and procedures in:
•	These Regulations;
•	Appendix B; and
•	CGS Sections 22a-105 through 22a-109.

5.2.D	Coastal Resource Setback

1.	No new building construction, including minor additions to or modifications of existing buildings, such as garages, utility sheds, pools, tennis courts or parking lots, shall be permitted within 25 feet of any tidal waterbody or watercourse or of the following coastal resource areas: tidal wetlands, coastal bluffs, escarpments, beaches or dunes, as defined by Chapter 444, Section
22a-93(7) of the Connecticut General Statutes or shown on the map entitled, “Coastal Resource Map” on file in the office of the City Clerk.

2.	This setback shall apply to all lots within the Coastal Area Management Overlay Zone, in addition to the requirement of lot, building and yard setback requirements in the underlying zoning district ,except that it shall not apply to:
a.	Section 4.1 Waterfront Business Residence Zone District, or
b.	Water-dependent uses as defined by Chapter 444, Section 22a-93(16) of the Connecticut General Statutes.
 
CAM - Coastal Area Management Overlay Zone

5.2.E	Coastal Site Plan Review Exemptions

Pursuant to CGS Section 22a-109(b), the following activities are exempt from coastal site plan review requirements for the applications specified in Section 5.2.F of these Regulations:

1.	Gardening, grazing and the harvesting of crops;

2.	Minor additions to or modifications of existing buildings or detached accessory buildings, such as garages and utility sheds;

3.	Construction of new or modification of existing structures incidental to the enjoyment and maintenance of a one- or two-family residential property, including, but not limited to, walks, terraces, driveways, swimming pools, tennis courts, docks, and detached accessory buildings;

4.	Construction of the following new or modifications of the following existing on premise structures:  fences, walls, pedestrian walks and terraces, underground utility connections, essential electric, gas, telephone, water and sewer service lines, signs, and such other minor structures as will not substantially alter the natural character of coastal resources, as defined by CGS Section 22a-93(7) or restrict access along the public beach;

5.	Construction of an individual single family residential structure, except in or within 100 feet of the following coastal resource areas, as defined by CGS Section  22a-93(7):
•	Tidal wetlands;
•	Coastal bluffs and escarpments;
•	Beaches; and
•	Dunes;

6.	Activities conducted for the specific purpose of conserving or preserving soil, vegetation, water, fish, shellfish, wildlife and other coastal and water resources.

7.	Interior modifications to buildings;

8.	Minor changes in use of a building, structure, or property except those changes occurring on property adjacent to or abutting coastal waters.
 

5.2.F	Effect of Coastal Site Plan Review Exemptions

The exemptions from coastal site plan review requirements as provided in Section 5.2.E above shall apply to the following applications:

1.	Site plan applications submitted to the Commission in accordance with CGS Section 22a-109 and Section 9.3 of these Regulations;

2.	Application for a Special Permit submitted to the Commission in accordance with CGS Section 8- 2 and Section 9.4 of these Regulations.

3.	Applications for a variance submitted to the Zoning Board of Appeals in accordance with CGS Section 8-6(3) and Section 9.7 of these Regulations; except that a use variance shall not be exempt from coastal site plan review.

4.	A referral of a proposed municipal improvement project to the Commission in accordance with CGS Section 8-24.
 

5.4.	FP - Flood Protection Overlay Zone

5.3.A	Purpose and Intent

The provisions of this Section are adopted to fulfill requirements for participation by the City of Groton in the National Flood Insurance Program. These regulations are also intended to:

1.	To minimize expenditure of public funds for costly flood control projects;

2.	To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;

3.	To minimize prolonged business and economic disruptions;

4.	To minimize damage to public facilities, infrastructure and utilities, such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, and streets and bridges, located in the floodplain;

5.	To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood hazard areas in such a manner as to minimize flood damage;

6.	To prevent increases in flood heights that could further increase flood damage;

7.	To discourage development in a floodplain if there is any practicable alternative to locate the activity, use or structure outside of the floodplain.



5.3.B	Applicability

1.	The provisions of this Section, as well as those of City Ordinance #73 concerning floodplain management, shall apply to the areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in its Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for New London County, Connecticut, dated August 5, 2013, and accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM), dated August 5, 2013. The FIS and accompanying FIRMs, and other supporting data applicable to the City of Groton, and any subsequent revisions thereto, are adopted by reference and declared to be a part of these Regulations.

2.	The area of special flood hazard includes any area shown on the FIRM as Zones A, AE, Coastal AE and VE, including areas designated as a floodway on a FIRM. Zone VE is also identified as a Coastal High Hazard Area.

3.	Since mapping is legally adopted by reference into this regulation it must take precedence when more restrictive until such time as a map amendment or map revision is obtained from FEMA.
 

5.3.C	Caveat

1.	The degree of flood protection required by this regulation is considered the minimum reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering consideration and research. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions.  Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes.

2.	This regulation does not imply or guarantee that land outside the Special Flood Hazard Area or uses permitted in such areas will be free from flooding and flood damages.

3.	This regulation shall not create liability on the part of the City of Groton or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this regulation or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. The City of Groton, its officers and employees shall assume no liability for another person’s reliance on any maps, data or information provided by the City of Groton.

5.3.D	Definitions

For the purposes of this Section of the Regulations, the following words and terms shall be interpreted and applied as defined below:

Basement – For floodplain management purposes, a basement is any area of the building having its floor sub grade (below ground level) on all sides.  See “basement” for the general definition of basement.

Base Flood – The flood having a one (1) percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, also referred to as the one hundred (100) year flood, as published by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) as part of a Flood Insurance Study (FIS) and depicted on a Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM).

Base Flood Elevation (BFE) – The water-surface elevation of the base flood in relation to a standard set of geographic data in Areas of Special Flood Hazard. BFEs provided on a Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) are only approximate (rounded up or down) and should be verified with the BFEs published in the Flood Insurance Study for the City of Groton.

Breakaway Wall –A wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system.

Building – See definition for “Structure”.

Coastal AE Zone – The portion of the Coastal High Hazard Area with wave heights between 1.5 feet and
3.0 feet during the base flood and seaward of the line labeled the “Limit of Moderate Wave Action” (LiMWA) on a Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM).

Coastal High Hazard Area –The area of special flood hazard extending from offshore to the inland limit of a primary frontal dune along an open coast and any other area subject to high velocity waters caused by, but not limited to, hurricane wave wash. The area is designated on the FIRM as Zone VE and Coastal AE.
 

Cost - As related to substantial improvements, the cost of any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, alteration, repair or other improvement of a structure shall be established by a detailed written estimate by a licensed contractor. The estimate shall include, but not be limited to: the cost of materials (interior finishing elements, structural elements, utility and service equipment); sales tax on materials, building equipment and fixtures, including heating and air conditioning and utility meters; labor; built-in appliances; demolition and site preparation; repairs made to damaged parts of the building worked on at the same time; contractor’s overhead; contractor’s profit; and grand total. Items to be excluded include:  cost of plans and specifications, survey costs, permit fees, outside improvements such as septic systems, water supply wells, landscaping, sidewalks, fences, yard lights, irrigation systems, and detached structures such as garages, sheds, and gazebos.

Development – Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to the construction of buildings or structures; the construction of additions, alterations or substantial improvements to buildings or structures; the placement of buildings or structures; mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment; the storage, deposition, or extraction of materials; and the installation, repair or removal of public  or private sewage disposal systems or water supply facilities.

Elevated Building –A non-basement building built to have the lowest floor elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns (posts and piers), shear walls, or breakaway walls.

Existing Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision - A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured home are to be affixed (including, as a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before April 21, 1980, the effective date of  the floodplain management regulations adopted by the community.

Expansion to an Existing Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision - The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufacturing homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).

Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) - The federal agency that administers the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP).

Finished Living Space - As related to fully enclosed areas below the base flood elevation (BFE), a space that is, but is not limited to, heated and/or cooled, contains finished floors (tile, linoleum, hardwood, etc.), has sheetrock walls that may or may not be painted or wallpapered, and other amenities such as furniture, appliances, bathrooms, fireplaces and other items that are easily damaged by floodwaters and expensive to clean, repair or replace.

Flood or Flooding –A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from either the overflow of inland or tidal waters, or the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
 

Floodproofing –Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to properties and structures, primarily for the reduction or elimination of flood damage to lands, water, and sanitary facilities, structures, and contents of buildings.

Floodway –The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than 1 foot.

Flood, 100 Year –A 100-year flood is a flood of such magnitude as can reasonably be expected to be equaled or exceeded on an average of once every 100 years; the term also means the level of flooding having a 1% probability of occurrence in any year.

Flood Hazard Area –The maximum area of the flood plain which is likely to be flooded by a 100-year flood, or any area for which mudslides can reasonably be anticipated.

Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) –An official map of a community on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has delineated both the Special Flood Hazard Areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.

Flood Insurance Study (FIS) –The official report by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), which contains flood profiles, the water surface elevation of the base flood, and other flood data.

Functionally Dependent Use or Facility – A use or facility that cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities. The term does not include seafood processing facilities, long- term storage, manufacturing, sales or service facilities.

Historic Structure - Any structure that is:
(a)	Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
(b)	Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the
historic significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
(c)	Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
(d)	Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:  (1) By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or (2) Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.

Limit of Moderate Wave Action (LiMWA) – The landward limit of the 1.5 foot breaking wave within a Coastal AE Zone. These areas are seaward of the line labeled “Limit of Moderate Wave Action” (LiMWA) on a Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM).
 

Lowest Floor - The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for the parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building’s lowest floor provided that such an area meets the design requirements specified in Section 5.3.G.4 of this regulation.

Manufactured Home – A structure, transportable in one (1) or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term also includes park trailers, travel trailers, recreational vehicles and other similar vehicles or transportable structures placed on a site for one hundred and eighty (180) consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property.

Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision – A parcel or contiguous parcels of land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.

Market Value – As related to substantial improvement and substantial damage, the estimated market value of the structure as determined by the Assessor or an independent appraiser as the appraised value of the structure:
•	Prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement; or
•	Prior to the damage occurring.

Mean Sea Level –For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced.

Mobile Home – A transportable, single-family home, which may be towed on its own running gear, and which may be temporarily or permanently affixed to real estate, used for non-transient residential purposes, and constructed with the same, or similar, electrical, plumbing, and sanitary facilities as immobile housing.  Any mobile home which remains on any lot within the limits of this City for more than forty-eight hours within any six-month period shall be construed to be a dwelling, and as such, shall be subject to the Zoning Regulations of the City of Groton.  See “Building”

North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) – As corrected in 1988, this is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain.

New Construction – Structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after April 21, 1980, the effective date of these Floodplain Regulations and includes and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.

New Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision - A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after April 21, 1980, the effective date  of the floodplain management regulation adopted by the community.

Recreational Vehicle – A vehicle which is:
(a)	Built on a single chassis;
(b)	Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection;
(c)	Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and
(d)	Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as a temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
 


Sand Dunes – Naturally occurring accumulations of sand in ridges or mounds landward of the beach.

Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA) – The land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one (1) percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. SFHAs are determined utilizing the base flood elevations (BFE) provided on the flood profiles in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for a community.  BFEs provided on Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) are only approximate (rounded up or down) and should be verified with the BFEs published in the FIS for a specific location. SFHAs include, but are not necessarily limited to, the land shown as Zones A, AE, and the Coastal High Hazard Areas shown as Zones VE and Coastal AE on a FIRM. The SFHA is also called the Area of Special Flood Hazard.

Start of Construction – Includes substantial improvement, and means the date that the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the building permit date (should the permittee fail to being work within this time frame, a new permit shall be required). The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling, nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure.  For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.

Structure –For floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building which is principally above ground, including a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank, or other man-made facilities or infrastructures. See “Building vs Structure” for the general definition of structure.

Substantial Damage – Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to it’s before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. “Substantial Damage” also means flood-related damages sustained by a structure on two separate occasions during a 10-year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on the average, equals or exceeds 25 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.

Substantial Improvement – Any combination of repairs, reconstruction, alteration, or improvements to a structure taking place during a one-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the “start of construction” of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred “substantial damage”, regardless of the actual repair work performed.  The market value of the structure should be (1) the appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the “start of construction” of the initial repair or improvement; or (2)
in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. For the purposes of this definition, “substantial improvement” is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure.  The term does not, however, include
 

any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions.

Variance, Floodplain– A grant of relief by a community from the terms of the floodplain management regulation that allows construction in a manner otherwise prohibited and where specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship.

Violation, Floodplain - A failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community’s floodplain management ordinance. A structure or other development without required permits, lowest floor elevation documentation, flood-proofing certificates or required floodway encroachment calculations is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.

Water Surface Elevations – The height in relation to the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas.

5.3.E	General Requirements

In all Special Flood Hazard Areas, the following provisions shall apply in addition to those set forth elsewhere in these Regulations:

1.	A Floodplain Development Permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this Section prior to the commencement of any development activities. Permits issued under this Section shall expire if actual construction of a permitted structure does not commence within one hundred and eighty (180) days of the permit approval date.

2.	All applications for building permits within the flood hazard area shall include with the application the base flood elevation data from the FIRM for that portion of the activity located within the flood hazard area.

3.	The Commission shall review plans for new developments requiring Site Plan approval or Special Permit in order to determine whether such development is consistent with the need to  minimize flood damage within the flood prone areas and to determine whether proposed developments and building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding.  Special consideration shall be given to the placement of public utilities and the provision of adequate drainage to reduce exposure of flood hazards.

4.	In riverine situations, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall notify adjacent communities and the Connecticut Department of Energy and Environmental Protection (DEEP) prior to approving any activity involving alterations or relocation of the watercourse and submit copies of such notice to the Federal Emergency Management Agency.  In any portion of a watercourse that is altered or relocated, the flood carrying capacity must be maintained.
 

5.	All building permits for new construction, substantial improvements (including placement of prefabricated buildings), or other development shall require, as a condition of building permit approval, confirmation by the Zoning and Building Official that the development is designed and constructed so as to minimize flood damage.

6.	The Zoning and Building Official shall record the as-built elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new construction or substantially improved structures and shall record the elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which the new or substantially improved structures have been flood proofed. In coastal high hazard areas (VE zones), the Zoning and Building Official shall record the elevation of the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member for all new construction and substantial improvements to structures. All records pertaining to the provisions of these Regulations shall be maintained on file.

7.	The bottom of all electrical, heating, plumbing, ventilation and air conditioning equipment, appliances, fixtures and components, HVAC duct work and duct systems, and any other utility service equipment, facilities, machinery, or connections servicing a structure shall be elevated one (1.0) foot above the base flood elevation (BFE). This includes, but is not limited to, furnaces, oil or propane tanks, air conditioners, heat pumps, hot water heaters, ventilation duct work, washer and dryer hook-ups, electrical junction boxes, and circuit breaker boxes. Systems, fixtures, equipment and components shall not be mounted on or penetrate through breakaway walls intended to fail under flood loads. Connections or other equipment that must be located below the BFE plus 1.0 foot elevation are permitted only when no other elevation alternative is available and provided they are designed and installed to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components and to resist hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and stresses, including the effects of buoyancy, during the occurrence of the base flood event. Electrical wiring systems that must be located below the BFE plus 1.0 foot shall conform to the standards for wet locations.

8.	New construction, substantial improvements, and repair to structures that have sustained substantial damage shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment that are flood- damage resistant and conform to the provisions of FEMA Technical Bulletin 2, Flood Damage- Resistant Material Requirements. This includes, but is not limited to, flooring, interior and exterior walls, wall coverings and other materials installed below the base flood elevation plus one (1.0) foot.

9.	New construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage.

10.	New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system.

11.	New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designated to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the system into flood waters.

12.	On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
 


13.	All manufactured homes to be placed within Zone A, AE and VE on the City’s FIRM shall be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood damage.  For the purposes of this requirement, manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over- the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable State and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.

14.	New construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.

15.	When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source in order to administer the provisions of this regulation. A registered professional engineer, at the applicant’s expense, must determine the BFE in accordance with accepted hydrologic and hydraulic engineering practices and document the technical methods used. Studies, analyses and computations shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow thorough review and approval.

5.3.F	Site Plan and Building Permit Requirements

On all Site Plan and building permit applications for development in the Special Flood Hazard Areas, the following information is required:

1.	Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the proposed lowest floor (including basement) of all structures;

2.	Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any non-residential structure will be flood- proofed;

3.	Description to the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development;

4.	Assurances that the flood carrying capacity of any watercourse and its related flood plain is maintained;

5.	Copies of all applicable Federal and State permits shall be included with the building permit.

6.	For non-residential structures certification at time of building permit application shall be provided to the Zoning and Building Official on the FEMA Floodproofing Certificate, Form 81-65 and in accordance with 5.3.G.2.b below.
 

5.3.G	Requirements in Zones A and AE

1.	Residential - All new construction, substantial improvements, and repair to structures that have sustained substantial damage which are residential structures shall have the bottom of the lowest floor, including basement, elevated one (1.0) foot above the base flood elevation (BFE). Electrical, plumbing, machinery or other utility equipment that service the structure must be elevated one (1.0) foot above the BFE.

3.	Non-Residential - All new construction, substantial improvements, and repair to structures that have sustained substantial damage which are commercial, industrial or non-residential structures shall:

a.	Have the bottom of the lowest floor, including basement, elevated one (1.0) foot above the base flood elevation (BFE); or

b.	In lieu of being elevated, non-residential structures may be dry flood-proofed to one (1.0) foot above the BFE provided that together with all attendant utilities and sanitary facilities the areas of the structure below the required elevation are watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and provided that such structures are composed of structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall review and/or develop structural design specifications and plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with acceptable standards of practice for meeting the provisions of this section.

c.	Electrical, plumbing, machinery or other utility equipment that service the structure must be elevated one (1.0) foot above the BFE.



3.	Wet Flood-proofing - All new construction, substantial improvements, or repair to structures that have sustained substantial damage, whether residential or non-residential, that include fully enclosed areas formed by a foundation and other exterior walls shall have the lowest floor elevated to one (1.0) foot above the base flood elevation (BFE). The elevated building shall be designed to preclude finished living space below the lowest floor and be designed to allow for the entry and exit of flood waters to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls (wet flood-proofing). Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect as meeting the requirements of ASCE 24 Section 2.6.2.2, or meet the following minimum criteria listed in sections (a)-(h) below:

a.	Provide a minimum of two (2) openings (hydraulic flood vents) having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every one square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding. These hydraulic openings must be located on at least two different walls.
Only the area (square footage) that lies below the base flood elevation can be used in the calculation of net area of vents required. If the structure has more than one enclosed area, openings must be installed in the exterior walls of each enclosed area so that flood waters can enter directly from the outside;
 

b.	The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot above the finished grade adjacent to the outside of the foundation wall. At least one entire side of the  structure’s fully enclosed area must be at or above grade.  Fill placed around the foundation walls must be graded so that the elevation inside the enclosed area is equal to or higher than the adjacent outside elevation on at least one side of the building.  The finished floor of the enclosed area shall be no lower than the bottom of the foundation openings. The foundation slab of a residential structure, including the slab of a crawlspace, must be set equal to the outside finished grade on at least one side of the building;

c.	The openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic entry and exit of flood waters in both directions without any external influence or control such as human intervention, including the use of electrical and other non-automatic mechanical means. These coverings must not block or impede the automatic flow of floodwaters into and out of the enclosed area. Other coverings may be designed and certified by a registered professional engineer or approved by the Zoning and Building Official;

d.	Openings shall not be less than three (3) inches in any direction in the plane of the wall;

e.	The area cannot be used as finished living space.  Use of the enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary and shall only be used for the parking of vehicles, building access or limited storage.  Access to the enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to allow for the parking of vehicles (garage door) or limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises (standard exterior door) or entry to the living area (stairway or elevator). The enclosed area shall not be used for human habitation or partitioned into separate rooms;

f.	All interior walls, floor, and ceiling materials located below the base flood elevation shall be unfinished and resistant to flood damage in accordance with FEMA Technical Bulletin 2, Flood Damage-Resistant Requirements.

g.	Electrical, plumbing, HVAC ductwork, machinery or other utility equipment and connections that service the structure (including, but not limited to, furnaces, oil or propane tanks, air conditioners, heat pumps, hot water heaters, ventilation, washer and dryer hook-ups, electrical junction boxes, circuit breaker boxes and food freezers) are prohibited in the fully enclosed area below the base flood elevation. Utilities or service equipment located in this enclosed area, even if elevated above the base flood elevation in the space, will subject the structure to increased flood insurance rates.

h.	A residential building with a structurally attached garage having the floor slab below the BFE is considered an enclosed area below the BFE and must meet the standards of Sections 5.3.G.4 (a)-(g).  A garage attached to a residential structure, constructed with the garage floor slab below the BFE, must be designed to allow for the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters in both directions. Flood openings or vents are required in the exterior walls of the garage or in the garage doors. Garage doors that must be manually opened do not meet the flood vent opening requirements in Section 5.3.G.4 (a)-(c).  In
 

addition to the automatic entry of floodwaters, the areas of the garage below BFE plus one (1.0) foot must be constructed with flood damage-resistant materials per the requirements of FEMA Technical Bulletin 2. Garages attached to non-residential structures must also meet the aforementioned requirements or be dry floodproofed as per the requirements of Section 5.3.G.2.b.

5.3.H	Requirements in Zone VE and Coastal AE (Coastal High Hazard Areas)

1.	The provisions of Section 5.3.G shall also apply in the VE zone unless specifically modified by this Subsection.

2.	All new construction or substantial improvement shall be located landward of the reach of the Connecticut Coastal Jurisdiction Line as defined in CGS 22a-359 as amended by Public Act 12- 101.

3.	All new construction, substantial improvement and repair to structures that have sustained substantial damage shall be elevated so that the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member (excluding pilings, pile caps, and columns) is elevated at least one (1.0) foot above the base flood elevation (BFE), with all space below the lowest horizontal supporting member open and free of obstruction so as not to impede the flow of water. Basement floors that are below ground on all sides are prohibited.

4.	The bottom of all electrical, plumbing, machinery or other utility equipment that service the structure must be elevated one (1.0) foot above the BFE and cannot be located below the structure. Any service equipment that must be located below the BFE must be floodproofed to prevent water from entering during conditions of flooding. Electrical, mechanical and plumbing system components are not to be mounted on or penetrate through walls designed to breakaway under flood loads.

5.	All new construction or substantial improvement shall be elevated so that the bottom of the lowest supporting horizontal member (excluding pilings or columns) is located above the base flood elevation plus one foot, with all space below the lowest supporting member open as not to impede the flow of water.

6.	All new construction or substantial improvement shall be securely anchored on pilings or columns.

7.	All pilings and columns and the attached structures shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement due to the effect of wind and water loads acting simultaneously on all building components.  The anchoring and support system shall be designed with wind and water-loading values which equal or exceed the one hundred year mean recurrence interval (1% annual chance floods and winds).

8.	A registered professional engineer or architect shall review and/or develop structural design specifications and plans for the construction and shall certify that the design, specifications and plans for construction are in accordance with acceptable standards.
 

9.	There shall be no fill used as structural support.  Minor grading and the placement of minor quantities of non-compacted fill shall be permitted for landscaping and drainage purposes under and around buildings, and for support of parking slabs, pool decks, patios and walkways  installed at current grade. The fill must wash out from storm surge, thereby rendering the building free of obstruction, prior to generating excessive loading forces, ramping effects, or wave deflection.  . The Zoning and Building Official shall approve design plans for landscaping/aesthetic fill only after the applicant has provided an analysis by an engineer, architect and/or soil scientist, which demonstrates that the following factors have been considered:

a.	Particle composition of fill material does not have a tendency for excessive natural compaction;

b.	Volume distribution of fill will not cause wave deflection to adjacent properties; and

c.	Slope of fill will not cause wave run-up or ramping.

10.	Non-supporting breakaway walls, lattice work or mesh screening shall be allowed below the base flood elevation provided it is not part of the structural support of the building and is designed so as to break away under abnormally high tides or wave action without damage to the structural integrity of the building on which it is to be used and provided the following specifications are met:

a.	Design safe loading resistance of each wall shall be not less than 10 nor more than 20 pounds per square foot; or

b.	If more than 20 pounds per square foot, a registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design wall collapse would result from a water load less than that which would occur during the base flood event, and the elevated portion of the building and supporting foundation system shall not be subject to collapse, displacement, or other structural damage due to the effects of wind and water loads acting simultaneously on all building components during the base flood event.

c.	Maximum wind and water loading values to be used in this determination shall each have 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given 100-year mean recurrence interval.

d.	Areas enclosed by breakaway walls shall contain hydraulic flood vents per the requirements of Section 5.3.G.4.

11.	If breakaway walls, lattice work or screening are utilized, the resulting enclosed space shall not be designed to be used for human habitation, but shall be designed to be used only for parking of vehicles, building access, or limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises.

12.	Prior to construction, plans for any structures that will have breakaway walls, lattice work or screening must be submitted to the Zoning and Building Official for approval.
 

13.	Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure shall not enclose the space below the lowest floor except with breakaway walls, latticework, or screening, as provided in Section 5.3.G.4.

14.	There shall be no alteration of sand dunes (naturally occurring accumulations of sand in ridges or mounds landward of the beach) which would increase potential flood damage.

15.	To protect the building envelope, an exterior door shall be installed at the top of the stairs that provides access to the lowest (habitable) floor of the structure.

16.	The base of a chimney or fireplace shall not extend below the BFE plus one foot.  When vertical support is required, a chimney or fireplace shall be vertically supported on pile or column foundations embedded at least as deep as the rest of the structure foundation or deeper where needed to support the chimney against water and wind loads. The chimney and fireplace system shall be designed to minimize transfer of water and wind loads to the structure or structure foundation.

5.3.I	Requirements for Floodways

1.	Within areas designated as floodways on the FIRM or other available source, encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, and other developments, are prohibited unless certification with supporting technical data, by a Connecticut registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice, that the encroachments shall not result in any (0.00 feet) increase in flood levels during occurrence of the base flood discharge.

2.	Buildings and structures meeting the standard above and located in whole or in part in the floodway shall be designed and constructed in accordance with ASCE 24.

3.	Fences in the floodway must be aligned with the flow and be of an open design.

4.	The City may request floodway data of an applicant for watercourses without FEMA-published floodways. When such data is provided by an applicant or whenever such data is available from any other source (in response to the City’s request or not), the City shall adopt a regulatory floodway based on the principle that the floodway must be able to convey the waters of the base flood without increasing the water surface elevation more than 1 foot at any point within the community.

5.	In Zone A when base flood elevations become available and in Zone AE when base flood elevations have been determined, but before a regulatory floodway is designated, no new construction, substantial improvement, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted which will increase the water surface elevation of the base flood elevations more than 1 foot at any point the community when all existing and anticipated development is considered cumulatively with the proposed development.
 

5.3.J	Additional Provisions

1.	Equal Conveyance

a.	Within the floodplain, except those areas which are tidally influenced, as designated on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for the community, encroachments resulting from filling, new construction or substantial improvements involving an increase in footprint of the structure, are prohibited unless the applicant provides certification by a  registered professional engineer demonstrating, with supporting hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice, that such encroachments shall not result in any (0.00 feet) increase in flood levels (base flood elevation).

b.	Work within the floodplain and the land adjacent to the floodplain, including work to provide compensatory storage shall not be constructed in such a way so as to cause an increase in flood stage or flood velocity.

2.	Compensatory Storage

a.	The water holding capacity of the floodplain, except those areas which are tidally influenced, shall not be reduced.

b.	Any reduction caused by filling, new construction or substantial improvements involving an increase in footprint to the structure, shall be compensated for by deepening and/or widening of the floodplain.

c.	Such compensatory volume shall have an unrestricted hydraulic connection to the same waterway or water body.

d.	Storage shall be:
•	Provided on-site, unless easements have been gained from adjacent property owners;
•	Provided within the same hydraulic reach and a volume not previously used for flood storage;
•	Hydraulically comparable and incrementally equal to the theoretical volume of flood water at each elevation, up to and including the 100-year flood elevation, which would be displaced by the proposed project.

e.	Compensatory storage can be provided off-site if approved by the municipality.

3.	Aboveground and Underground Storage Tanks

a.	In all flood zones, underground tanks shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse and lateral movement under conditions of the base flood.

b.	In VE and Coastal AE zones, above-ground storage tanks which are located outside or inside of a structure must be elevated one (1.0) foot above the base flood elevation (BFE).
 

c.	Where elevated on platforms, the platforms shall be cantilevered from or knee braced to the building or shall be supported on elevated foundations that conform to the standards for the particular flood zone as described in Section 5.3.

d.	In A and AE zones, above-ground storage tanks which are located outside or inside of a structure shall be elevated one (1.0) foot above the base flood elevation (BFE) or shall be securely anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement under conditions of the base flood.

e.	Anchored tanks must have the top of the fill pipe located at least one (1.0) foot above the BFE and have a screw fill cap that does not allow for the infiltration of flood water.

4.	Portion of Structure in Flood Zone

a.	If any portion of a structure lies within the Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA), the entire structure is considered to be in the SFHA and the entire structure must meet the construction requirements of the flood zone.

b.	The structure includes any attached additions, garages, decks, sunrooms, or any other structure attached to the main structure.

c.	Decks or porches that extend into a more restrictive flood zone will require the entire structure to meet the standards of the more restrictive zone.

5.	Structures in Two Flood Zones

a.	If a structure lies within two or more flood zones, the construction standards of the most restrictive zone apply to the entire structure (i.e., V zone is more restrictive than A zone; structure must be built to the highest BFE).

b.	The structure includes any attached additions, garages, decks, sunrooms, or any other structure attached to the main structure.

c.	Decks or porches that extend into a more restrictive zone will require the entire structure to meet the requirements of the more restrictive zone.

6.	No Structures Entirely or Partially Over Water - New construction, substantial improvements and repair to structures that have sustained substantial damage cannot be constructed or located entirely or partially over water unless it is a functionally dependent use or facility.

7.	Manufactured Homes (Existing Park) - Manufactured homes placed or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park within A, AE, Coastal AE, and VE zones shall be elevated so that:

a.	The lowest floor is at or above the base flood elevations;

b.	The chassis is supported by reinforced piers no less than 36 inches above grade and securely anchored; and

c.	The installation meets the requirements of Section 5.3.E.12.
 

8.	Manufactured Homes (Other Locations) - Manufactured homes placed or substantially improved within A, AE, Coastal AE and VE zones shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to or above the base flood elevation plus one foot and meet the requirements of Section 5.3.E.13 if situated in one of the following locations:

a.	Outside a manufactured home park or subdivision;

b.	In a new manufactured home park or subdivision;

c.	In an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision;

d.	On a site in an existing park which a manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as a result of a flood.

9.	Recreational Vehicles - In A, AE, Coastal AE, and VE zones , all recreational vehicles to be placed on a site must:

a.	Be elevated and anchored, meeting the requirements of Section 5.3.E.13; or

b.	Be on the site for less than 180 consecutive days, be fully licensed, and be ready for highway use as evidenced by:
•	Being on its wheels or a jacking system, is
•	Being attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and
•	Having no permanently attached additions.

5.3.K	Floodplain Variances

1.	A floodplain variance shall not be granted if the Zoning Board of Appeals determines that:

a.	No exceptional hardship would result from failure to grant the variance;

b.	Granting the variance would result in increased flood heights, additional threats to the public safety, extraordinary public expense, or creation of a nuisance.

c.	Within any designated floodway, an increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would occur as a result of such variance.

2.	A floodplain variance may be issued for new construction and substantial improvement and other development necessary for the conduct of a functionally-dependent use provided the structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage and create no additional threat to public safety.

3.	An applicant for a floodplain variance to this Section 5.3 shall be notified by the Zoning and Building Official that the issuance of a floodplain variance to construct a structure below the base flood elevation will result in increased rates for insurance coverage, and that a record of all flood protection variance action and resulting construction shall be maintained.
 


4.	Any applicant to whom a floodplain variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation to which the structure is to be built and stating that the cost of risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation up to amounts as high as $25.00 for $100.00 of insurance coverage.

5.	The Zoning and Building Official shall maintain a record of all flood protection variance actions, including justification for their issuance, and biennial report such variances issued in the annual report submitted to the Federal Emergency Management Agency
 


5.4	Planned Development Districts.

Section 5.4 of these Regulations is reserved for adoption, by the Planning and Zoning Commission, from time to time, of regulations authorizing the implementation of Planned Development Districts, which shall be floating zones, designed to provide flexibility, but with regulatory control, to achieve targeted developmental objectives within the City of Groton which will enhance and diversify development opportunities within the City, and which development cannot be feasibly achieved pursuant to the regulatory framework created by other sections of these regulations. Each Planned Development District adopted by the Planning and Zoning Commission hereunder shall be a floating zone. Development within any Planned Development District may only be accomplished by (1) obtaining from the Planning and Zoning Commission a zone change attaching the applicable Planned Development District regulation to a parcel or parcels of land proposed for inclusion within the zone, which zone change shall only be granted in conjunction with the approval of a preliminary site development plan and land use concept plan (“Master Plan”) as provided in these Regulations and (2) obtaining final site plan approval for the development as proposed.
 


5.4.A	Mixed Use Development District.

1.	General. The Planning and Zoning Commission recognizes that areas exist within the City of Groton which present unique opportunities for development and re-development in an urban setting in order to develop a “sense of place”, provide population densities which will promote a pedestrian friendly environment, create a walkable environment to major regional employers and enhance the economic diversity of the City of Groton. The Planning and Zoning Commission desires to create a legislative framework which will allow the type of development contemplated by this Section 5.4.A of the City of Groton Zoning Regulations with stringent controls which will allow the Planning and Zoning Commission to ensure that the uses proposed within the Planned Development District can be developed in harmony with each other and in harmony with surrounding uses, both existing and contemplated, giving due consideration to the unique characteristics and location of the property which is proposed for rezoning.

2.	Intent. The Mixed-Use Development District (“MUDD”) will be a floating zone governed by a Master Plan, in accordance with Section 5.4.A of these Regulations. The Master Plan will be subject to review and approval by the Planning and Zoning Commission as a zone change and zoning text amendment, in conjunction with a contemporaneous zoning map amendment to MUDD, but subject to a public hearing and all other applicable procedural terms and conditions of these Regulations. Except as provided in Section 5.4.A hereof, the MUDD will supersede all pre- existing zoning, and any development of the zoned property owned and/or controlled by the Applicant, will be subject to the specific requirements for the MUDD set forth herein and as delineated in the approved Master Plan.

a.	Unified and Comprehensive Design. The MUDD is designed to encourage urban development in close proximity to places of major employment incorporating a neighborhood concept of both commercial and residential uses within the District. Such unified design shall include comprehensive standards for the architectural style of buildings within the MUDD, pedestrian linkages and linked community facilities, the design of utilitarian elements such as lighting fixtures, and signage and preliminary designs for sewer, water and stormwater management and renovation for the District.

b.	Expand Property Tax Base and Employment Opportunities. Use
 

the incentives of higher density residential development and increased flexibility in overall development density and intensity to create an expanded tax base for the City; to create attractive urban scale mixed use commercial and recreational lifestyle environments which address the needs of City and which will create residential units in close proximity to places of major employment in order to promote a  pedestrian friendly environment within the City and a “Sense of Place” in the eligible zoning districts which occupy strategical locations within the City.

c.	Increased Residential Density Near Employment Opportunities.
Provide housing units in compact urban residential patterns that are located within reasonable walking distance of major places of employment and other service businesses in order to promote a walkable environment and sense of place within the City.

d.	Health, Safety, and Welfare; Plan of Conservation and Development. To encourage mixed use development at such degrees of intensity as can be conveniently accommodated by parcel size, available infrastructure and parking demands in a manner which is consistent with the Plan of Conservation and Development of the City of Groton and which promotes the health, safety, economic development and general welfare of the City and its residents.




5.4.A.1	Mixed Use Development District.

1.	Applicants. Any owner of property within a proposed MUDD may apply to the Planning and Zoning Commission for a change of zoning district classification from the underlying zoning district to MUDD. Such owner, herein referred to as the “Applicant”, need not own all land within the proposed MUDD, and failure to own all land within such proposed district shall not prevent the Planning and Zoning Commission from hearing or granting any such application; provided, however, that the owner of each parcel delineated on the Master Plan for which MUDD approval is requested consents, in writing, to the filing of the application for the MUDD. For the purpose of this Section, the term “underlying zoning district” shall be defined as the zone(s) or district(s) existing on the subject parcel prior to the filing of an application for a MUDD.

2.	Limitations on Underlying Zoning Districts.  An Applicant can only apply
 

for MUDD zoning district classification in the existing Waterfront Business Residence District or the existing Five Corners District.

3.	Uses Allowed and Required. A MUDD may include any use of land set forth in Sections 4.1 or 4.2 of these Regulations (whether permitted as of right or by special permit), developed at the density and in accordance with the design parameters permitted by this Section 5.4.A of these Regulations, in distinction to the density and design requirements set forth in the hereinbefore referenced underlying districts.

a.	Residential Uses. Multi-family residential uses established in a size and configuration consistent with urban scale  residential development; provided, however, that no such residential use shall be permitted on the first floor of any structure within the MUDD. Residential density shall be determined by the Planning and Zoning Commission based upon the unique characteristics of the neighborhood context in which the MUDD is proposed. Residential components of the MUDD shall contain, be linked to, or be supported by commercial development on the first floor of any structure in the MUDD accommodating residential dwelling units. Nothing herein contained shall be construed to limit or prohibit the utilization of first floor space  within the limits of any  building footprint from accommodating required parking spaces.

b.	Commercial Uses. Any use permitted (whether as of right or by special permit) in the Waterfront Business Residence District or the Five Corners District.

c.	Recreational Use. Any use located entirely within a building or buildings in a MUDD available as an amenity for residents of the MUDD, or on a fee for use basis, including, but not limited to a swimming pool, fitness center, gymnasium, video golf facilities, arcade or bowling alleys.

d.	Accessory Uses. Those accessory uses permitted pursuant to the provisions of Section 4.1.E.2 and 4.2.E.1 of these Regulations.

4.	Performance standards for MUDDs. Any MUDD established pursuant to the provisions of this Section 5.4.A of the City of Groton Zoning Regulations shall satisfy the following minimum standards:

a.	Each MUDD shall be designed to provide for adequate access for emergency access to structures within the MUDD.
 


b.	All uses in the MUDD shall be served by municipal water and municipal sewer facilities.

5.4.A.2	Application Procedure For Mixed Use Development Districts.

1.	Informal Preliminary Review. The Planning and Zoning Commission recommends that, prior to the submission of an official application for MUDD approval, the Applicant initiate a pre-application conference with the Planning and Zoning Commission and its staff and subsequently prepare and present a preliminary plan for informal consideration by the Planning and Zoning Commission. The preparation of the preliminary plan is recommended to facilitate the general consideration of factors and problems affecting the development of the MUDD before the Applicant proceeds with the official application and the preparation of submittable maps, plans and documents required for formal consideration by the Planning and Zoning Commission. The presentation of a preliminary plan will more readily and economically facilitate alterations and changes recommended by the Planning  and Zoning  Commission. The pre- application conference and the informal consideration of the preliminary plan shall not be deemed to constitute any portion of the official and formal procedure of applying for a change of zone or a Master Plan approval. Neither the Applicant nor the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be in any way bound by statements made in such informal discussions, their purpose being only to minimize delay, expense and inconvenience to the public, the Applicant, and the Planning and Zoning Commission upon the future receipt, if any, of a formal application for a MUDD. Following any informal discussion, the Planning and Zoning Commission may suggest that the proposal, or certain aspects thereof, be referred to other municipal, State, or Federal agencies for review and comment, or may suggest that additional information is or will be required prior to action on a formal application for change of zone.

2.	Formal Application.

a.	Application Form and Fee. All applications for a MUDD shall be submitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission on a form prescribed by it and accompanied by an application fee for a zone change in accordance with the Ordinances of the City of Groton. In addition, each application shall be accompanied by a list of names and addresses of the owners of all properties located within and within five hundred (500’) feet of the property included in the zone change application, as such names and addresses appear in the
 

most recent Grand List of the Municipal Assessor.

b.	General Statement. Applications for change of zone to MUDD shall include a general statement describing the following:

i.	The specific types of proposed uses on the site and the approximate square footage of each use;

ii.	The methods by which site utilities will be provided;

iii.	The proposed timetable for development, including a description of phases, if any;

iv.	A list of all additional licenses, permits, and approvals which will be required for the development together with a delineation of the agency responsible for the issuance of such permits, licenses and approvals;

v.	For residential portions of the site, a schedule of bedrooms per dwelling unit, total numbers of units, and such other data as may be required to evaluate compliance with the standards and criteria of these Regulations; and

vi.	A statement outlining how the proposed development conforms to the Comprehensive Plan embodied in these Regulations and the adopted Plan of Conservation and Development of the City.

3.	Zone Change Map for Recording. All applications for a MUDD shall be accompanied by a property boundary survey, suitable for filing in the Office of the Groton Town Clerk, indicating the area of the proposed zone change relative to existing property boundaries, and the names of all property owners owning property located within the MUDD and the names of all abutting property owners of record and the names of all property owners located within five hundred (500’) feet of any portion of the zone change parcel as evidenced by the then most current records of the Municipal Assessor as of the date of filing of the zone change application for the MUDD. Said survey shall include a key map. Said property boundary survey shall be certified by a Connecticut licensed land surveyor certifying that the survey conforms to the standards of survey and map accuracy respectively of Class A-2 as defined in the Minimum Standards for Surveys and Maps in the State of Connecticut, as the same may be amended from time to time.  In the event that the Planning and
 

Zoning Commission approves a zone change of a lesser area than that requested, the Applicant shall provide an amended zone change map reflecting the zone change as approved.

4.	Master Plan.   All applications for a MUDD shall be accompanied by a Master Plan as required below:

a.	The Plan shall be drawn clearly and legibly at a scale of 1” = 100' presented on sheets not exceeding 24” x 36” (unless a different scale or sheet size is approved by the Commission) and the plan shall be drawn by a professional engineer, architect, landscape architect, or land surveyor registered in the State of Connecticut. Sixteen (16) paper prints shall be provided with each application. Where appropriate, supporting information may be provided in textual rather than graphic form.

b.	The following items are required to be submitted to the Commission with each application for change of zoning district classification to MUDD and the approval of a master plan:

i.	Key Map. A key map at a scale of 1” = 1000' showing the location of the proposed development and its relationship to existing City and State roads.

ii.	Adjacent Land Uses. The boundaries of the subject parcel or parcels to be rezoned and/or developed, owners of these parcels and adjacent parcels, roadways, structures, and land uses.

iii.	Existing Site Features. Existing structures, roads, land uses, topography at a contour interval of two (2') feet or less, major and unique natural, scenic and historic features of the parcel and their relationship to the proposed development.

iv.	Proposed Land Uses. The proposed density of land uses intended for different parts of the parcel, including the number of residential and commercial units, and the amount of land to be devoted to each land use including the amount and general location of parking, walkways and other amenities.

v.	Proposed Buildings.	The  general height, bulk,  use  and
 

location of buildings, including conceptual elevations of the buildings in the MUDD sufficient to demonstrate to the Planning and Zoning Commission a consistent architectural theme which will be maintained throughout the MUDD.

vi.	Circulation. The proposed location of roads, driveways, parking and pedestrian circulation including tie-ins with existing City, state and public utility facilities.

vii.	Water Supply. The proposed method for a provision of a potable water supply to the development and a projection of the number of gallons per day to be consumed by the project upon completion.

viii.	Sewage Disposal. The proposed method for the collection and disposal of all sanitary waste.

ix.	Stormwater. A stormwater quality and management plan that will incorporate low impact development techniques and processes.

x.	Surface Water Quality. A statement indicating the quality of existing watercourses through or near the site, if any.

xi.	Erosion Control. A statement indicating the erodibility of the soils and a general indication of the need for erosion and sedimentation control. All erosion and sediment control measures shall comply with the latest edition of the Connecticut Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control.

xii.	Watercourses. The location of any inland wetland and watercourse as defined by the City Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations, and map, as amended.

xiii.	Traffic Impact Study.  A traffic impact analysis prepared by a Connecticut licensed professional engineer specializing in traffic engineering, evaluating the capacity of existing streets and highways to accommodate the projected traffic which will be generated by the MUDD uses.

xiv.	Pedestrian Impact Study. An impact analysis prepared by a Connecticut licensed professional engineer evaluating the
 

movement of pedestrian traffic within the MUDD and between the MUDD and adjacent uses, which impact analysis shall incorporate recommendations to facilitate pedestrian traffic both within the MUDD as well as between the MUDD and adjacent uses.

xv.	Parking Analysis. A parking plan for the MUDD prepared by a licensed professional engineer specializing in parking needs and design, which analysis shall determine the amount and location of parking required by the MUDD. The recommendations of the parking analysis shall be incorporated into the Master Plan by the Applicant s consulting civil engineer; and, when approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission, shall supersede any and all parking requirements otherwise contained in these Regulations.

xvi.	Signage Plan. A general signage plan delineating the general signage program for the MUDD, including directional signage. Signage within the MUDD shall not be required to comply with the requirements of Section 7.2 of these Regulations, but shall be subject to the approval of the Planning and Zoning Commission. In approving the Master Plan, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall approve, or modify and approve, as the case may be, the signage program for the MUDD. In conjunction with each site plan application for a  specific element or phase of development within the MUDD, the Applicant shall present the specific signage proposal for that element or phase of the MUDD, including the size, location, illumination and design of all signage, which signage shall be determined by the Planning and Zoning Commission to be consistent with the general signage program for the MUDD approved in the Master Plan approval, and which signage shall be consistent with the architectural character and theme of the MUDD, and which shall be consistent with the Plan of Conservation and Development of the City.

xvii.	Restrictions. The substance of any proposed covenants, easements and restrictions.

xviii.	Further  Documentation.  Other  documentation  as  may reasonably   be   required   by   the   Planning   and   Zoning
 

Commission to make an adequate determination of the appropriateness of the proposal to the site and of its fulfillment of the intent of these Regulations. The Planning and Zoning Commission may require information generally required in the final site development plan if it feels such information is necessary to make an informed judgment. Preliminary findings for all site investigations shall be indicated.

5.	Additional Information. A zone change application calls upon the Planning and Zoning Commission to exercise a legislative function, and to determine that the MUDD applied for will be superior to the underlying zone in achieving the purposes of these Regulations and the Plan of Conservation and Development of the City. It is the obligation of the Applicant to provide any additional information which the Planning and Zoning Commission may request or require in order to make such a determination. Such information may include, but is not limited to: additional information concerning surrounding land uses, building locations, driveways, streets, topography, watercourses and wetlands, utilities, and the like.

5.4.A.3	Public Hearing, Personal Notice, and Action.

1.	Procedure, Applicant’s Notice Requirements. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall act in such manner, and in accordance with such time limits, as are designated for changes of zone in accordance with Section
9.6 of these Regulations and in accordance with the applicable provisions of Section 8-7d of the Connecticut General Statutes. In the event of conflict between the procedures set forth in these Regulations and the General Statutes, the latter shall prevail. In addition, the Applicant shall mail personal notice of the proposed zone change to MUDD to each owner of property within the MUDD and within two hundred (200’) feet of any portion of the MUDD as required by the provision of Section 9.9.G of these Regulations and post notice of the pendency of the public hearing on the zone change application on the property constituting the MUDD in accordance with the requirements of Section 9.9.H of these Regulations.

2.	Action on Master Plan. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall approve, modify and approve, or disapprove the Master Plan. Any site plan approval subsequently granted for any use within  the approved MUDD shall substantially conform to the approved Master Plan, except to the extent that the Planning and Zoning Commission approves a departure therefrom. No Certificate of Zoning Compliance or Building Permit shall be issued, nor shall any construction activity of any kind commence, for any
 

work depicted on an approved Master Plan, until such time as a site plan approval in accordance with Section 9.3 of these Regulations has been issued for development to be located in the phase, or on the lot or site, where such development is to occur.

3.	Notice of Action and Filing of Map. Upon approval of a MUDD and Master Plan, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall provide notice to the Applicant and the public, as provided in the General Statutes, and shall cause the approved MUDD zone change map to be noted on the official zoning map of the City of Groton by outlining the boundaries of the land affected thereby and indicating the approval date.

4.	Recording. The Applicant shall, within ninety (90) days of approval of any MUDD, record notice thereof in the Groton Land Records under the name of the record owner(s) of land affected thereby, giving a legal description of the land, and giving specific reference to the approved plan(s) and map(s); and, further, the Applicant shall file in the Groton Land Records a copy of the approved plan(s) and map(s), endorsed by the signature of the Planning and Zoning Commission’s Chairman or Secretary.

5.4.A.4	Criteria for Decisions on Change of Zone and Master Plan. In acting on the application for change of zone and approval of a Master Plan, the Planning and Zoning Commission is performing a legislative function and shall be allowed the discretion granted to zoning commissions acting in a legislative capacity by Connecticut law. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall, in acting upon the Master Plan, consider the Plan of Conservation and Development adopted by the Planning and Zoning Commission as well as make a determination that the Master Plan is in conformance with the Comprehensive Plan of the City of Groton.

1.	General Findings. In general, the application shall allow the Planning and Zoning Commission to make the following findings in support of any decision to approve a MUDD:

a.	The proposed MUDD shall be of such location, size and character that, in general, it will be in harmony with the appropriate and orderly development of the area in which it is proposed to be situated and will not be detrimental to the orderly development of adjacent properties.

b.	The location and size of proposed uses, the intensity of operations involved in connection with such uses, the site layout, and their relationship to access streets shall be such that vehicular and pedestrian  traffic  generated  by  the  use  or  uses,  shall  not  be
 

detrimental to the character of the neighborhood.

c.	The establishment of such MUDD will not unreasonably hinder or discourage the appropriate development and use of adjacent land and buildings or impair the value thereof.

d.	The proposed uses permits the development of the site with the design of structures and land uses which is compatible with the shape, size, topography and natural character of the zone.

2.	Site Plan Approval. Upon the adoption of a MUDD by the Planning and Zoning Commission, the Applicant shall prepare a final site plan for the development of each phase of the MUDD. Each phase of the MUDD shall be capable of being fully developed without dependence upon any subsequent phase of the MUDD.

Any application for site plan approval shall be submitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission, if applicable, on a “Per Phase” basis. Any site plan approval granted by the Planning and Zoning Commission shall require a finding that the architectural style and placement of buildings within the Phase of the MUDD will not adversely impact residentially zoned properties abutting the MUDD. In order to assist the Planning and Zoning Commission in making these findings, the Applicant shall, in conjunction with a site plan application for a Phase of the MUDD, provide architectural information with respect to all buildings in the Phase including, if applicable, screening, building and site illumination, landscaping plans, the location and construction material of any fences, walls, walkways, trash disposal areas and the like.

5.4.A.5	Specific Requirements for All MUDDs.

1.	Access.

a.	Access and circulation ways shall be designed to permit appropriate firefighting equipment, fuel trucks, refuse collection, deliveries and snow removal equipment to operate in a safe and efficient manner.

b.	The MUDD shall be served from, or have access to, at least one through improved  State or municipally owned  and maintained street or highway which provides adequate circulation and access to other sections of the City. The design of the MUDD shall be formulated to facilitate ingress to and egress from the MUDD without significantly adversely impacting traffic flow and traffic safety on interconnecting City or State streets and highways.
 


c.	The street system shall be designated to permit connection to existing and proposed facilities where necessary for proper functioning of the utility systems, or the extension of utilities to adjoining properties.

d.	Buildings, walls, fences, planting and other sight obstructions shall be so located and designed that a driver exiting any garage, carport or parking space has an unobstructed view of approaching traffic.

2.	Parking. Parking for all uses shall be in accordance with the requirements of the parking analysis and plan for the MUDD incorporated into the Master Plan and approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall, where possible, seek to minimize the construction of parking spaces, and encourage the use of shared parking facilities, mass transit and pedestrian connections.

3.	Underground Utilities. All development in a MUDD shall provide for underground installation of all utilities interior to the MUDD. All development shall provide proper design and construction of storm sewer facilities, including grading, gutters, piping and treatment of pervious areas to handle stormwater, prevent erosion and the formation of dust. Utilities and maintenance facilities shall be in accordance with the requirements and regulations of the appropriate authority having jurisdiction.

4.	Pedestrian and Bicycle Circulation. The Planning and Zoning Commission may, where deemed appropriate, require walkways and/or bikeways within the development to facilitate non-vehicular movement to community facilities within the development and on adjoining and neighboring properties.

5.	Driveways.

a.	Private Driveways. All driveways within a MUDD shall be designed by a licensed professional engineer and submitted with the Master Plan for approval by the Planning and Zoning Commission. The design of driveways and the interconnection of driveways with abutting streets and highways shall be based upon the anticipated volume of vehicular traffic on the driveway, the alignment of the driveway with the intersecting street and the available sight stopping distance.

b.	Waste Disposal. Adequate sight screening must be provided for all
 

common and commercial garbage collection areas.

c.	Setback Requirements, Building Proximity. Where the MUDD abuts any residentially zoned property outside of the MUDD, all buildings or structures shall be at least thirty (30') feet from any residentially utilized building on any residentially zoned parcel adjoining the exterior boundaries of the MUDD.

Setbacks between buildings and structures within the MUDD shall be such as to provide reasonable access to light and air, and access space for service, fire protection and maintenance equipment and operations.

d.	Design. The design of any  MUDD shall protect neighborhood property values, prevent future deterioration, promote good community living standards, provide for the preservation and enhancement of the character of the City, provide for feasible management and control of the premises, and serve the purposes of this Section 5.4.A and Section 1.2 of these Regulations, specifically including the protection of the public health, safety, and welfare. Site  and architectural design  shall take  advantage of topographic features, provide for landscaping and restoration of all areas disturbed by construction, and complement any adjoining neighborhood. Consistency of scale and complementary architectural design and landscaping standards shall be maintained throughout the various components of the MUDD.

e.	Phasing. Each phase proposed for a MUDD shall be capable of independent existence and operation and shall be consistent with the approved Master Plan. Amenities, such as recreation areas, community buildings and facilities and other similar improvements shall be divided as equally as possible among phases, or shall be completed in the earlier phase(s) of the development, as the Planning and Zoning Commission may require.

For any phase of a MUDD containing dwelling units, such phase shall also include not less than three (3%) percent of the gross floor area of buildings within that phase of the MUDD as commercial or recreational development, which calculation shall be made on a cumulative basis; i.e. in the event that the commercial or recreational development in any phase of development in a MUDD contains in excess of the minimum required floor area of commercial or recreational development, the excess contained in such phase over the requirement for such phase shall
 

be applied to the satisfaction of the minimum  commercial and recreational use development required in future phases of development of the MUDD. For purposes hereof, recreational development shall be limited to recreational facilities located entirely within a building such as, but not limited to, bowling alleys, video golf facilities, arcades, swimming pools, exercise facilities and gymnasiums. Small-scale commercial uses may be included within mixed-use buildings or complexes within a phase, provided that no Certificate of Zoning Compliance at either the Building Permit or Certificate of Occupancy stages shall be issued for any residential use until construction has commenced on the commercial uses within the applicable phase of the MUDD.

5.4.A.6	Specific Requirements for Residential Development in a MUDD

1.	Multi-family Dwellings. In addition to other applicable standards of this Section, multi-family dwelling complexes within the MUDD shall comply with the following additional requirements:

a.	Each multi-family building shall not contain more than one hundred
(100) dwelling units nor less than four (4) dwelling units.

b.	Each building containing multi-family dwelling units shall not exceed the lesser of (i) sixty (60’) feet in height (ii) such height, based upon the location of and access to the building, as has been approved for fire protection purposes by the fire marshal of the City of Groton or (iii) four (4) floors of residential units above commercial, office or parking use.

c.	Exterior walls longer than fifty (50') feet shall include an offset for each fifty (50') feet of length of at least four (4') feet, or shall include a commonly accepted architectural feature that breaks the building wall plane.

d.	All multi-use buildings within a MUDD containing residential units shall contain only commercial or office space on the ground level floor (with the exception of areas which are reserved for parking below second floor residential units. Sidewalks, five (5’) feet in width, shall be required adjacent to all existing municipal streets and highways which abut the MUDD. In addition, sidewalks, five (5’) feet in width, may be required by the Planning and Zoning Commission in locations interior to the MUDD in order to provide for the efficient and convenient movement of pedestrian traffic within the MUDD and to and from the MUDD from the adjoining state or municipally owned and maintained street or highway.
 

Proposed sidewalk locations shall be determined by the Applicant’s licensed professional engineer and delineated on the circulation plan included with the Master Plan submitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission for approval in conjunction with a zone change application for a MUDD.

e.	The landscaping and architectural design of buildings containing multi-family dwellings shall be in harmony with that of the MUDD of which it is a part, and the maintenance of the approved architectural style shall be enforced by declarations and covenants acceptable to the Planning and Zoning Commission’s legal counsel. Building and site design, lighting, landscaping, walkways, and other site improvements shall create a consistent, complimentary visual atmosphere, and shall incorporate layout, architectural, development and landscaping plans and techniques including, but not limited to: varied, but complimentary roof lines and styles, complimentary building styles, sizes, orientations and exterior finishes, foundation plantings, street trees, bollard lighting for walkways, ornamental gardens, gazebos and courtyard park settings to accomplish the desired effect.

f.	Satellite Receivers. A single satellite receiver may be provided for each building in the MUDD; or, each unit may be served by cable television service. Any receiver serving a building or complex of buildings shall be located in a  manner which will minimize its visibility.

g.	Landscaping. Suitable landscaping, as determined by the Planning and Zoning Commission, and based upon the geographic location and community context in which the MUDD is approved shall be provided.

5.4.A.7	Specific Requirements for Commercial and Mixed Use Development in a MUDD. In addition to other applicable standards of this Section, commercial and mixed-use development within the MUDD shall comply with the following additional requirements:

1.	All buildings within a MUDD shall be setback not less than five (5’) feet from an adjoining streetline. Building placement shall be designed by the Applicant’s consulting professional engineer in order to maintain adequate sightline at all intersections of state or municipally owned and maintained streets abutting the MUDD. Rear yard setbacks shall be thirty (30’) feet. Building height in a MUDD shall not exceed the lesser of (i) sixty (60’) feet in height or (ii) such height, based upon the location of and access to the
 

building, as has been approved for fire protection purposes by the fire marshal of the City of Groton. The Planning and Zoning Commission may increase the setbacks contained in this Regulation in the event that greater setbacks are required in order to achieve the purposes enumerated in Section 1.2 of these Regulations.

2.	The architectural design and landscaping of the commercial use or building, including mixed-use buildings shall be in harmony with that of the MUDD, and the maintenance of the approved architectural style shall be enforced by declarations and covenants acceptable to the Planning and Zoning Commission’s legal counsel. Building and site design, lighting, landscaping, walkways and other site improvements shall create a consistent, complimentary, visual atmosphere, and shall incorporate layout, architectural, development and landscaping plans and techniques including, but not limited to: varied, but complimentary roof lines and styles, complimentary building styles, sizes, orientations and exterior finishes, foundation plantings, street trees and bollard lighting for walkways to accomplish the desired effect.

5.4.A.8	Conformance to Recorded Documents. Land included in a MUDD shall be used and developed only in accordance with the recorded documents. Any site plan approval issued for any phase in the MUDD shall substantially conform to the design, use, and other standards of the approved Master Plan, unless modified as provided hereunder.

5.4.A.9	Amendment or Extension of Approved MUDDs. An application to extend or amend an approved MUDD shall specify the nature of the planned extension(s) or amendment(s) and shall be accompanied by a scale plan of the proposed extension(s) or amendment(s) in the same detail as is required in an initial application for Master Plan approval and shall be accompanied by a fee in accordance with the applicable fee ordinance establishing fees for land use applications in the City of Groton. An applicant for extension or amendment of a MUDD shall  have sufficient interest in  the land  subject to  MUDD regulations, in accordance with section 5.4.A.1.1. See Section 9.5 of these Regulations – Text Amendment Application and Section 9.6 of these Regulations – Zone Change Applications.

An applicant applying for a MUDD and submitting a Master Plan may choose to incorporate language and plan components with sufficient detail to allow the applicant to make minor and foreseeable deviations on a subsequent site plan(s). Such information shall become the basis for minor deviations from the Master Plan at such a time that an applicant applies for site plan approvals, so that a formal change to the Master Plan is not required. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall have the authority in approving a Master Plan to determine the nature and extent of such minor deviations which may be allowed on subsequent site plans. In all cases where additional application language and plan components are incorporated into a Master Plan, such information shall be sufficient
 

in detail to allow for all necessary reviews of the Master Plan by the Commission, its staff, and its consultants.

5.4.A.10	Commencement and Completion of Construction. For any MUDDs approved pursuant to this Section 5.4.A, the construction of any building or structure or the establishment of any use depicted on the Master Plan, or any phase thereof, shall be completed by the Applicant, and a Certificate of Zoning Compliance and Certificate of Occupancy, where required, shall be issued, within five (5) years from the effective date of any site plan approval of each individual Phase of the MUDD, as the case may be, which has been issued in accordance with the approved Master Plan. Upon application, the Planning and Zoning Commission may grant one (1) or more extensions of the aforesaid time limit for a total period of up to five (5) additional years. The foregoing time limits shall be tolled during the pendency of any court appeal of the approval of the MUDD or, for any particular phase or portion of the MUDD, or of any site plan approval issued thereunder.

5.4.A.11	Performance Bonds. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall require performance bonds to insure the completion of any public improvements in connection with any MUDD, for the installation of any infrastructure which, in accordance with the MUDD documents will be available for public use, and for the maintenance of erosion and sediment control measures until each phase of the MUDD is stabilized as delineated on any site plan approved for a use in the MUDD in a form satisfaction to the Town Attorney.

5.4.A.12	Deeds. Any conveyance of real property and/or drainage and utility easements, or other interests in real property to be conveyed to the City of Groton in accordance with the approved Master Plan shall be by Warranty Deed, and shall be accompanied by a current Certificate of Title, prepared by an attorney admitted to the bar of the State of Connecticut or an owners policy of title insurance issued by a title insurance company licensed to transact title insurance business in the State of Connecticut, and certifying or insuring, as the case may be, that title to the real property conveyed or the interest therein conveyed is free and clear of, or superior in right to, any mortgage lien, restriction or other encumbrance materially affecting the use thereof for its intended purpose.

5.4.A.13	Outside Storage Applicable to Uses in a Mixed Use Development District. No outside storage of materials, products or refuse shall be permitted unless specifically authorized by the Planning and Zoning Commission, and such authorized outside storage shall be screened in such manner as the Planning and Zoning Commission may require. All loading areas shall be oriented away from residential areas and public ways and adequately screened from view by appropriate landscaping.
 


6.	USE-RELATED PROVISIONS


6.1.	Overview
 
Overview
 


Each of the uses listed in Section 6 of these Regulations is subject to:
1.	The requirements listed below for that use, and
2.	The regulations for the particular zoning district, unless otherwise specifically provided for in this Section.
3.	The requirements of Section 7 of these Regulations including but not limited to:
a.	Parking;
b.	Signage;
c.	Earth removal and filling;
d.	Access drives and corner visibility; and
e.	Performance standards.



6.2.	Multi-Family Standards

Multi-family dwellings, as defined in these Regulations, are subject to the following conditions:

1.	Density - No multi-family development shall exceed a density of one unit per 4,000 square feet of site area, not including wetlands, watercourses, slopes in excess of 15 percent, and 100-year floodplain.

2.	Size of Buildings - No building shall exceed 160 feet in horizontal dimension or section.

3.	Floor Area Of Units - The minimum required floor area for each dwelling unit shall be based on the number of habitable rooms as follows:

 
Habitable
 
Floor Area
 
 	Rooms	(square feet) 	





    5 or more	850 	

4.	Basement Apartment - No dwelling units shall be permitted in basements or cellars.
 
Multi-Family Standards

5.	Distance Between Buildings - All minimum distances required below shall be measured in a straight line between the points of the building(s), which are nearest each other.
a.	Facing Walls – The minimum distance between any two front or rear facing walls (long dimension) of any principal building(s) shall not be less than the sum of the heights of the affected buildings or 50 feet, whichever is greater.
b.	Facing and End Walls – The minimum distance between any end wall (short dimension) of any principal building(s) and any front or rear facing wall (long dimension) of any principal building(s) shall not be less than 75% of the sum of the heights of the affected buildings or 35 feet, whichever is greater.
c.	End Walls – The minimum distance between any two end walls (short dimension) of any principal buildings shall be not less than 50% of the sum of the heights of the affected buildings or 20 feet, whichever is greater.
d.	Minimum Distances – In all instances, the minimum distance between any walls or corners of any principal or accessory building(s) shall not be less than 20 feet.


Illustration Of Separation Distance Between Buildings With Facing Walls Minimum Separation = Height 1 + Height 2
50’ minimum


















Illustration Of Separation Distance Between Buildings With Facing Walls And End Walls Minimum Separation = (Height 1 + Height 2) x 75%
35’ minimum
 
Multi-Family Standards



Illustration Of Separation Distance Between Buildings With End Walls Minimum Separation = (Height 1 + Height 2) x 50%
20’ minimum

















6.	Screens - Outdoor clothes drying areas and rubbish areas shall be surrounded with complete visual screening.

7.	Rubbish - Separate rubbish containers shall be provided for recycling items and so denoted on the plans.

8.	Usable Open Space -

a.	Usable open space area(s) shall be located on the lot in such a way as to provide easy access from all dwelling units on the lot.

b.	A minimum of 400 square feet of usable open space shall be provided per dwelling unit.

c.	Indoor or accessory roof space may be substituted for not more than 25% of the required usable open space, provided such space is developed as a recreational area and is accessible and available to all occupants of the dwellings.

d.	The minimum dimension of a usable open space area shall not be less than 25 feet.

e.	At least 25% of the required usable open space shall be developed for and equipped with recreation facilities such as playgrounds, ball fields, tennis courts, or bocce courts, depending on the age group served by the housing.

f.	All required recreation facilities shall be complete or bonded for by the time Certificates of Occupancy have been issued for 50% of the units.

g.	If the required recreation facilities are not complete or bonded for at that time, no further Certificates of Occupancy shall be issued until the required recreation facilities are complete.
 
Rear Lots

9.	Garages - For every ten required parking spaces that shall be provided in a separate garage or under a residential building, one additional dwelling unit above the maximum number of units permitted by Section 3.4.E shall be permitted on the lot provided that:

a.	The garage is enclosed on all sides by walls; and

b.	The additional dwelling units have a floor area no greater than the average dwelling unit proposed on the lot; and

c.	The required parking for any additional dwelling units so created shall also be in enclosed garages or under residential buildings.

10.	Private Streets - Private streets shall be constructed to the following standards:

a.	Pavement width shall be a minimum of 24 feet where street parking is not allowed. An additional 8 feet shall be added on each side of the street where parking is allowed.

b.	Pavement shall be a minimum of 2-inch bituminous concrete on a 4-inch process gravel base on an 8-inch bank run gravel sub base.

c.	A 4-inch bituminous lip curb shall be provided along both sides of the street and around parking and turning areas.

d.	A 4-foot wide concrete sidewalk shall parallel the street or parking lot and shall provide access to the building. Said sidewalks shall be separated from the pavement by at least a 3 ½-foot wide grass strip.

e.	Stop signs shall be installed at all intersections of City or State highways.

6.3.	Rear Lots

Rear lots, as defined in these Regulations, are subject to the following conditions:

1.	A rear lot shall contain at least twice the minimum lot area as required for the zoning district where it is located.

2.	Rear Lots shall have a landscaped buffer along each property line excluding the driveway access to the property.

3.	The landscaped buffer is intended to provide visual screening between the rear lot and adjacent properties and shall include a mix of plantings with a minimum of 10’ width strip of evergreen plantings.

4.	Building coverage for rear lots shall be a maximum of 12.5 percent of the rear lot area, not including the accessway.

5.	No side yard setback associated with a rear lot shall be less than ten (10) feet.
 
Home-Based Businesses

6.4.	Home-Based Businesses

Home-based businesses, as defined in these Regulations, are subject to the following conditions:

1.	The home office or home occupation shall not occupy more than 25% of the gross floor area or 50% of one floor of the dwelling unit, whichever is less.

2.	The home office or home occupation shall not change the exterior residential character of the dwelling in any visible manner and shall not have any outside storage or parking of commercial vehicles unless specifically approved by the Commission.

3.	The home office or home occupation shall be clearly incidental to the residential use.

4.	The home office or home occupation shall not offer, display or advertise any commodity or service for sale on the premises other than a sign permitted in accordance with Section 7.2, nor shall any materials or products be stored outside of a building.

5.	The home office or home occupation shall not create any noise, traffic, odor, vibrations, smoke, gas, fumes, radiation, electromagnetic interference or unsightly conditions noticeable off the lot.

6.	A home office or minor home occupation shall be restricted to those occupations that serve clients, patients, customers or patrons by appointment only and that not more than two clients, patients, customers or patrons would be on the premises at any given time.

7.	The number of on-site parking spaces shall not be increased for clients, patients, customers or patrons unless specifically approved by the Commission.
 
Day Care

6.5.	Day Care

Day care operations, as defined in these Regulations, are subject to the requirements listed below and other applicable regulations.

1.	For any child day care operation, a graded and suitably fenced play area, including a minimum of 75 square feet of play space for each child who would be using the play area at any one time, shall be provided.

a.	The minimum required play area shall be free of hazards and regulated wetland soils, provide a suitable play surface, and shall be a minimum of 1% but not in excess of 3% in grade.

b.	Where the existing topography and conditions present unique circumstances which will not compromise child safety, the Planning and Zoning Commission may, by Special Permit, increase the maximum play area grade requirement to 5%.

c.	Active play areas, defined as areas containing playground equipment, including, but not limited to, swings and other apparatus, shall not exceed 1% in grade.

d.	Outdoor play activities shall only take place within the hours of 8:30 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.

2.	For any adult day care operation, a suitably graded and fenced outdoor area of at least 75 square feet for each person who would be using the area at any one time shall be provided.

3.	Group day care homes and child day care centers shall provide a buffer strip within the boundaries of the lot with appropriate fencing and landscaping of suitable type, density and height to effectively screen the daycare activities from the neighboring properties.

a.	The width of the buffer strip shall be at least as follows: Residential Districts:	10 feet
Commercial Districts:	15 feet
Industrial Districts:	25 feet

b.	The buffer area shall be designed to mitigate impacts from adjacent uses as well, particularly in cases where centers are located in commercial and industrial districts.

c.	This buffer requirement shall typically be applied to the portion of the site dedicated to day care use including such items as play area(s).

d.	The play area or areas shall not be located within the designated buffer area.

e.	The Commission may, by Special Permit, reduce the width requirement of the buffer area where:
•	existing topography, landscaping, and/or other features provide an adequate buffer and screening, or
•	lot size and shape or existing structures make it infeasible to comply with the minimum widths required above, provided screening (planting, fences, berms, etc.) or other methods are utilized to ensure the buffer area meets the intent of the Regulations.
 
Bed and Breakfast Establishments

4.	Child day care centers in the R-5.1 zone shall be developed only on sites which contain a minimum of five acres (5.0) and include a public or private elementary school.

5.	Unless otherwise specifically approved by the Commission, day care operations shall only operate from 6:00 AM to 8:00 PM.

6.	The applicant shall accommodate all pedestrian and vehicular traffic to and on the site, and shall provide an acceptable area for dropping off children or patrons on site. To the extent possible, parking stalls for public use shall be located so as to preclude pedestrian crossing of interior drives.

7.	All State and/or local licensing and permit requirements/standards shall be met including special or coastal flood hazard area development standards to demonstrate to the Commission’s satisfaction that hazards to life and property are minimized.

6.6.	Bed and Breakfast Establishments

Bed and breakfast establishments, as defined in these Regulations, are subject to the following conditions which are intended to balance the desire to provide for short-term overnight accommodations in a residential setting for travelers and visitors to this area while helping to ensure that bed and breakfast establishments are as unobtrusive as possible, i.e., that they are commenced and maintained with little or no impact upon the existing character and appearance of the neighborhoods in which they are located.

1.	Bed and breakfast establishment shall generally be accommodated within an existing building.
a.	Exterior alterations may be made to existing buildings or structures in order to preserve a valuable historic property, promote adaptive reuse of buildings, or comply with local or State health and safety code requirements.
b.	No building addition or freestanding building shall be constructed in order to
accommodate or otherwise make room for the bed and breakfast establishment, except for additions or structures required under local or State health and safety codes.
c.	An existing outbuilding may accommodate rooms, but shall not be added onto or enlarged, provided it conforms to the minimum yard setback requirements of the respective zone in which it is located.
d.	However, in all cases, such alterations must be considered minimal exterior modifications of the building or structure which are compatible with the character of the area, ensure the residential character of the buildings, and preserve the existing features of the building.

2.	The gross floor area of that portion of the residence containing the bed and breakfast establishment shall not equal more than 50% of the total gross floor area of the entire building, said bed and breakfast area being defined as guestrooms, dining areas, and bathroom areas used by guests.  This provision shall not apply to outbuildings used as part of the bed and breakfast establishment; however, under no circumstances shall an outbuilding contain more guestrooms than the owner occupied principal residence.

3.	No guest shall be accommodated for more than seven nights in any two-week period.
 
Bed and Breakfast Establishments

4.	Minimum parking space requirements shall be as stated in Section 7.1 of these Regulations.  In addition, all spaces shall be on-site, and no guest parking spaces shall be located in any required front yard setback area of the subject property.

5.	All parking and loading areas and other outdoor recreational and/or service activities associated with the Bed and Breakfast Establishment that are located within a residential zone or abut or are located across the street from property within a Residential Zone shall be effectively screened and bordered on all sides by a 10-foot-wide buffer strip; however, the Planning and Zoning Commission may, by Special Permit, reduce the buffer dimension requirement where:
a.	Existing topography, landscaping, and/or other features provide an adequate buffer and screening, or
b.	where lot size and shape or existing structures make it infeasible to comply with the buffer width required above, provided screening (planting, fences, berms, etc.) or other methods are utilized to ensure the buffer area meets the intent of these Regulations.

6.	All applicable fire, building, health and safety codes and requirement shall be met prior to commencement of operations, and in the cases where proposed sites are located in A and V zones of designated coastal flood areas, the applicant shall demonstrate to the Commission’s satisfaction at the time of application that hazards to life and property are being minimized.

7.	No more than two non-resident staff shall be employed on any single shift.

8.	Access to each guestroom shall be via a main entrance, lobby or foyer within the building.  No guestroom shall have a separate exterior access except as may be required by fire or building codes.

9.	The owner of the Bed and Breakfast Establishment shall maintain a Guest Book to record lengths of stay.

10.	The owner of the Bed and Breakfast Establishment shall make the Guest Book available to the City within ten days of receipt of written request for same from the City Planner or the Zoning and Building Official.
 
Gasoline Stations, Vehicle Dealerships, Vehicle Repair and Service

6.7.	Gasoline Stations, Vehicle Dealerships, Vehicle Repair and Service

Gasoline stations, vehicle dealerships, vehicle repair and/or service garages, and similar automotive uses, as defined in these Regulations or by State Statute, are subject to the following conditions:

1.	In addition to any approvals required from the Commission, location approval shall be obtained from by the Zoning Board of Appeals as required by CGS Section 14-54.

2.	There shall be a minimum lot area of 15,000 square feet and a minimum lot width of 120 feet  for gasoline stations, vehicle repair and/or service garages.  There shall be a minimum lot area of 30,000 square feet and a minimum width of 150 feet for new and used vehicle dealerships.

3.	The storage of petroleum products in underground tanks shall not exceed 40,000 gallons and the storage of fuel oils in above-ground tanks shall not exceed 275 gallons.

4.	Provisions shall be made for entering and leaving the lot in such a manner that traffic hazards are minimized. Driveway aprons shall be a minimum distance of 25 feet from any street intersection and 10 feet from any adjacent lot line.

5.	Fuel pumps and above-ground fuel storage tanks shall be located 25 feet from any street line or adjacent lot line.

6.	Servicing, other than retail sale of gasoline and oil and minor services customarily incidental thereto, shall be conducted within a building. No repair work, except of an emergency nature, will be performed out-of-doors. No servicing or storage of any vehicle shall take place on any adjacent public street or sidewalk. Outside storage and display of vehicles shall be restricted to areas no closer than 10 feet from any street line or adjacent lot line.

7.	Adequate area for parking, storage and servicing shall be provided on private property.

8.	Outdoor lighting shall be in accordance with Section 7.6 and the following:
a.	Appropriate and necessary lights shall be installed and maintained.

b.	All free-standing lights shall be indirectly illuminated and shall not exceed 18 feet in height.

c.	No free-standing light shall be permitted in any required rear or side yard setback adjacent to a residential district.

9.	Appropriate landscape and screening of suitable type, density and height shall be installed and suitably maintained.

10.	No application for Approval of Location for any gasoline station, vehicle dealership or vehicle repair and/or service garage, shall be accepted by the Zoning Board of Appeals unless and until the Planning and Zoning Commission has previously approved the Site Plan and authorized the issuance of a Special Permit.
 
Halfway Houses

6.8.	Halfway Houses

Halfway houses, as defined in these Regulations, are subject to the following conditions:

1.	A halfway house shall not be permitted on any lot or parcel which is within 800 feet of any lot or parcel containing a duly licensed or authorized public or private school, park, playground or day care facility.

2.	A halfway house shall not be permitted on any lot or parcel which is within 1,500 feet of any lot or parcel containing an existing and duly licensed or authorized halfway house.

3.	A halfway house shall not expand, enlarge, add on to, intensify or otherwise increase the scope and services of the program authorized by the Commission (such as by adding or taking in more residents or clients) without first receiving approval from the Commission.  At the time of application for any approval, the applicant shall:

a.	Submit a written description of the proposed scope and services of its program, including, but not limited to, security precautions, meals, transportation arrangements and recreation.

b.	State the maximum number of residents to be served by the facility and the number of staff.

4.	The applicant shall present, at the time of application for approval, written authorization from the State of Connecticut to conduct the proposed program, as stated under the definition of “halfway house” in these Regulations, at the proposed site.

5.	A staff member shall be on-site at the facility at all times.

6.	No halfway house shall be operated without first obtaining all licenses and permits as required by State and federal law.

7.	Within the General Commercial zone only, a halfway house may provide counseling services to non-residents as well as residents, providing that the Commission has approved such use and providing the facility includes a separate waiting room and separate meeting room for such non- resident services.
 
Community Residential Counseling Facilities (CRCFs)

6.9.	Community Residential Counseling Facilities (CRCFs)

Community Residential Counseling Facilities (CRCFs), as defined in these Regulations, are subject to the following conditions:

1.	A CRCF shall not be permitted on any lot or parcel which is within 800 feet of any lot or parcel containing a duly licensed or authorized public or private school, park, playground or day care facility.

2.	A CRCF shall not be permitted on any lot or parcel which is within 1,000 feet of any lot or parcel containing an existing and duly licensed or authorized CRCF.

3.	A CRCF shall not expand, enlarge, add on to, intensify or otherwise increase the scope and services of the program authorized by the Commission (such as by adding or taking in more residents or clients) without first receiving approval from the Commission.  At the time of application for any approval, the applicant shall:

a.	Submit a written description of the proposed scope and services of its program, including, but not limited to, security precautions, meals, transportation arrangements and recreation.

b.	Shall state the maximum number of residents to be served by the facility and the number of staff.



4.	A staff member shall be on-site at the facility at all times.

5.	No CRCF shall be operated without first obtaining all licenses and permits as required by State and federal law.

6.	Within the General Commercial zone only, a CRCF may provide counseling services to non- residents, as well as residents provided that the Commission has approved such use and providing the facility includes a separate waiting room and separate meeting room for such non- resident services.
 
Vocational Training Facility

6.10.	Vocational Training Facility

Vocational Training Facilities (VTF) as defined in these Regulations, are subject to the following conditions:

1.	Vocational Training Facilities shall be developed only on sites that contain a minimum of five (5) acres.

2.	A VTF shall not be permitted on any lot or parcel that is within 1,000 feet of another VTF.

3.	Unless otherwise specifically approved by the Commission, a VTF shall only operate between the hours of 6:00 AM to 8:00 PM.

4.	The applicant shall accommodate all pedestrian and vehicular traffic to and on the site, and shall provide an acceptable area for dropping off participants on site.

a.	To the extent possible, parking stalls dedicated to the public shall be located so as to preclude pedestrian crossing of interior drives.

b.	No overnight storage of more than four multi-passenger vehicles used to transport participants shall be allowed on site.

c.	Any overnight vehicle storage shall be located in the rear yard of the property and shall be screened appropriately from public view as determined by the Planning and Zoning Commission.

d.	Any areas designated for overnight vehicle storage shall not count toward the minimum parking spaces required pursuant to Section 7.1.

5.	All State and/or local licensing and permit requirements/standards shall be met  including special or coastal flood hazard area development standards to demonstrate to the Commission's satisfaction that hazards to life and property are minimized.

6.	A VTF shall not expand, enlarge, add on to, intensify or otherwise increase the square feet of use or the scope and services of the program(s) authorized by the Commission (such as by taking on additional participants) without first receiving approval from the Commission.  At the time of application for any approval, the applicant shall:
a.	Submit a written description of the proposed scope and services of all programs, including, but not limited to, services, training, educational, meals, transportation arrangements, any outside participants, agencies served either full or part -time whether permanent or temporary.

b.	shall state the maximum number of participants to be served at the facility, the number of staff and the total square feet of the facility including all areas to be utilized by the VTF.
 
Vocational Training Facility

7.	A VTF may provide for recreational activities on site.

a.	Said recreational area shall be a minimum of one-half (0.5) acre, free of hazards and regulated wetland soils and contain a suitable surface for the proposed activities at no more than 3% slope.

b.	The recreational area shall have suitable lighting and fencing and screening to ensure  the safety of the users and to mitigate any impacts both to and from adjacent properties as determined by the Commission.

c.	In the R-5.1, R-5.2 and RM zones outdoor recreational activities shall only take place between the hours of 8:30 AM and 6:00 PM.



8.	A VTF shall provide a buffer strip within the boundaries of a lot as follows:

a.	appropriate fencing and landscaping of suitable type, density and height shall be located and maintained in a buffer strip of the following width to effectively screen the facility activities from the neighboring properties:
•	Residential Districts:	25 feet
•	Commercial Districts:	25 feet
•	Industrial Districts:	25 feet

b.	The buffer area shall be applied to the portion of the site dedicated to vocational facility uses including associated parking, accessory buildings and recreational areas.

c.	The recreational area shall not be located within the buffer area.

d.	The buffer area shall include scattered plantings of mixed height of both evergreen and deciduous trees and bushes.

e.	The Planning and Zoning Commission may, by Special Permit, reduce the width requirement of the buffer area where
•	existing topography, landscaping, and/or other features provide an adequate buffer and screening, or
•	lot size and shape or existing structures make it infeasible to comply with the minimum widths required above, provided screening (planting, fences, berms, etc.) or other methods are utilized to ensure the buffer area meets the intent of these Regulations.
 
Specialized Classrooms

6.11.	Specialized Classrooms

Specialized Classrooms, as defined in these Regulations are subject to the following conditions:

1.	Specialized Classrooms shall be entirely located within a building and shall not include any activities, other than parking, outside the building.

a.	The parking areas and entrances to the building shall be of a suitable surface and have adequate lighting to ensure the safety of users.

b.	The parking lot and exterior of the building shall be suitably fenced and screened to mitigate any impacts both to and from adjacent properties, as determined by the Commission, particularly when the Specialized Classrooms are located in a building adjacent to a residential use or zone.

c.	Lighting, to the extent feasible, shall be downward directed and confined to the site.

2.	Specialized Classrooms shall not expand, enlarge, add on to, intensify, or otherwise increase the square feet of use or scope in services of programs authorized by the Commission (such as by taking on additional participants or subjects) without first receiving approval from the Commission, as appropriate.  At the time of application for any approval, the applicant shall submit a written description of the proposed scope of services and all programs, including, but not limited to, the subject matter to be taught, the maximum number of students, the maximum number of instructors and supporting staff, the number and size of classrooms to be occupied, as well as the hours of operation, the internal floor layout, and the total square footage of the areas utilized.

3.	The applicant shall accommodate all pedestrian and vehicular traffic to and on the site to the extent possible.

a.	Specialized Classrooms will not provide overnight parking for any vehicles.

b.	If the applicant will provide transportation to the site for students, instructors, or staff, it will submit a description of the mode and frequency of transportation. Further, it shall show on the site plan designated drop-off and pick-up sites that are safe and accessible for all vehicles and riders.

4.	Specialized Classrooms shall provide a buffer strip within the boundaries of a lot, which is in or adjacent to a residential district or use, and shall maintain appropriate fencing and landscaping of suitable type, density, and height to effectively screen the facility activities from neighboring residential zones or properties.

a.	Said residential buffer strip shall be 25 feet in width.

b.	The buffer shall include scattered plantings of mixed height of both evergreen and deciduous trees and bushes.
 
Boat Club, Beach Club and Marina

c.	The Commission may, by Special Permit, reduce the width requirements of the buffer area where
•	existing topography, landscaping, and/or other features provide an adequate buffer and screening, or
•	lot size and shape or existing structures make it infeasible to comply with the minimum widths required above, provided screening (planting, fences, berms, etc.) or other methods are utilized to ensure the buffer area meets the intent of these Regulations.


6.12.	Boat Club, Beach Club and Marina

Boat clubs, beach clubs and/or marinas, as defined in these Regulations, are subject to the following conditions:

1.	Properties used for boat clubs, beach clubs and/or marinas shall have at least 150 feet of water frontage.

2.	Boat clubs, beach clubs and/or marinas shall comply with all applicable provisions of the State and City Building, Housing, Health, Sanitation, and Environmental Protection Codes and Ordinances, as approved by the proper official.

3.	Adequate toilet facilities shall be provided on the lot and shall be located so as to be easily accessible to patrons and guests.

4.	The following uses and structures are hereby recognized as being accessory to boat clubs, beach clubs and/or marinas:

a.	A boat way, ramp or dock.

b.	Fuel filling facilities for boats.

c.	Storage garage for boats.

d.	Repair and/or service garage for boats.

e.	A boat storage yard.

f.	Buildings to house storage lockers and related shower facilities.

g.	A building for retail sales of boats, equipment, material and supplies.

h.	A refreshment stand or snack bar attached to or inside the principal building with a seating capacity not to exceed twenty seats.

i.	Other accessory buildings and uses clearly subordinate and customarily incidental to and located on the same lot with the principal use.

5.	Outdoor storage of boats shall not be permitted within required front and side yard setbacks.
 

6.13.	Telecommunication Facilities

6.12.A	Purposes

This Section of the regulations is intended to:
•	Regulate the location and number of telecommunication towers and antenna;
•	Minimize the adverse visual effect of telecommunication towers and antenna through careful design, siting, and vegetative screening;
•	Encourage the shared or joint use of telecommunication towers and antenna
•	Be consistent with the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996, as amended;
•	Not discriminate among providers of functionally equivalent services;
•	Not prohibit or act to prohibit the provisions of personal wireless services; and
•	Not regulate the placement and construction of personal wireless service facilities on the basis of environmental effects of radio frequency emissions to the extent that such facilities comply with the FCC regulations regarding such emissions.



6.12.B	Permitted Facilities

 

No Permit Required From City
 
Zoning / Building Permit Required
 

Site Plan Approval Required
 

Special Permit Required
 


1.	State-Regulated Tower or Antenna – Any new tower or antenna regulated by the Connecticut Siting Council.				
2.	Residential Household/ Amateur Antenna – An antenna used solely for residential television and private radio reception provided any such antenna meets required setbacks and a height no greater than 40 feet above grade or 15 feet above the roof for all uses in all zoning districts.	

			
3.	Residential Satellite Dish Antenna – A satellite dish antenna in a residential district provided the dish antenna:
a.	Measures 1 meter (3.28 feet) or less in diameter;
b.	Shall not exceed the height of the roof ridgeline; and
c.	Shall not be located in a required front yard.	

			
4.	Amateur Radio Antenna – An amateur radio antenna operated by an amateur radio operator licensed by the FCC provided that it is located in the rear yard, meets required setbacks, and is less than 40 feet in total height.	
			

5.	Other Residential Antenna – An antenna listed in 2, 3, or 4 above that does not comply with the identified standards.				

(continued on next page)
 

(continued from previous page)

 

No Permit Required From City
 
Zoning / Building Permit Required
 

Site Plan Approval Required
 

Special Permit Required
 

6.	Commercial Satellite Dish Antenna – A ground-mounted or roof-mounted satellite dish antenna in a non-residential district provided the dish antenna measures 2 meters (6.56 feet) or less in diameter; and the dish antenna is either screened from public view or integrated into the site design or approved by the Commission by Special Permit.		


		

7.	Commercial Satellite Dish Antenna – An antenna listed in 6 above that does not comply with the identified standards.				
8.	Other Antennas on Existing Structures – Any other antenna which is not attached to a tower, provided the antenna complies with all applicable FCC and FAA Regulations.			
	
9.	New Public Safety Tower or Antenna – A new antenna tower intended and used primarily for the purpose of police, fire ambulance, and/or other emergency services or similar emergency communications.			
	
10.  New Tower or Antenna on City-Owned Property – A new antenna located on a lot owned, leased or otherwise controlled by the City of Groton.			
	

11.  Other Tower or Antenna – Any tower or antenna not listed above.				
 

6.12.C	asic Standards

1.	Lot Area - The lot on which a new telecommunication tower is constructed shall meet the minimum lot area requirements for the underlying zone.

2.	Setbacks –

a.	All new tower structures and other facilities shall meet the setback requirements of the respective zone or be set back from all property lines a distance equal to the height of the structure, whichever is greater.

b.	Guy anchors shall meet the setback requirements of the respective zone.

3.	Height –

a.	The tower and/or antenna shall only be erected to the minimum height necessary to satisfy the technical requirements of the telecommunication facility.

b.	Documentation of the minimum height needed, prepared by a professional telecommunications systems engineer, shall accompany the application for special permit.

c.	Such documentation may include propagation modeling and/or test results.

4.	Color - Towers and other telecommunication facilities shall be a subdued, non-reflective color which shall blend in with its surroundings.

5.	Landscaping –

a.	Landscape buffers, as appropriate, shall be required around the perimeter of all structures, including guy anchors.

b.	Such landscape buffers shall include evergreen trees of sufficient height and planted at a sufficient distance to provide visual screening as determined during the site plan approval process.


6.	Illumination - Signal lights or illumination shall not be permitted unless required by the Federal Communications Commission or the Federal Aviation Administration and the need for such lighting shall be disclosed as part of the application.

7.	Signage - No advertising or signage, other than warning signs, is permitted on any tower or other telecommunication facility.

8.	Multiple Towers - Placement of more than one tower on a lot may be permitted if all setbacks, design, and landscape requirements are met for each tower.
 

9.	Removal –

a.	All unused telecommunication towers shall be removed within 12 months of cessation of use.

b.	In the event that an unused tower is not removed within 12 months of cessation of use, the tower and associated facilities may be removed by the City and the cost of removal assessed against the property.

c.	As a condition of approval, the Commission may require a bond to insure removal of abandoned towers where the cost of the removal of the tower may equal or exceed the value of the lot on which it is located.


10.	Interference - No existing or proposed telecommunications service shall interfere with public safety communications or with any existing television or radio signal and all applications for facilities under this regulation shall be accompanied by a study which provides a technical evaluation of existing and proposed transmissions and indicates all potential interference problems.

6.12.D	Locational Standards for Towers

1.	New telecommunication towers shall not be located within:

a.	Existing local historic districts;

b.	Existing districts on the State Register of Historic Places;

c.	Existing districts on the National Register of Historic Places; and

d.	Along designated scenic roads established under provisions of CGS Sec. 7-149a.

2.	To discourage the proliferation of telecommunication towers:

a.	Shared use of tower structures is both permitted and encouraged.

b.	Applications involving the co-location of antennae on existing telecommunication towers or on other existing structures are encouraged.

c.	Applications for new towers shall be accompanied by documentation that no existing or planned tower or other structure can accommodate the applicant’s antenna or transmitter.


3.	It is a condition of any approval issued under this Section that the applicant shall exercise good faith in allowing other providers to share space or co-locate on the tower, provided that such shared use does not impair the technical level or quality of service and, in the event that a dispute arises as to whether the applicant has exercised good faith in accommodating other users, the City may require a third party technical study at the expense of either or both the permit holder and the applicant.
 



6.14.	Historic/Institutional Adaptive Reuse

6.13.A	Purpose

The purpose of this regulation is to allow for the reuse or redevelopment of municipal, state or institution owned buildings to meet the changing needs of technology, the local economy, and shifting demographics. As technology, demographics and the local economy change public and institutional buildings become functionally obsolete, yet the structure continues to be important to the fabric of a neighborhood. This regulation will allow a significant building to remain by allowing uses that may not be allowed by the existing zoning.

This regulation is intended to:

a.	Allow the reuse or redevelopment of buildings owned or most recently owned by the City or Town of Groton, the State of Connecticut or an Institution to a use that may not be allowed by the existing zoning; and

b.	Allow flexible and innovative uses in order to promote development and preserve historically significant buildings that may be functionally obsolete; and

c.	Ensure that the new use is compatible with the surrounding neighborhood.

6.13.B	Pre-requisite

In order to utilize this provision, the applicant must demonstrate that:

a.	The subject building is or has most recently been owned by the City or Town of Groton, the State of Connecticut or an Institution as defined in Section 2.2; and

b.	The building proposed for reuse is structurally capable of being redeveloped for the proposed use; and

c.	The building proposed for reuse contributes to the fabric of the neighborhood and community.

6.13 C   Principal Uses Permitted by Special Permit and Site Plan Approval

Any residential, office, commercial, cultural, educational, community service or combination of such  uses which is consistent with the purpose of this regulation and which is not detrimental to the character of the neighborhood in which the use is located as determined by the Planning and Zoning Commission. The burden of proof for determining compatibility of uses in a neighborhood shall be upon the applicant.

In addition to the uses allowed by the subject property’s zoning district the following uses are generally considered compatible with the surrounding neighborhood, subject to any conditions the Planning and Zoning Commission may impose:
 

Residential Zoning Districts:

a.	Multiple Family Dwelling provided the open space requirements of Section 6.1.8 a, c, d, f and g are met or an equivalent public open space area is located within 1,000 feet of the property.

b.	Retail Business of less than 8,000 square feet

c.	Restaurant or Eating Facility of less than 6,000 square feet provided outdoor seating is not allowed

d.	Business Services and Professional Offices provided drive through facilities and ATMs are not allowed.

e.	Artist Studios and Galleries

f.	Personal Service Establishments

g.	Specialized Classrooms

h.	Community Residential Counseling Facilities and Rooming or Boarding Houses are not considered compatible with the surrounding neighborhood in residential zoning districts.

Business and Industrial Zoning Districts:

a.	Multiple Family Dwelling provided the open space requirements of Section 6.1.8 a, c, d, f and g are met or an equivalent public open space area is located within 1,000 feet of the property.

b.	Specialized Classrooms

No minimum lot size is required in order to utilize this historic/adaptive reuse section of the Regulations.

6.13.D	Design Standards

1.	The Dimensional Standards for the existing zone shall be used for the proposed use. If the dimensional standards are not clear for the existing zone comparable standards for such proposed use may be used. The Commission may increase the residential density up to twenty percent above what is allowed by the existing zoning if it finds that the increased density is compatible with the neighborhood, the building size is appropriate for such density, and that there are adequate public utilities to accommodate the additional density.

2.	Nothing in these regulations shall be deemed to prevent additions and new structures on the site as allowed by the Planning and Zoning Commission.

3.	Nothing in  these regulations shall  be deemed  to require conformance with yard  or  height regulations where no enlargement, extension, or alteration of the existing building is planned that increases the degree of non-conformity; however, new building or site construction shall conform to the Dimensional Standards of the existing zone.
 

4.	The existing historic or institutional building(s) must be preserved as part of the reuse. Minor alterations or demolitions may be allowed if the Commission finds that the alteration or demolition does not significantly impact the existing building’s contribution to the neighborhood or that the building(s) is structurally unsound. No more than 30 percent of the building(s) can be demolished unless the Commission finds that the building(s) to be demolished does not contribute to the historic context of the remaining building or site.

5.	The Commission may allow a more flexible use than allowed by the existing zoning if it determines that the existing character of the building will not be substantially changed, that the building is appropriate for the proposed re-use and that the proposed re-use is similar in intensity to the previous use.

6.	All applicable State and/or local licensing and permit requirements/standards shall be met.

7.	Off Street parking and/or loading requirements shall be determined in accordance with the provisions of Sections 7.1, as needed. The parking space requirements for a use not specifically listed shall be determined by the Commission based on demand generation for a listed use of similar characteristics.

8.	Any increase in density as part of the reuse shall adequately address off-site impacts, possibly through improvements that may be required such as roadway and drainage improvements to the access or frontage roadway.

9.	A buffer strip shall be provided within the boundaries of the lot if the proposed use is more intense than those allowed by the existing zone.

a.	The width of the buffer strip shall be at least as follows: Residential Districts:	25 feet
Commercial Districts:	15 feet
Industrial Districts:	10 feet

b.	The buffer shall shield the neighboring properties from noise, headlight glare, and visual intrusion and shall provide complete visual screening.

c.	The Commission may, by Special Permit, reduce or eliminate the width requirement of the buffer strip where:

i.	Existing topography, landscaping, and/or other features provide an adequate buffer and screening; or

ii.	Lot size and shape or existing structures make it infeasible to comply with the minimum widths required above, provided screening (planting, fences, berms, etc.) or other methods are utilized to ensure the buffer area meets the intent of the Regulations; or

iii.	The architectural features of the site are deemed visually important  to the neighborhood and the Commission determines that all or some of the property should be left open to be seen.
 

6.13.E	Decision Considerations

In evaluating the appropriateness of the proposed new use, the Planning and Zoning Commission, shall consider the following:

1.	The historic use of the site

2.	The preservation of all or a portion of the historic building(s)

3	The structural integrity of the building(s)

4.	The character and density of the surrounding area

5.	The topography of the site

6.	The bulk of the buildings existing on the site and the impact of the proposed alterations on the surrounding neighborhood

7.	Noise and lighting impacts of the proposed use on the surrounding properties

8.	The impact of traffic from the proposed use on the surrounding neighborhood and the ability of the access roads to adequately handle the proposed traffic from the proposed use

9.	The extent of the benefit to the welfare of the community to be derived by preserving the existing aesthetic appearance of the site.

10.	The adequacy of the water supply, sewage disposal, stormwater management and other utility systems

11.	The surrounding zoning as it relates to the proposed uses(s)

12.	The allowed and prohibited uses as recommended by the Plan of Conservation and Development

13.	The consideration of the bulk of the building(s) as it relates to the surrounding buildings
 

7.	STANDARDS


7.1.	Parking and Loading Regulations


7.1.A	General


l.	Except as may be otherwise provided in this Section 7.1,off-street parking and loading shall be provided in accordance with this Section for any building or use created, enlarged,or increased after the effect ive date of these Regulations.

2.	Parking and loading space shall be maintained and shall not be encroached upon so long as said principal building or use remains,unless an equivalent number of such spaces are provided elsewhere in conformance with these Regulations .

3.	The requirement for off-street parking space and off-street loading space shall be a continuing obligation of the owner of the real estate on which any such structure or use is located as long as the structure or use is in existence and its use requiring vehicle parking facilities continues unless a change in use also changes the parking requirements .

4.	.	It shall be unlawful for :

a.	.	An owner of any structure or use affected by this Section to discontinue, change, or dispense with, or to cause the discontinuance of any vehicle parking or loading space .

b.	Any firm or corporation to occupy a structure without providing parking a nd loading spaces,which meet with the requirements of and is in compliance with this these Regulations.



5.	Handicapped parking shall be provided in accordance with CGS Section 14-253a and any other
requirements of State law.


6.	Nothing in this Section shall be construed to prevent collective provision of off-street parking faci lities for two or more structures or uses, provided that the total of such off-street parking spaces supplied co llectively shall, unless modified by the Commiss ion as provided in Section
7.1.C,be not less than the sum of the requirements for the various uses computed separately .
 

7.1.B	Number of Parking Spaces


Off-street parking spaces shall be provided for all new uses or buildings constructed, reconstruct ed,or enlarged after the effective date of these Regulations in accorda nce with the following schedu le of requirements and any ca lculation resulting in a fraction s hall be rounded to the nearest whole number:




1.    RESIDENTIAL USES	SPACES  REQUIRED
a.	One-fa mily dwellings	2 spaces per dwelling
b.    Two-fam ily dwe llings	3 spaces per dwelling
c.	Multiple-family  dwellings	2.25 spaces per dwelling unit
d.   Housing for elderly	0.75 spaces per dwelling unit





2.   INSTITUTIONAL USES	SPACES  REQUIRED

a.		Places of assem bly,including, but not limited to churches, auditoriums, theaters, and stadiums	
1space for each 4 fixed seats or equivalent gross floor area
b.  General hospital,convalesce nt, nursing or rest
home	1space per 4 patients beds plus 1space per employee during the maximum work shift




	3	. MARINE USES	SPACES  REQUIRED
a.	Boat docks, marinas, and boatyards.	1space per boat or mooring facility
b.   Tour boat I Sport fishing boats	1space for every 2 passengers the boat is licensed to carry
c.	Passenger  ferries	1space for each 2 passengers the ferry is licensed to carry
 

	4	. RETAIL/ SERVICE USES	SPACES REQUIRED
a.	Appliance, carpet,furniture, electrical,
heating, and plumbing retail sales	2.0 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area
b.    Other retail sales and service establishments	
4.0 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area
c.	Open or outdoor businesses, including, but not limited to those which sell new and used: Motor vehicles, trailers, mobile homes, building supplies, machinery, equipment, swimming pools, nursery, and garden supp lies	1space per 1,000 square feet of lot area
d.	Automotive services, including, but not limited to gas stations, auto dealers, auto accessories, auto repair, auto body and paint shop, muffler installations, tire shops, engine and transmission overhaul shops and car wash	4.0 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area; or 3 spaces per bay, lift or equivalent, w hichever is greater.  An attendant - operated or self-service car wash shall have at least 10 wa iting positions for each bay between the street line and such bay for cars approaching and at least 2 waiting positions for cars leaving said bays




5.		OFFICE USES		SPACES REQUIRED

a.		
General business and professional offices and
financial institutions		
4.0 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area; or 2
spaces for each office or tenant,w hichever is greater
				
A drive-in bank window shall have at least 5 waiting positions between the street line and sa id window for cars approaching and at least 1wa iting position for cars leavi ng said w indow




6.	HOSPITALITY USES	SPACES REQUIRED

a.	Food and beverage estab lishments, including,	12.0 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area but not limited to, restaurants, taverns,bars,
luncheonettes, soda fountains , clubs (public and private), fraternal organizations and lodges

b.	Hotels, motels, and boarding, lodging, and	1space for each rooming unit, plus required parking for
rooming houses	facilities used for eating, drinking, assembly, and other such
uses

c.	Bed and Breakfast Establishments	1space per guest room, 2 spaces for the resident- owner,
and 1space per non-resident staff employee on each shift
 


7.	INDUSTRIAL USES

a.	Manufacturing and industrial establishment s	
SPACES  REQUIRED

1space for each 3 employees on the maximum work sh ift provided that for uses with more than 100 employees, an official of the firm or institution shall submit a semi-annual affidavit (beginning within 30 days of the effective date of these Regulations) certifying the number of employees on each work shift.

The parking requirements may be met in part by the provision of alternate transportation for employees in the following manner:
1.  Each three occupied seats in a van or bus shal l be considered as one parking space.
2.  A bus which makes repeated trips from outlying areas outside City limits to the establishment before the start of the maximum work shift sha ll be counted once for each trip.
b.  Who lesale and distribution businesses, warehousing and storage businesses, truck terminals and other enclosed non-industria l storage uses	1space for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area or 1 space for each three 3 employees on the maximum work shift,whichever is greater provided that For uses with more than 100 employees, an official of the firm or institution shall submit a semi-a nnual affidavit (beginning within 30 days of the effective date of these Regulations) certifying the number of employees on each work shift.

The parking requirements may be met in part by the provision of alternate transportation for employees in the following manner:
1.   Each three occupied seats in a van or bus shall be
considered as one parking space.
2.	A bus which makes repeated trips from outlying areas outside City limits to the establis hment before the start of the maximum work shift shall be counted once for each trip.
 
























































The parking space requirements for a use not specifically listed in this Section shall be determined by the Commission based on parking demand generation for a listed use of similar character istics .
 

7.1.C	Possible Modification of Parking Requirements

l.	Permanent Parking Reduction For A Single Property-The Commission may, by Special Permit, modify the cumulative parking requirements of Section 7.lB of these Regulations for a single property in the following situations:

a.	Where in a mixed-use development on a single property,there are two or more land uses which have differences in their principal operating hours or dissimilarities in their clientele,thereby allowing utilization of the same parking spaces.

b.	Wher e a use is located wit hin 500 feet of another use, such as a church or other public place of assembly that is not in operation during the same hours or days as the first use, and w here such church or public place of assembly is willing to make its parking
ava ilable to the first use.

c.	Where the Commission finds that existing on-street parking or on-street parking to be established by the applicant in the vicin ity will alleviate the need to provide the full comp lement of parking on the site .




2.	Permanent Parking Reduction For Multiple Properties -The Commission may, by Special Permit, modify the cumulative parking requirements of Section 7.lB of these Regulations for multiple properties where the Commission finds that a functional and interconnected parking arrangement is provided within and between the properties,that an agreement for jo int access and parking, in perpetuity ,acceptable to the Commission is filed on the land records, and further provided the Commission finds one or more of the following based on information provided by the applicant :

a.	Peak parking demands among uses occur at different hours of the day and this offset
results in a lower net peak parking demand;

b.	Synergistic relationships among uses a llow patrons to park once while accessing multiple locations or allow for multiple purpose trips to occur within the development(s); or

c.	The uses are likely to generate transit, bicycle or pedestrian trips and accommodations
have been made to support these alternative forms of transportation.
 

3.	Permanent Compact Space Parking Reduction - The Commission may, by Special Permit, permit
parking spaces not less than 8 feet by 18 feet in cases where:

a.	the parking spaces are for the exclusive use of employees,

b.	all vehicles are parked by an attendant, or

c.	the parking spaces are with in a garage.




4.	Temporary Change of Use Exemption - In the event that no new buildings or structures are being established and the land area, structures or permitted uses are simply being changed from one  permitted use to another permitted use allowed under these Regulations, no additiona l parking spaces s hall be required provided that:

a.	the number of spaces that presently exist on the property is at least 90 percent of the cumulative parking requirement for the new use(s) and the other existing use(s) on the property, and

b.	no "grandfathering" or other exception sha ll be provided relative to any future use of
such premises .




5.	Temporary Parking Installation Reduction - The Commission may, by Special Permit,waive the immediate insta llation of up to 25% of the required parking spaces where sufficient evidence has been presented, in the judgment of the Commission, to s how that the reduced parking
faci lities will adequate ly serve the proposed use provided that:

a.	The Special Permit sha ll be applicable only to the particular use or occupancy of land,
buildings, or other structures specified in the application, and such Special Permit and Zo ning I Building Permit issued for the use sha ll become null and void in the event that such use or occupancy is changed to another use or occupancy.

b.	Before the Commission wa ives the immediate insta llation of spaces, the applicant s hall show upon the site deve lopment plan the complete layout for the full parking requirements and the design of the complete stormwater manage ment system designed to handle the deferred parking pavement.

c.	Upon approva l by the Commission, the owner sha ll file the plan approved by the Commission in the Office of the Town Clerk, stipulating that :
•	the complete stormwater management system sha ll be installed at the time of
initial development ,and
•	the owner, or the successor and assigns of the owner,will install as many of the waived parking spaces as the Commission deems necessary within six months of the Comm issio n's request, when, in the opinion of the Commission, such installation is needed.
 


7.1.D	Location of Parking


l.	The parking spaces required for all residential dwellings shall be located on the same lot as the dwelling.

2.	The parking spaces required for non-residential uses shall be located on the same lot as the principal use or on a lot which is within 500 feet of the principal use, such distance to be measured along the street lines to the property.

3.	In industrial zones, if there are special and unusual circumstances that make it impractical to provide all required parking within 500 feet of the principal use, other provisions may be made for the location of parking provided parking is a permitted use in the zone in which it is to be located and subject to Special Permit approval and Site Plan approval by the Commission.

4.	When required parking spaces are provided on land other than the lot occupied by the principal use for which they are required:

a.	The land occupied by such spaces must be in the same possession as such principal use.

b.	Such land must be bound by a covenant, recorded in the office of the Town Clerk binding such owner and his/her heirs and assigns to maintain the required number of parking spaces for the duration of the use served.



7.1.E	Size of Spaces


l.	Off-street parking space shall be 9 feet in width by 20 feet in length except that the Commission may, by Special Permit, permit the following parking space configuration where the location and distribution of spaces and overall circulation is appropriate:

a.	At least 60 percent of the spaces shall be 9 feet in width by 18 feet in length;

b.	Up to 20 percent of the spaces may be 8 feet in width by 16 feet in length and be marked as "compact spaces"; and

c.	Up to 20 percent of the spaces shall be 10 feet in width by 20 feet in length and be marked as "oversized spaces."

2.	An off-street loading space, as used herein, shall be a space of not less than 12 feet in w idth,40 feet in length, and 14 feet in height.
 








7.1.F	Parking Area Dimensions




A .Parking angle	o	·	30°	45°	60°	90°
B. Curb length				16'6"	12'9"	10'5"	9'
	22'				
C. Stall depth	8'	18'	19'	19'	18'
D. Driveway width	- one way	12'	13'	15'	18'	20'
- tw o way	20'	20'	20'	22'	24'
E. Parking space width	8'	9'	9'	9'	9'
F. Parking space length	22'	18'	18'	18'	18'



8
                            :	(0
I

:L  8 ,:.'
--( _\.-:-;=;.,-)----) :'\	7
 

7.1.G	General Layout Requirements


1.	No parking lot is to be located in any required front yard setback


2.	The general layout and traffic circulation of parking and loading areas shall be designed so as to avoid unsafe conditions and traffic congestion in the streets upon which the area has access and to provide for the safety and adequacy of access for vehicles and pedestrians using the area.

3.	All proposed curb cuts and access drives shall comply with all applicable requirements of:

a.	the State Department ofTransportation when accessing a State highway, and

b.	the City's Highway Department when accessing a City street .


4.	Any enclosed loading spaces shall be located at least 30 feet from any street line,and any open loading space shall be so designed that trucks when loading or unloading will not project over any street line.

5.	Individual parking and loading spaces,maneuvering areas, entrances and exits shall be suitably
identified with lines and arrows, as deemed necessary by the City Planner .


6.	No access drive, aisle or maneuvering area shall have a turning radius of less than 20 feet.


7.	Where vehicles will be located adjacent to sidewalks, fences, walls,required buffer strips, trees, landscaping, or similar constructions, a suitable bumper or curb shall be provided in such a location that the vehicle cannot overhang or otherwise damage said area.

7.1.H	Loading Spaces


1.		Every hospital, institution, hotel, retail store, office building, wholesale house, warehouse or industrial building, or additions thereto to which or from which outside deliveries of materials or dispatches of materials are to be made by motor vehicles and totaling 8,000 square feet or more in floor area constructed, reconstructed or enlarged after the effective date of these Regulations shall have on the lot one permanently maintained loading space and one additional loading space for each additional 16,000 square feet of floor area or major portion thereof, excluding basements.

2.	When such calculation results in the requirement of a fractional space, any fraction up to and including one-half shall be disregarded and fractions over one-half shall require an additional loading space.

7.1.1	Truck/Trailer  Parking


No tractor, trailer,tractor-trailer combination or any truck loaded with merchandise shall be parked or stored on a lot for a period exceeding seven consecutive days in one calendar month, except in an industrially zoned district.
 

7.1.J	Surface I Lighting I Landscaping Requirements

1.		Off-street parking and loading areas, including driveways, s hall include an all-weather surface to the satisfaction of the Planning and Zoning Commission, or the Zoning and Building Official in cases where the Zoning and Building Official has final authority.

2.	Such all-weather surface shall be stable, durable, dustless and graded and drained as to dispose of all surface water accumulation in the area.

3.	Where the proposed grade exceeds 10%, all such areas and driveways shall be paved in those areas.

4.	Any lighting used shall be in accordance with Section 7.6 and sha ll be shielded and so arranged
as to direct the light away from adjoining premises and public rights-of-way.


5.	All parking areas shall be landscaped in accordance with the requirements below:

a.	Except in the Industria l / Technology (IT) or Technology Campus (TC) zones, not more than twelve (12) at-grade parking spaces shall be permitted in a continuous row, and not more than twenty-four (24) spaces shall be permitted in a single parking area without being interrupted by landscap ing.

b.	All parking areas with more than 5 spaces that abut or are across the street from, the boundary of, or any property within any Residential Zone sha ll be bordered on all sides with a 10-foot-wide buffer strip.

c.	All loading areas that abut or are across the street from, the boundary of, or any property within any Residential Zone shall be bordered on all sides wit h a 10-foot-wide buffer str ip.

d.	A planting area with a minimum width of three (3) feet shall be provided between the parking area and the required setback line on any parcel, except in the Industrial / Technology (IT) or Technology Campus (TC) zones, where:
•	A Site Plan approval or Special Permit is required, and
•	The parking area faces a street or property line.

e.	On such buffer strip(s) sha ll be located and maintained appropriate landscaping and fencing approved by the Commission of suitable type, density, and height to effectively screen the parking a rea and the lights of motor vehic les adjoining residential areas.
 

7.2.	Sign Regulations


7.2.A	Purpose


It is the intention of these sign regulations to promote the public safety,protect property values, create an attractive business climate and enhance the physical appearance of the community.

7.2.B	General  Requirements


No sign, except as provided in Section 7.2.C and Section 7.2.H,hereof,shall be erected or structurally altered unless an app lication for a Sign Permit has been approved by the Zoning and Building Official.

7.2.C	Signs Permitted in All Zones


The following signs are permitted in a ll zones provided they meet the requirements of Section 7.2.1 and Section 7.2.J:

1.	One non-illuminating identification sign not to exceed 2 square feet in area or 8 feet in height, stat ing the name and address of the occupant. Home occupations on file with the Zoning and Building Official may also state the occupation or profession on the sign.

2.	A marker not to exceed 2 square feet identify ing a historic building.


3.	A sign erected by the City,State, or Federa l Government.


4.	A sign erected by a public carrier for direct information concerning its service at the location.


5.	A sign erected by a ny fraternal, civic, religious or serv ice organization or club, merely announc ing its presence in the City of Groton and the time and place of its regular meeting, provided such sign shall not exceed 3 feet in diameter nor 9 square feet in area.

6.	Any flag, badge, insignia or device or any governmental agency or civic,charitable, religious, patriotic, political,fraternal, or similar non-profit organization when displayed a long a line of march of any parade, or in sockets along any street during a fundraising drive.

7.	Tempora ry political signs displayed during election campaigns provided no sign shall exceed 4 square feet in a residence zone or 24 square feet in a business or industrial zone.

8.	A temporary construction sign is permitted in any zone subject to approva l of a sign permit and provided the sign is non-illuminated,does not exceed 32 squa re feet in area, ident ifies an engineer, arc hitect, and/or contractor engaged in development of land or construction or
a lteration of buildings and further, provided such sign is set back at least 10 feet from any street
line and is removed upon comp letion of construction .
 

9.	One temporary, non-illuminated real estate sign identifying the lease or sale of a building and/or lot provided such sign is removed within 35 days after the sale or lease of said building and/or lot and further provided the area of said sign shall not exceed the fo llowing:

Use/ Zone			Sign Area Allowed	
One or two family dwelling	4 square feet
Any other use permitted in a
residential zone including the WBR Zone	24 square feet
Any use permitted in the Gene ral Commercial, Industrial / Technology ,or Technology Campus Zone .	32 square feet for each 25 feet the sign is set back from the street line, however, no sign shall exceed 300 square feet.

7.2.D	Signs Permitted in Residence Zones


The following signs are permitted in all Residence Zones, including the R-12 and WBR Zones .


1.	One identification sign for each separate street line of an approved Special Permit Use subj ect to
the following standards :

a.	The square foot area of such sign shall not be greater than one- half the linear foot distance it is located from any lot line and, in any case,shall not exceed 9 square feet in area;

b.	The height of such sign shall not be greater than the distance it is located from any lot
line and, in any case, shall not exceed 8 feet in height;

c.	The sign shall only be non-illuminated or indirectly illuminated;

d.	The sign shall comply with the applicable side and rear yard setbac k requirements for principal  buildings;and

e.	The sign shall be set back a minimum of 50% of the applicable front yard setback
requirement for principal buildings.


2.	Other signs shall be limited to directional signs necessary for public safety or convenience.


3.	In the WBR Zone, only one projecting sign is permitted for each use on the street front floor
w ith the following restrictions :

a.	No sign shall exceed 2 feet in any dimension.

b.	A 10-foot clearance over the existing grade or walk must be maintained.

c.	The projecting sign area shall be included in the total sign area for wall signs .
 

7.2.E	Signs Permitted in Non-Residential Zones


The following signs are permitted in the General Commercial, Industrial/ Technology, and Technology Campus Zones and for non-residential uses in the Waterfront Business Residence District.

1.	The aggregate area of all signs on the premises shall not exceed five percent {5%) of the gross floor area of all buildings on the lot.

2.	Illuminated identification signs shall be permitted for each separate street line.

a.	Ground Signs -
i.	There shall be only one ground sign along any street line for each separate use on the premises.
ii.	The total sign area along each street line may be increased by an area to setback
ratio of (2:1) 2 square feet of sign area for each linear foot of yard setback as measured from a street or lot line, provided that the minimum required setback from any street or lot line shall be 10 feet. The sign height may be increased up to the maximum permitted height in the applicable zone by a height to setback ratio of (1:1) 1foot in sign height for each linear foot of yard setback as measured from a
street or lot line, provided that the minimum required setback from any street or lot line shall be 10 feet.

b.	Wall Signs - There shall be only one sign on any street facade for each separate use of the building.  The total sign area on each street facade shall not exceed 20% of the gross area of said wall.  The Commission may, as deemed necessary, appropriate or desirable in its judgment,  permit additional wall signs, in the same manner as above on a building wall which faces and adjoins a significant and substantial accessory off-street parking structure,  lot or area.

c.	Projecting Signs - One projecting sign on any street facade may be permitted for each separate use of the building, provided that the sign area is included as part of the total sign area for wall signs. Said projecting sign shall extend under a roof and over a walkway and shall not exceed 4 feet in any dimension.

d.	Identification Signs - No identification signs shall be permitted in any required side or rear yard setback adjoining a Residential District.



3.	Other signs necessary for and exclusively limited to directional or safety purposes shall be allowed.

4.	No trailer-mounted signs shall be permitted, unless they meet all setback, height, and size requirements of ground signs, and a permit is issued for same by the Zoning and Building Official.
 

7.2.F	Commercial Advertising Signs in Non-Residential Zones


Indirectly illuminated commercial advertising signs are permitted in the General Commercial, Industrial/ Technology, and Technology Campus Zones subject to Special Permit approval and Site Plan approval  and the following conditions:

1.		Not more than one commercial advertising sign shall be permitted on a lot and the sign area of such sign shall not exceed a length of 48 feet nor a vertical dimension of 14 feet. All such commercial advertising signs shall be ground signs.

2.	Such signs shall be located only where the applicable zone extends at least 250 feet in all directions from the proposed sign and shall not be placed closer than 750 feet apart, measured along the center-line of the street to any other such sign.

3.	Such signs shall comply with all yard setback requirements for principal building in the applicable zone, but in no case shall such yard setback be less than 20 feet from any lot line.

4.	The maximum height of the structure shall not exceed the maximum height for principal buildings in the applicable zone, nor shall it exceed a height of 40 feet above the ground level nor 24 feet above the curb level of the street to which it is oriented.

5.	When such signs are visible from the main traveled way of a limited access highway and are located within 500 feet of such highway, they shall not be placed closer than 3,500 feet apart measured along the center-line of such highway to any other such sign.

6.	When pre-existing commercial advertising signs exist, the owner may apply to the Planning and Zoning Commission to remove and relocate such sign with a new commercial advertising sign of equivalent size which conforms to this Section in all respects; except that the Commission may allow such relocation 50% closer to other commercial signs than otherwise required.
 

7.2.G	Prohibited Signs


The prohibitions contained in this Section shall apply to all signs,all artificial lighting and all zones,
regardless of designation, within the City of Groton.


1.	Off-premises advertising signs or billboards are not permitted.


2.	No sign or advertising device shall be erected, used or maintained which in any way simulates official directional or warning signs erected or maintained by the Federal, State or City Governments for the protection of the public health and safety.

3.	No sign or advertising device shall be erected or maintained in such a manner as to obstruct or interfere with the free and clear vision on any street,driveway or navigable channel.

4.	No sign or advertising device shall be erected or maintained with any lighting control mechanis m which may cause radio or television interference.

5.	No illuminated sign or lighting device shall be placed or directed on any property in a manner that would permit the light beams and illumination therefrom to be directed or beamed onto a public street or walkway, or onto adjoining properties so as to cause glare or reflection that might constitute a traffic hazard or public nuisance.

6.	No animated sign or advertising device shall be erected .


7.	No flashing sign or advertising device which creates intermittent or varying light intensity shall be erected.

8.	No projecting sign shall extend more than 15 inches beyond the building walls or parts thereof,
except as otherwise provided in these sign regulations.


9.	No roof sign shall be erected.


10.	No building or part thereof, such as a gable, roof, or wall, shall be outlined by direct illumination for the purpose of commercial advertising.

11.	No sign shall be attached to or be erected or maintained in such a manner as to obstruct any fire
escape, window ,door,or other building opening used for egress and ingress,ventilation or
other firefighting purpose .


12.	No commercial advertising sign shall be allowed, except as otherwise provided in Section 7.2.F hereof.

13.	No signs shall be painted directly on any roof, wall or pole.
 
Effective December 11 2016	Section 7.2
STANDARDS
Sign Regulations

7.2.H	Exempt Signs


Banners suspended overhead from municipally owned poles along city streets, sponsored, in part or solely by the City of Groton and/or Groton Utilities.

7.2.1	Maintenance


1.	All signs, together with their supports, braces, guys, and anchors, shall be kept in good repair and in safe condition. The owner of the premises in which a sign is erected shall be directly responsible for keeping such sign and premises around it in a safe, sanitary, neat, and clean condition.

2.	Any sign, now or hereafter existing, which no longer identifies or advertises a bona fide business conducted, product sold, or activity or campaign being conducted shall be taken down and removed by the owner, agent, or person having beneficial use of the building, structure, or lot upon which the sign is located within sixty-five days of such cessation.

7.2.J	Illumination


Any illuminated sign or lighting device shall employ only lights emitting a light of constant intensity and shall be designed, located, erected and maintained only for the purposes of illuminating the subject sign and/or premises.
 
Earthwork and the Importing and Exporting Of Earth Products

7.3.	Earthwork and the Importing and Exporting Of Earth Products


1.	The following importing or ex porting of earth products such as,but not limited to, earth loam, topsoil, sand, gravel, clay, stone or minerals is permitted in any zone provided that the importing or  exporting shall only involve the minimum quantity of material necessary to make such lot,site, or right-of-way suitable for the proposed use.

a.	Necessary  importing or  exporting of earth products in direct connection with the building construction, structural alteration or site improvements on a lot for which only a building permit is required.

b.	Necessary importing or ex porting of earth products in direct connection with required
site improvements in accordance with an approved subdivision plan.

c.	Necessary importing or ex porting of earth products in direct connection with street or utility improvements within a public right-of-way for which the City Department of Public Works or State Department of Transportation has granted a street opening permit.

d.	Necessary importing or exporting of earth products in direct connection with the installation or relocation of heavy machinery or in connection with the installation, relocation or repair of on-site utilities.

e.	The  importing or  ex porting of not more than 50 cubic yards of earth products for the purpose of landscaping, building construction, structural alteration,or site improvements provided that in no case shall the importing or exporting of material
cause adverse conditions on neighboring properties . For buildings exempt from Site Plan Review under Section 9.3.B.2,the import of only structural fill material is exempt from site plan review per item 2 below.

f.	Necessary importing or ex porting of earth products in direct connection with the removal of a building or structure for which a demolition permit has been issued, provided that the amount of fill shall be limited to the minimum quantity necessary to restore the site to grade and permit landscaping or site restoration as shown on a site and grading plan approved by the City Planner or Zoning and Building Official.



2.	Any other importing or ex porting activities require Site Plan approval by the Planning and Zoning
Commission.


3.	At no time shall any open test holes, excavation pits or similar manmade depressions or stockpiles of natural or manmade material or debris be left in an ex posed state either permanently or for a period of time longer than necessary to complete construction.
 

7.4.	Corner Visibility


1.	On public streets, no structure,wall, fence, shrubbery,trees, or object shall be erected,
·maintained, planted,or parked on any lot which unreasonably or dangerously obstructs or interferes with visibility of drivers of vehicles on a curve or at any street intersection. The minimum vis ion clearance shall require a height not exceeding 3 feet above the street grade within 25 feet of the intersecting street lines bordering corner lots.

Corner Visibility
 
Access Drives,Accessways and Access Management

7.5.	Access Drives, Accessways and Access Management


1.	Access Drives

a.	.		No driveway or access to or from any property sha ll be so located at its juncture with a street as to create a danger or menace to the community or to the convenience or proper use of the adjacent property.

b.	No driveway shall provide access to a lot located in another Zoning District, if said lot is used for any use, principal or accessory, not permitted in the district in which such driveway is located.

c.	No driveway shall be located closer than 50 feet to any street intersection measured along the street lines.  In any non-residential district, no two driveways on the same lot shall be located closer than 25 feet to each other at their closest limits.

2.	Accessways  - Basic Limitations

a.	For any lot which does not meet the minimum lot width requirement, a twenty-five (25) foot wide area between the street line and the required front yard setback sha ll be excluded in calculating the total area of the lot for purposes of minimum lot size.










Area To be Excluded
From Measurement Of

Rear Lot





 
---/
 


Accessway
 


b.	An accessway shall not exceed a length of two hundred and fifty (250) feet unless authorized under the provisions of Section 8.2.B, at which point the lot shall be required to meet the lot width requirements of the zone that the lot is located in.

c.	The maximum number of adjoining accessways shall not exceed two, unless otherwise permitted by the Planning and Zoning Commission at the time of subdivision approva l.
 

d.	In an instance where two rear lots are being serviced by separate accessways, a common or shared driveway may be provided anywhere within these access areas in conformance with Section 7.5. Where two or more accessways are adjoining and a common or shared driveway will be provided,the width of each accessway may be reduced from 25 feet to a twenty (20) foot width for each lot being served.

3.	Accessways in Excess of 250 Feet - Accessways to serve lots may be permitted in excess of 250 feet at the discretion of the Planning and Zoning Commission when the following conditions are deemed  to be met:

a.	Accessways are adequate in width, grade and alignment so that all buildings, structures,
uses and equipment are readily accessible for fire, emergency, and police protection.

b.	Sufficient utility systems are suitably located and adequately designed to serve
proposed uses and protect the public health and welfare.

c.	The accessway shall not exceed a length of 400 feet, at which point the lot must meet the lot width requirements of the zone that the lot is located in.

d.	New utilities provided to service uses and buildings on lots beyond the 250 foot length
shall be installed underground .

e.	Where lot size, shape or excessive depths topography and/or significant land features such as bedrock, wetlands ,or coastal resources, make it infeasible to comply with the provisions of Section 8.2.A, and would thus deprive the owner or applicant of reasonable use of the property.

4.	Access Management - In business areas and along major streets, the Commission may:

a.	Seek to reduce or eliminate existing driveways;

b.	Require that property owners provide easements granting the right of access, egress,
and passage to the Town and/or a butting properties;

c.	.	Require that property owners use easements granting the right of access, egress,and
passage previously obtained from abutting properties; and/or

d.	Implement other approaches to accomplish access management strategies.
 

7.6.	Outdoor Lighting


7.6.A	Purpose


These regulations are intended to provide specific standards for lighting in order to maximize the effectiveness of site lighting, to enhance public safety and welfare, to raise public awareness of energy conservation, to avoid un-necessary upward illumination, indirect lighting and illumination of adjacent properties, and to reduce glare.

7.6.B	Applicability


Except as herein provided, these regulations shall apply to any outdoor lighting fixtures installed,
modified, refurbished, repaired or serviced on private property within the City of Groton.


All businesses,and community roadways,sidewalks and town property luminaires should be planned and installed with the idea of being a "good neighbor" by keeping unnecessary direct light from shining onto abutting lots or roadways,both public and private .

7.6.C	Standards


1.	All exter ior lights and sign illumination shall be designed, located,installed and directed in such a manner as to:

a.	Prevent direct or objectionable glare,light trespass ,spill light, or obtrusive light;

b.	Be shielded (full cut off);

c.	Employ soft,transitional light levels which are consistent from area to area;

d.	Minimize contrast between light sources, lit areas and dark surroundings ;and

e.	Be confined with in the target area.


2.	In all non-residential districts and in all areas adjacent to a resident ial lot, no externa lly­ mounted direct light source sha ll be v isible at the lot line at ground level or above .The direct illumination measured at the lot line sha ll be zero (O.O) foot-candles ,excluding driveway entrances .

3.	Lighting designed to highlight flagpoles shall be low level (no more than 100 w att incandescent equivalent) and shall be targeted direct ly at the flag.

4.	Lighting shall include timers,dimmers and/or sensors to reduce unnecessary light level during
non-business hours to a minimum level required for overnight secur ity.
 

5.	The height of luminaries, except streetlights in public right-of-ways ,shall be the minimum height necessary to provide adequate illumination,but shall not exceed a height of eighteen (18) feet. The height of a luminaire shall be measured from the finished grade (not the top of a supporting concrete base) to the bottom of the luminaire.

6.	Light standards within a parking lot sha ll be located within landscaped islands or buffer strips, and sha ll be set back two (2) feet from any parking space unless wheel-stops are provided.

7.	In reviewing and approving outdoor lighting, the Commission may utilize recommendations for lighting levels as issued by the Illuminating Engineering Society of North America ,the International Dark-Sky Association, or other reference.

8.	The use of utility poles for outdoor lighting is prohibited.


9.	Any light determined by the Zoning and Building Official and/or City Planner to be obtrusive,  spill light, upward lighting, light trespass, or otherwise not in compliance with these regulations shall constitute a violation.

10.	A photometric survey shall be submitted as part of any site plan that demonstrates compliance with these standards . Such photometric survey sha ll show both business hour and non-business hour light ing plans.
 



Fuly shielded lig-it
 



Luminaire
1'
fixture	j	LightPollion
J	/)plight  ing
 
 	,,_ r-:- ···JI.'.- ..-···-·-····--·--··-- ·--·-·-··-···- __ ,.


 


I
/

ugit Trespass
(
./

I I
 
....­e
S··E
::t: ...J




Finished Grade
 
Property•
Line  :
•
 

RECOMMENDED	NOT RECOMMENDED

 
Fixtures Which Would Not Generally Be Expected To Produce Glare or Light Trespass

Fixtures that sh:eldthe light source to m111imize glare and light trespass
and to fac11itale better vision at mght
 
Fixtures Which Would Generally Be Expected To Produce Glare or Light Trespass

Fixtures that produce glare and light trespass
 



lLGJ
 

JJ
'"'""'"', ,6
 
'=	'!fJ
 

FuUy   Shielded Wal ack & WaU Mount Fixtures
 
'"w"'a'tK"w"av"'
Bollards
 
Unshielded  Floodlights
or Poorly-shielded Floodlights
t	Hfii e
 



..--------< ,.--·
------<Lr")..:
H
'
I:
'

FUii)' Shielded Fixtures
 
'8   Unshielded Wallpacks
-o	& Unshielded or
Poorly-shielded Wall
J:::	Mount Fixtures	"""'
fll'M       i..
:J
 


Full Cutoff 3treetlight
 



F'PuellyrioSdh'iSeltyle ed
Fixtures	.,_1...::::_;.\
v;tk:!ee	·--]
 

Drop.Lens & Saq-Lens Fix tures
w/ exposed bulb I refractor lens



I
 
'",,,.,..,...,,.
 
./)
 
bul)

 
PAR FloOdlrgllts  -- -
 



Fixtures
 
Ur 1 htt!IUt!ll
Gecurity Light
 
Shielded I Properly-aimed	-...........:_FIUsll Mounted Canopy
-----
 
Unsllelded P/\R
''""
 

7.6.D	Exemptions and Modifications


1.	Temporary holiday lighting is exempt from these Regulations, for a period oftime to be commensurate with the holiday being celebrated,but in no event shall such lighting at a commercial property exceed a duration of 45 days annually in the aggregate.

2.	Temporary  lighting used by the Police Department, Fire Department or emergency services is exempt from these Regulations.

3.	The Commission may, by special permit, allow lighting that does not comply with the requirements of this Section provided the Commission determines, in its sole discretion, that such proposed lighting is consistent with the purpose of these Regulations. The following considerations are provided as guidance:

a.	That an extraordinary need for security exists because of a history of vanda lism or other objective means;

b.	That in traveled ways or areas, condit ions hazardous to the public ex ists, such as steep
embankments or stairs;

c.	That it would be unreasonable to require replacement of an entire lighting installation because a minor change is proposed to an ex isting non-conforming lighting installation;

d.	Special lighting is indicated for historic buildings;

e.	That ornamental up-lighting of scu lpture, buildings or landscape features end enhance the character of the area; and

f.	Such lighting is necessary for specia l outdoor events and playing fields.


4.	The Commission may modify the requirements of Section 7.6.C for a temporary use approved
under these Regulations .
 
Stormwater Management

7.7.	Stormwater  Management


7.7.A	Purpose and Intent


This Section of the Regulations is intended to promote the application of Low Impact Development (LID) strategies for the analysis and design of stormwater treatment systems in order to :
•	Minimize degradation of water resources within the City of Groton from pollution from non­ point source runoff;
•	Mitigate impacts to the hydrologic system from development, including reduced groundwater recharge and pollutants found in stormwater runoff; and
•	Reduce or prevent flooding, stream channel erosion, and/or other negative impacts created by the volume of stormwater runoff resulting from development.

7.7.B	Applicability


The provisions of this Section of the Regulations shall apply to any development within the City of Groton which requires approval of a Site Plan in accordance with Section 9.3 of these Regulations or approval of a Special Permit in accordance with Section 9.4 of these Regulations.

7.7.C	Requirement


1.	Unless modified by the Commis sion as provided in Section 7.7.D below,any development within the City of Groton shall implement the following provisions of Chapter 7 of the Connecticut Stormwater Quality Manual (CSQM), as amended:

a.	.	Pollutant Reduction (CSQM Section 7.4).

b.	Groundwater Recharge and Runoff Volume Reduction (CSQM Section 7.5).

c.	Peak Flow Control (CSQM Section 7.6) for the 10-year, 25-year, and 100-year storm events.

2.		In the design of a stormwater management system, design professionals may utilize low impact development techniques as contained in the Connecticut Stormwater Quality Manual, as amended .

7.7.D	Modifications


The Commission may, by Special Permit, reduce the requirements as specified in Section 7.7.C provided that adequate information has been submitted by the applicant for the Commission to evaluate the request and:

1.	The City Engineer has provided a recommendation such requirements cannot reasonably be attained at the subject property and/or such requirements would be of limited practical benefit at the subject property; or

2.	The Commission has received a report from a professional engineer hired by the Commission, at the applicant's expense, providing a positive recommendation regarding the modification.
 

7.8.	Performance Standards


7.8.A	Applicability


1.	The performance standards of this Section shall apply to all lands, buildings, structures, and uses in all zones,whether a permitted use, a special permit use, an accessory use or a non­ conforming  use.

2.	Initial and continued compliance with these performance standards shall be required of every
building, structure and use.


7.8.B	General Standard


1.	No building or use shall create any dangerous, injurious, nox ious, or otherwise objectionable fire, explosive, or other hazard; noise or vibration; smoke,dust, odor or other form of air pollution; heat,cold, dampness, electromagnetic or other substance, condition or element in such manner, or in such amount, as to adversely affect the reasonable use of the surrounding area or adjoining premises (referred to herein as "dangerous or objectionable elements"); except in accordance with the performance standards set forth hereinafter.

2.	In addition to the performance standards set forth hereinafter, all relevant provisions of any other Federal,State and City laws and Regulations shall also apply.

7.8.C	Standards for Dangerous or Objectionable Elements -


1.	Smoke, fly ash and other dusts, gases, fumes ,odors and dust-producing substances - No person shall cause or allow any smoke,fly ash and other dusts,gases,odors, fumes and dust­ producing substances to be discharged or emitted into the open air, except in accordance with State or Federal statutes and regulations thereunder.

2.	Fire and explosion hazards-All activities involving, and all storage of, inflammable and explosive materials shall be protected at any point,with adequate safety devices protecting against the hazard of fire and explosion and with adequate fire-fighting and fire suppression equipment and devices.

3.	Heat - Heat, defined as thermal energy of a radiative, conductive or convective nature, emitted at the lot line by any use or facility shall not exceed the temperatures tolerable to plant or animal life.

4.	Radioactive or electromagnetic disturbance - No activities shall be permitted which emit dangerous radioactivity at any point, or electromagnetic disturbance adversely affecting the operation, at any point, of any equipment other than that of the creator of such disturbance.
 
Performance Standards

5.	Noise -The maximum sound pressure level radiated at the lot or street line by any use or facility shall not exceed the values tolerable in a specifically affected residential neighborhood , unless such levels are specifically authorized as an integral part of a Special Permit approval and Site Plan approval.

6.	Vibration - No vibration shall be permitted which is detectable w ithout instruments at the lot or street line.

7.	Direct and Indirect Glare - Glare caused by direct or specifically reflected rays from incandescent, fluorescent , or arc lighting,or caused from high temperature processes, such as welding or metallurgical refining,or caused by diffuse reflection from a surface, such as a wall or roof of a structure, shall not be permitted at or beyond the lot line. Deliberately induced sky­ reflected glare, as by casting a beam upward for advertising purposes, is specifically prohibited.

8.	Liquid or Solid Waste - No discharge or deposit shall be permitted at any point into any sanitary sewerage systems, waterbodies, watercourses, or into the ground,of any materials of such quantity, nature or temperature as can contaminate any water or land or otherwise cause the emission of dangerous or objectionable elements, except in accordance with the State and City Health and/or Sanitary Codes.

9.	Waste materials - Waste materials used for the purpose offill may be permitted only in areas designated by the Commission, subject to Special Permit approval and Site Plan approval in accordance with Section 7.3, herein.

10.	Erosion and Sedimentation -
a.	All development activities shall utilize "best management practices" to prevent and
minimize soil erosion and sedimentation,
b.	Soil erosion and sedimentation control measures appropr iate to the circumstances shall be installed prior to the commencement of development activities and sha ll be maintained throughout the development process.
c.	Such soil erosion and sedimentation control measures shall be planned, engineered and
installed in accordance with the standards and specifications of the "Connec tic ut Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control", as amended.
d.	The Commission or its designated agent is hereby author ized to make periodic
inspections of the so il erosion and sediment control measures on any site under development and, if necessary.
•	Issue an order to cease and desist from activities resulting in erosion or sedimentation and immediately institute remedial measures.
•	Require preparation and submittal of a remedia l plan showing permanent corrective action followed by implementation and maintenance of s uch plan as approved by the Commission.
•	Revoke a ny permit for construction if erosion and sediment control measures are not installed in a timely manner.
e.	Soil erosion and sediment control measures may be bonded as part of any develo pment
project in accordance with Section 9.9.L.
 

7.8.D	Administration and Enforcement -


1.		Written Statement May Be Required -As a part of any application for a Special Permit or Building Permit, the Commission, City Planner, or Zoning and Building Official, respectively, may require that the applicant submit a written statement of the proposed use of the building, structure or use for which the appli.cation is made, together with a certificate by a registered professional engineer, qualified scientist, or other recognized authority as to his/her best estimate as to the impact of the proposed use from the standpoint of the standards set forth in Section 7.8.C of these Regulations, and what, if any, environmental protection measures will be taken.

2.	Other Approvals - Where certain aspects of a proposed use are regulated by State or Federal governmental agencies, no Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued for any building, structure or use until approvals are obtained from such agencies and copies thereof are submitted to the Commission or Zoning and Building Official.

3.	Response To Possible Violation - As a result of a complaint or investigation of a possible
v iolation, the Zoning and Building Official may require that the owner or operator submit a written statement regarding the use of the building,structure or use,together with a report by a registered professional engineer, qualified scientist, or other recognized authority as to the compliance of the use relative to the standards set forth in Section 7.8.C of these Regulations, and what, if any, environmental protection measures will be taken.

4.	.	Measurements - Measurements to determine present compliance and estimates to determine future compliance may be made by, and at the discretion of, the Zoning and Building Official, City Planner,Fire Marshal, Ledge Light Hea lth District, or other officer of the City or their qualified agents . The Zoning and Building Official may,at his discretion, require the owner or user of the property to furnish current measurements or estimates within a reasonable time in appropriate cases.
 
Frontage Required

8.	SPECIAL PROVISIONS


8.1.	Frontage Required


1.		No use shall be permitted hereunder on any lot in the City of Groton, unless said lot has a minimum of 25 feet of street frontage and no building permit shall be issued for any building or structure unless the lot for which such permit is sought has a minimum frontage of 25 feet.

2.	Said minimum frontage of 25 feet must:

a.	Be owned by the applicant in fee and rights-of-way,easements , and other areas not owned in fee by the applicant will not be accepted as frontage.

b.	Be on a street accepted by the City of Groton or approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission under the Subdivision Regulations of the City of Groton.

c.	Maintain the 25 feet width to the buildable area of the lot.

8.2.	Dimensional  Exceptions


8.2.A	Yard Setback Exceptions


1.	Open entries, steps, stoops, or porches, cantilevered roofs,eaves,cornices, chimneys, belt­ courses, window sills, balconies, and similar architectural features may project into a required yard setback provided that such features shall not project more than 4 feet into any required yard setback or more than a distance equal to 20% of the required yard setback, whichever is less.

2.	Public utility equipment may be installed within a front yard setback provided it is installed in an underground vault or is screened to the satisfaction of the Zoning and Building Official or City Planner.

3.	Notwithstanding any other provision of these Regulations,a Zoning I Building Permit may be issued to allow construction of stairways and landings within a front yard setback, side yard setba ck,and/or rear yard setbacks when such construction is necessary in order to elevate an existing structure in a flood plain to meet FEMA requirements and the intrusion of such
sta irways and/or landings within the required yard setback is minimized.


8.2.B	Height Exceptions


1.	The height provisions of these Regulations shall not apply to the erection of church spires, belfries, towers designated exclusively for ornamental purposes, flagstaffs ,chimneys, flues,or gas holders.
 

2.	The height provisions of these Regulations shall not apply to bulkheads, elevator enclosures, penthouses,w ater tanks,standpipes, or stage towers occupying in the aggregate less than 10% of the area of the roof on w hich they are located .

3.	Nothing in these Regulations shall prevent the erection of a parapet wa ll or a cornice extending
not more than 3 feet above the height limit indicated.


4.	The height provisions of these Regulations shall not prevent the erection of a permitted public
building or facility not exceeding 40 feet in a residence zone.


8.2.C	Second Principal Building on Same Lot


1.		No lot in any residential district,except for approved multi-fam ily dwellings in groups, boat clubs, beach clubs and marinas, and bed and breakfast establishments, shall contain more than one principal building or structure.

2.		No building to be used as a dwelling sha ll be constructed, altered,or moved on, to,or in the rear of a building situated on the same lot, nor shall any building be constructed in front of,or
moved to the front of a dwelling situated on the same lot.


8.3.	Non-Conforming Uses, Structures and Lots


8.3.A	Non-Conforming Uses


1.	May Be Continued - Notwithstanding any other provision of these Regulations, a pre-existing non-conforming use may be continued, including through change of tit le or possession or right of possession of property, except as otherwise specified in this Section.

2.	Alteration Or Enlargement - A non-conforming use s hall not be extended or enlarged and no structure containing a non-conforming use shall be structurally alte red except:

a.	To make it a conforming structure;

b.	To comply w ith requirements of health and safety laws or ordinances; and/or

c.	Subject to Special Permit approval and Site Plan approval by the Commission, to result
in a situation with a lesser impact upon the surrounding area than the existing use.

3.	Relocation - A pre-ex isting non-conforming use may,subject to Spec ial Permit approval and Site Plan approva l by the Commission, be moved or relocated provided that such moving or relocation  will:

a.	Reduce or eliminate the non-conformity; or

b.	Result,in the opinion of the Commission, in a situation w ith a lesser impact upon the
surrounding area than the existing use.
 
Non-Conforming Uses, Structures and Lots

4.	Change Of Use· The Commission may,subject to Special Permit approval and Site Plan approval, allow a change from a pre-existing non-conforming  use to another  non-conforming use  provided that:

a.	The proposed use is similar in intensity to the existing use or lower in intensity than the existing use; and

b.	The proposed use will have a lesser impact upon the surrounding area than the existing use.

5.	Restoration -When a building, whether conforming or non-conforming, in which there is a non­ conforming use is damaged or destroyed by fire, collapse, explosion, act of God or act of the public enemy, it may be restored only to its previous floor area, cubica l content and exterior appearance and the non-conforming use continued to the same extent as said use existing before such destruction .

6.	Reversion Or Abandonment-

a.	Whenever a non-conforming use has been abandoned, changed to a conforming use, or changed to a more conforming use, it shall not thereafter be changed back to the previous non-conforming use or to a less conforming use.

b.	For the purposes of this provision, abandonment sha ll mean the voluntary and intentional discontinuance of a use such as:
i.	A change to a conforming use or to a more conforming use; or
ii.	Any other act indicating an intent to abandon.

8.3.B	Non-Conforming  Structures


l.		May Be Continued - Notwithstanding any other provision of these Regulations, a pre-existing non-conforming structure may remain, including through change of title or possession or right of possession of property, except as otherwise specified in this Section.

2.	Limitation - This Section sha ll not permit the non-conforming structure to violate any other provisions of these Regulations .

3.	Alteration Or Enlargement -A non-conforming structure shall not be extended, enlarged, or altered except:

a.	To make it a conforming structure;

b.	To comply with requirements of health and safety laws or ordinances;

c.	Subject to Site Plan approval by the Commission, changes to the exterior appearance of the non-conforming structure may be permitted when the Commission determines that such cha nge is more compatib le with the surrounding neighborhood; and/or

d.	Subject to Special Permit approval and Site Plan approval by the Commission, to result
in a situation with a lesser impact upon the surrounding area than the existing structure.
 

4.	Relocation - A pre-existing non-conforming structure may, subject to Special Permit approval and Site Plan approval by the Commission, be moved or relocated provided that such moving or relocation  will:

a.	Reduce or eliminate the non-conformity; or

b.	Result, in the opinion of the Commission, in a situation with a lesser impact upon the
surround ing area than the ex isting structure .

5.	Restoration - When a non-conforming building is damaged or destroyed by fire, collapse, explosion, act of God or act of the public enemy, it may be restored only to its previous floor area, cubical content and exterior appearance as exist ing before such destruction.

6.	Flood Preparation - When a non-conforming building is located within a FEMA flood zone and is being elevated to comply with FEMA standards, it may be so elevated provided doing so does not increase its non-conformity as to yard setbacks or building coverage.

7.	Reversion Or Abandonment-

a.	Whenever a non-conforming structure has been abandoned, changed to a conforming structure,or changed to a more conforming structure, it shall not thereafter be changed back to the previous non-conforming structure or to a less conforming structure.

b.	For the purposes of this provision,abandonment shall mean the voluntary and
intentional discontinuance of a structure such as:
iii.	A change to a conforming structure or to a more conforming structure; or
iv.	Any other act indicating an intent to abandon.

8.3.C	Non-Conforming  Lots

1.	May Be Continued - Notwithstanding any other provision of these Regulations,a pre-ex isting non-conforming lot may remain, including through change of title or possession or right of possession of property, except as otherwise specified in this Section.

2.	Merger Of Adjoining Lots -

a.	If two or more adjoining lots of record, one or both of which fail to meet the requirements of these Regulations with regard to lot area, lot width, yard setback requirements and/or coverage, have continuous frontage and are in a single ownership at the effective date of these Regulations,and if such lots are taken together would
form one or more lots, each more nearly meeting the requirements of these Regulations with regard to lot area, lot width, yard setback requirements,and/or coverage,such lot or lots sha ll no longer be considered legally existing on the effective date of these Regulations and must be used in compliance with the zoning requirements irrespective of subsequent changes in ownership.

b.	Provided however, a lot of record,existing and recorded as a separate lot in the land records of the Town of Groton prior to February 18, 2005, even though the said lot was neither part of an approved subdivision plan nor a lot wh ich has a valid building permit, shall be exempt from the above referenced provisions.  The burden of proof to show compliance with this exemption shall be upon the lot owner .
 

8.4.	Design Considerations



As used in this Section of the Regulations:


The word "shall" means that the relevant consideration, standard, criterion or action will be applied unless the applicant demonstrates that it would clearly be unreasonable or undesirable to do so.

The word "should" means that the relevant co nsideration, standard, criterion or action will generally be applied, but the applicant may offer, and the Commission may approve, an alternative if the Commission finds that the alternative would better fulfill the overall goals set forth in these standards.



8.4.A	Purpose


Since the architectural design, scale and mass of the buildings and other structures are important in determining the visua l characte r of an area, the considerations listed in this Section are recommended in certain areas (such as the Waterfront Business Residence District and the Five Corners District) so as to ensure that new buildings harmonize with and will be compatible with the neighborhood, to protect property va lues and to preserve and improve the appearance and the beauty of the community.

The design considerations listed in this Section are intended to aid in maintaining and enhancing the character and quality of the buildings and public spaces in designated areas in Groton (such as the Waterfront Business Residence District and the Five Corners District) in order to maintain and enhance:
•	The distinctive character, landscape and historic value, especially in areas designated as "village
districts";
•	The sensitive balance of visua l and spatia l relationships that create the character and support
the function of the designated areas;
•	The overall quality of the built environment ;and
•	The economic and social vitality of areas which depends upon maintaining the attractiveness of the street environment, the economic viability of businesses, and a hospitable atmosphere for residential occupants and visitors.

These design considerations may also be used as part of development reviews in other areas of Groton, particularly as part of the Special Permit process.
 

8.4.B	Relationship of Buildings to Site and Adjoining Areas


1.		Buildings shall be designed and located on the site so as to retain the existing topography and natural features of the land to the greatest extent possible.

2.	Buildings shall be organized in a coordinated and functional manner that is compatible with site features and the desirable characteristics of adjoining areas.

3.	A unified design theme for building massing, exterior treatments and signage shall be established where harmony in textures, lines, and masses is provided and monotony is avoided.

4.	Parking areas shall be treated appropriately in relation to the building, the neighborhood,and the community .

5.	The height and scale of each building shall be compatible with its site and existing (or anticipated) adjoining buildings .

6.	Newly installed utility services, and service revisions necessitated by exterior alterations, shall be underground.

7.	A desirable streetscape and attractive landscape transitions to adjoinin g properties shall be provided.

8.4.C	Landscape and Site Treatment


l.	The design of the development and the placement of buildings, driveways, walkways, parking facilities and other improvements shall be such that existing trees, watercourses, rock outcrops and similar natural features are preserved to the greatest extent possible.

2.	Landscape treatment shall be provided to enhance architectural features, shield unsightly areas, provide shade, and relate to the natural environment and topography.

3.	Plant material that is indigenous to the area shall be selected for its ultimate growth and for interest in its shape, texture, and color.

4.	Pedestrian walkways shall provide safe and convenient connections within the site and between adjacent sites and shall be constructed of all-weather materials appropriate for the location (such as brick, concrete, or paving blocks but not earth,grave l, or loose stone).

5.	Existing trees of four (4) inches or greater caliper shall be incorporated into the site plan to the
extent practicable and appropriate .
 

8.4.D	Building Design


1.	Architectural designs appropriate to a New England community are generally preferred (pitched
roof buildings, colonial facades, etc.).


2.	Architectural features shall be evaluated based on the scale of the building(s), the quality of the design, and the relationship to surroundings.

3.	Facades and rooflines shall be articulated and/or varied to reduce the appearance of bulk and
provide architectural interest.


4.	Building materials shall have good architectural character and durable quality and shall be
selected for harmony of the building with adjoining buildings.


5.	Building textures, colors, and components shall be selected for harmony of the building with adjoining buildings.

6.	Utility and service equipment areas shall be screened from public view with materials harmonious with the building.

7.	Rooftop mechanical equipment (other than solar energy panels) should be concealed to the extent practicable.

8.4.E	Signs and Lighting


1.	Every sign shall be designed as an integral architectural element of the building and site to
which it principally relates and shall be coordinated with the building architecture.


2.	Exterior lighting, where used, shall enhance the building design and the adjoining landscape.


3.	Lighting shall be restrained in design and excessive brightness avoided.


4.	Roof lighting is prohibited unless specifically approved by the Commission .
 

8.4.F	Additional  Design Guidelines for Village Districts


1.	Special attention shall be paid to protecting the dist inctive character, landscape, and historic structures within any Village District.

2.	The removal or disruption of historic, tradit ional, or significant structures or architectural elements shall be avoided or minimized .

3.	The conversion, conservation, and preservation of existing buildings and sites in a manner that
maintains the historic or distinctive character of a Village District is encouraged.


4.	The exterior of structures or sites shall be consistent with:

a .	The "Connecticut Historical Commission - The Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation and Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings", revised through 1990, as amended ;or

b.	The distinctive characteristics of the district identified in the Plan of Conservation and
Development.



5.	Proposed buildings or modifications to existing buildings shall be harmoniously related to their surroundings, the terrain in the district, and to the use, scale and architecture of existing buildings in the district that have a functional or visual relationship to a proposed building or modification.

6.	All spaces, structures, and related s ite improvements visible from public roadways shall be designed to be compatible with the elements of the area of the Village District in and around the proposed building or  modification.

7.	The color, size, height, location, proportion of openings, roof treatments , building materials, and landscaping of commercial or residential property,and any proposed signs and lighting,shall be evaluated for compatibility with the local architectural motif.

8.	Maintenance of views, historic buildings, monuments, and landscaping shall be encouraged.
 
Pre-Application Reviews

9.	ADMINISTRATIVE  PROVISIONS


9.1.	Pre-Application Reviews


1.	Prior to the submission of a formal application,the potential applicant is encouraged to present a preliminary plan for informal consideration by the City Planner,the Zoning and Building Official, City Staff,and/or the Commission.

2.	The optional pre-application plan is recommended to facilitate consideration of factors and problems that may be associated with a particular proposal before the applicant proceeds with preparation of official maps, plans and documents required for formal consideration by the Commission .

3.	Neither the pre-application plan nor the informal consideration by City Staff or the Commission, however,shall be deemed to constitute any portion of the official and formal procedure of applying for any approval as contemplated herein or under the provision of the Connecticut General Statutes.
 
Zoning/ Building Permit

9.2.	Zoning I Building Permit


9.2.A	Applicability

1.	A Zoning I Building Permit shall be obtained from the Zoning and Building Official prior to:

a.	.	Construction, reconstruction, alteration,extension, enlargement, relocation, or demolition of any building or structure: and

b.	Occupancy of any building or structure or for any change, extension, or alteration of any use.



2.		Nothing herein contained sha ll require any change in the plans,construction, or use of a building for which a Zoning I Building Permit has been issued or for which plans were on file with the Zoning and Building Official before the effective date of these Regulations.


9.2.B	B	Application  Procedures


2.	An application for a Zoning/ Building Permit shall be made on a form to be furnished by the
City .

3.	The application for a Zoning I Building Permit shall be accompanied by such information and
ex hibits as are required herein or may be reasonably required by the Zoning and Building Official in order that the proposal of the applicant may be adequately interpreted and judged as to its conformity with any approval of the Planning and Zoning Commission,the provisions set forth in the Zoning Regulations, and/or with a variance granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals .

4.	.	If required :
a.	An application for a Zoning I Building Permit shall include a certification that the lot is
on record by map or by deed, including the date of recording or is in a subdivision which has been approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission and a bond covering the cost of street improvements has been received.

b.	An application for a Zoning/ Building Permit shall include verification in writing from the engineer who designed the Site Plan that the site work has been completed
substant ially in accord with the approved Site Plan.



5.	In the event that any Zoning I Building Permit is issued based on incorrect information or the
specific conditions of approval are not strictly adhered to, such permit shall be null and void.
 
Zoning/ Building Permit

9.2.C	Approval

1.	No Zoning I Building Permit,order, or other zoning enforcement document shall be issued unless they are in full compliance with the provisions of these Regulations and any conditions of approval established by the Planning and Zoning Commission and/or Zoning Board of Appeals and until they are signed by the Zoning and Building Official.

2.	Any Zoning/ Building Permit issued to the contrary shall be null and void, and any work
undertaken or use established pursuant to such approval or issuance shall be lawful.


3.	If site improvements cannot be completed because of weather, or if an alteration does not require the vacating of the premises,or if a portion of a building or development is ready for occupancy before the completion of the entire building or development ,or for other pertinent reasons, a conditional Zoning/ Building Permit may be issued by the Zoning and Building Official for a period not to exceed 180 days, provided that a bond shall be posted or a portion of the posted bond shall be retained in an amount sufficient to cover the cost of completing the remaining site improvements . Upon satisfactory completion of the remaining site
improvements and the written request of the applicant, the Commission shall then release the
bond.


9.2.D	Notice Provisions


1.		In accordance with CGS Section 8-3(f), the recipient of a Zoning / Building Permit may publish notice of issuance of the Zoning/ Building Permit in order to establish the appeal period per CGS Section 8-7 .

2.	Any such notice to be published by the recipient shall contain:

a.	A description of the building, use or structure and its location;

b.	The identity of the applicant; and

c.	A statement that an aggrieved person may appeal to the Zoning Board of Appeals in
accordance with the provisions of CGS Section 8-7.
 

9.3.	Site Plan Application


9.3.A	Purpose


A Site Plan is intended to provide the Commission with information that will enable it to determine that the proposed building, use or structure is consistent with the requirements of these Regulations.

9.3.B	Applicability


1.	Unless exempted by Section 9.3.B.2, a Site Plan application shall be submitted :

a.	For any activity designated in the Regulations as requiring Site Plan approval.

b.	For any activity designated in the Regulations as requiring Special Permit approval.

c.	In a residential zone,for any construction, development,ex pansion, or major alteration of a multi-family use or any non-residential use.

d.	In a non-residential zone, for any construction, development ,expansion, or major alteration of any use including any alteration in site improvements such as parking, pedestrian or vehicle circulation, public utilities or reduction of landscaping.

2.	Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 9.3.B.1, the following activities shall be exempt from the requirement to submit a formal Site Plan application (a Zoning Permit may still be required) provided that a plot plan drawn to scale is s ubmitted to the City Planner and/or Zoning and Building Official showing any changes from existing conditions, such as new signs, revised parking arrangements and entrances, new lighting and similar alterations:

a.	.	when the structure or use is existing and will not be enlarged.

b.	when a change from a principal use to another principal use permitted by site plan approval does not require the enlargement of an ex isting building or structure or an increase in site improvements.

c.	when off-street parking requirements for the new use are not more than those required for the existing use.

d.	when the site is in the Industrial/Technology Zone or the Technology Campus zone and:

i.	the use is permitted,
ii.	the use will not result in a structure over 10,000 square feet,
iii.	the use will not result in a structure over 25 feet in height, and
iv.	the site to be built upon does not abut or lie directly across the street from a residential zone. The term "site" for the purpose of this provision is defined as the area of disturbance to support the structure's construction and associated improvements and may be limited to a confined area of an overall property that may also abut or lie adjacent to or across the street from non-residential zones .
 

3.	The City Planner may conduct the formal Site Plan application review for Principal Uses Permitted by Site Plan within a non-residential district and when not associated with a Coastal Area Management Zone and approve, condition, modify,or deny the application. The City Planner may refer any Site Plan application to the Commission in accordance with these regulations .

4.	Modifications to an approved site plan shall be reviewed by the City Planner or Commission, as may be applicable, and are classified as either a minor or major using the guidelines outlined below .

a.	.	Minor modifications are reviewed by the City Planner and generally meet the following:


i.	The changes are required because of conditions that were unknown at the time the approval was issued and have only a de minimis impact;
ii.	The City Planner determines that the changes satisfy and are consistent with the intent of these regulations and the findings made by the decision-making body in connection w ith the approval and have only a de minimis impact; and
iii.	The changes involve, as applicable: a change in placement of a building or structure which is less than 5 feet away from the approved placement; the use of materials, components, features or materials (site or building) which do not adversely affect any prior design review decisions; a modification in site improvements that produces no additional negative environmental effects.

b.	Major modifications exceed the above guidelines as determined by the City Planner and may require review by the Commission.

9.3.C	Submission  Requirements


1.	A Site Plan application sha ll be submitted to the Commission or its agent and sha ll include a completed application form and the appropriate fee.

2.	A Site Plan application sha ll be accompanied by detailed plans that conform to Appendix A and comply with the requirements of these Regulations, signed and sealed by an appropriate professional,for review by the Commission and its designees.

3.	The Site Plan application and accompanying plans shall be subm itted to the City Planner three
weeks prior to any regularly scheduled meeting of the Commission.


4.	In addition to paper copies of the application a PDF of the initial application and all subsequent rev isions and supplemental materials shall be provided.

5.	The Commission may, in accordance with the requirements of these Regulations, require the submission of additional information as deemed necessary to make a reasonable review of the app lication .

6.	Site Plans will not be considered complete unless they contain all applicable information as
required by these Regulations.
 


9.3.D	D	Proceedings


l.	The date of receipt for the Site Plan application shall be determined in accordance with Section 9.9.B.

2.	An incomplete Site Plan application may be denied in accordance with Section 9.9.C.


3.	If a Site Plan application involves an activity regulated pursuant to CGS Section 22a-36 to 22a-45, inclusive, the applicant shall submit an application for a permit to the Inland Wetlands Commission not later than the day such Site Plan application is filed with the Commission .

4.	Notification by the Commission may be required to:
a.	Adjoining municipalities in accordance with the requirements of Section 9.9.1.

b.	Water companies in accordance with the requirements of Section 9.9.J.

c.	The Department of Energy and Environmental Protection (DEEP) in accordance with the requirements of Section 9.9.K.

5.	Whenever a Site Plan application is required in conjunction with another application requiring a public hearing (such as a Special Permit application or a Zone Change application) :

a.	.	The time period for acting on the Site Plan application shall coincide with the time period for acting on the related application; and

b.	A decision on the application shall be rendered within sixty-five days after the close of the public hearing on such other application except that the applicant may consent to one or more extensions of such period provided the total period of any such extension or extensions shall not exceed sixty-five days.

6.	In accordance with CGS Section 8-7d,whenever approval of a Site Plan is the only approval required, a decision on the application shall be rendered within sixty-five (65) days after the date of receipt of such Site Plan application except that the applicant may consent to one or more extensions of such period provided the total period of any such extension or extensions shall not exceed sixty-five (65) days.

7.	In accordance with CGS Section 8-7d, if an application involves an activity regulated pursuant to CGS Section 22a-36 to 22a-45, inclusive and the time for a decision by the Commission would elapse prior to the thirty-fifth {35th) day after a decision by the Inland Wetlands Commission, the time period for a decision shall be extended to thirty-five (35) days after the decision of such agency.

8.	The Commission may hold a public informational meeting on a Site Plan application.


9.	In accordance with CGS Section 8-3(g), a Site Plan shall be pres umed approved unless a decision to deny or  modify it is rendered within the applicable time period specified above.
 


10.	The applicant may,at any time prior to action by the Commission, withdraw such application .


11.	To assist with its consideration of an application for Site Plan approval,the Commission may refer the plan to any department, agency or official it deems appropriate,to review and comment upon those technical matters which are the concern or responsibility of such department, agency or official.

12.	The Commission may require additional technical assistance in evaluating an application, the
expense of which is to be paid by the applicant as set forth in City Ordinance.


13.	If any modification of the Site Plan is made by the Commission as part of its approval, revised copies of the Site Plan reflecting such modification shall be submitted to,and approved by, the City Planner prior to the issuance of any Zoning/ Building Permit relating to the application.

9.3.E	Considerations


1.	On a Site Plan application involving an activity regulated pursuant to CGS Section 22a-36 to 22a- 45, inclusive, the Commission shall:

a.	Wait to render its decision until the Inland Wetlands Commission has submitted a report
with its final decision; and

b.	Give due consideration to any report of the Inland Wetlands Commission when making its decision.

2.	On a Site Plan application involving notice to other agencies,the Commission shall give due consideration to any report or testimony received.

3.	On a Site Plan application involving new construction or remodeling of the exterior of a building within an area designated within these Regulations as a "village district" in accordance with CGS Section 8-2j,the Commission shall give due consideration to any report or testimony received from the village district consultant.

4.	.	Before the Commission approves a Site Plan application,it shall determine that the application
is in conformance with these Regulations .


5.	The Commission shall not approve any Site Plan for any property on which there ex ists a zoning
violation , unless such Site Plan application will remedy such violation .


6.	The Commission may require,as a condition of approval, such modifications of the proposed plans as it deems necessary to ensure that structures and the uses of land area arranged in a manner that protects the public health, safety and general welfare.

7.	In cases where the development of the property is proposed to be undertaken in phases, the Commission may grant Site Plan approval limited to each phase of development. Each phase shall be capable of independent ex istence without the completion of succeeding phases.
 


8.	As a condition of approval of a Site Plan, the Commission may require:

a.	Submission of a passbook savings account, a statement savings account, or similar cash equivalent to guaranty the installation and performance of erosion and sediment control measures at the site.

b.	A performance guaranty in accordance with Section 9.9.L of these Regulations in an amount and in a form satisfactory to the Commission to guaranty satisfactory completion of drainage facilities, parking and access facilities, buffer strips and any other site improvements other than buildings.

9.	When a performance guaranty is required by the Commission :

a.	.	The applicant shall provide a cost estimate of improvements to be guaranteed, together
with a description of the basis for the estimate.

b.	The performance guaranty shall become effective prior to issuance of a building permit or prior to the commencement of site work,whichever comes first, and shall stay in effect until the Site Plan is 100% complete .

9.3.F	Action Documentation


1.	The Planning and Zoning Commission sha ll approve, modify and approve,or disapprove a Site Plan.

2.	Whenever it grants or denies a Site Plan application,the Commission shall state upon its record the reason(s) for its decision . Commission disapproval shall include written findings upon any Site Plan element found contrary to the provisions or intent of these Regulations.

3.	The Commission shall send, by certified mail, a copy of any decision to the applicant within fifteen (15) days after such decision is rendered.

4.	The Commission shall cause notice of the approval or denial of a Site Plan to be published in a newspaper having a substantial circulation in Groton within fifteen (15) days after such decision is rendered and, in any case where such notice is not published by the Commission,the person who submitted such plan may provide for the publication of such notice within ten (10) days thereafter .

5.	On any application for which the period for approval has expired and on which no action has been taken, the Commission sha ll send a letter of approval to the applicant within fifteen (15) days of the date on which the period for approval ex pired and such letter of approval shall state the date on which the five-year completion period, as set forth in Section 9.3.H below, ex pires.
 

9.3.G	Following Approval


1.	Following approval of a Site Plan application and expiration of the appeal period, one (1) "mylar"
copy and four (4) paper copies of each approved plan shall,unless waived by the Commission, be submitted to the City Planner for signature by the Chairman:

a.	Each such plan shall bear the seal and signature of the appropriate professional(s) which
prepared the drawing;

b.	Each such plan shall contain a signature block where the Chairman of the Commission can indicate the approval of the Commission and state the date on which the five-year period for completing all work  in connection with such Site Plan, as set forth in Section
9.3.H below, ex pires; and

c.	At least one (1) sheet shall bear a copy of the decision letter of the Commission and any
other town regulatory agencies authorizing the activity .


2.	Such plans shall be so filed before any Zoning/ Building Permit is issued for the activities shown on the approved plan.

3.	Within an area designated within these Regulations a s a "village district" in accordance with CGS Section 8-2j (such as the Waterfront Business Residence District), no approval shall be effective until a copy thereof,certified by the Commission, containing the name of the owner of record, a description of the premises to which it relates and specifying the reason(s) for its decision, is recorded by the applicant in the land records, indexed in the grantor's index under the name of the record owner.

4.	All site improvements shall be carried out in strict compliance with the Site Plan approved by
the Commission . Minor amendments to the approved Site Plan may be approved only in writing by the City Planner upon the written request of the applicant.  All other amendments or modifications to the Site Plan shall require the approval of the Commission.

5.	All conditions and improvements shown on the approved Site Plan shall continue in force as long as the use indicated on the approved Site Plan shall be in operation, regardless of any change in ownership of the property.

6.	When a performance guaranty has been provided, the performance guaranty shall be held by the Commission and the Commission shall not release the performance guaranty until it has determined that all of the improvements subject to the guaranty have been satisfactorily completed .

7.	The Commission may require an "as built" A-2 survey of the lot showing the location of the buildings and improvements to determine compliance with the approved Site Plan.
 

9.3.H	Expiration and Completion


1.		Unless otherwise provided in CGS Section 8-3, all work in connection with a Site Plan shall be completed within five (5) years after the date of approval of the Site Plan and failure to complete all work within such five-year period shall result in automatic ex piration of the approval of such Site Plan unless the Commission shall have granted an extension of the time to complete such work.

2.	Provided the applicant has requested an extension prior to the expiration of the completion period, the Commission may grant one (1) or more extensions of the time to complete all or part of the work in connection with the Site Plan provided the total extension or extensions shall not exceed ten (10) years from the date of approval of such Site Plan unless otherwise provided in CGS Section 8-3 .

3.	The Commission may condition the approval of such extension on a determination of the
adequacy of any performance guaranty in accordance with Section 9.9.L or other surety .
 

9.4.	Special .Permit Application


9.4.A	Applicability


1.	A Special Permit application shall be submitted for any activity designated in the Regulations as requiring Special Permit approval.

2.	Notwithstanding the above, a Special Permit sha ll not be required for interior renovations and modifications for space within a structure previously approved by the Commission as a Specia l Permit,provided  that:

a.	The City Planner finds that the proposed use is substantially similar to what was
previously approved by Special Permit;

b.	There are no exterior alterations to the structure or the site;

c.	There is no additional requirement for parking under Section 7.1 of these Regulations.


9.4.B	Submission  Requirements


1.	A Special Permit application, in accordance with the requirements as specified in these Regulations, shall be submitted to the Commission or agent and shall include a completed application form and the appropriate fee.

2.	Each application for a Special Permit shall be accompanied by a Site Plan application, as
s pecified in Section 9.3, unless the City Planner finds that there are no physical changes proposed to the site or any building or structure and the submission of a Site Plan application is not necessa ry for the Commission to evaluate the proposal.

3.	The Special Permit app lication, Site Plan app lication, if applicable, a nd accom panying plans
sha ll be s ubmitted to the City Planner three weeks prior to any regularly sched uled meeting of
the Commission.


4.	In addition to paper copies of the application a PDF of the initial application and all subsequent revisions and supplemental materials s ha ll be provided.

5.	.		Each app licat ion for a Special Permit shal l be accompanied by a written statement descr  ibing the proposed use in s ufficient detail to permit the Commission to determ ine whether the proposed use complies w ith these Regulations.

6.	The Commission sha ll not be required to hear an application relating to the same request or substantially the sa me request, more than twice in a twelve-month period.

7.	Notwithstanding the basic s ubmissio n requirements,the Commission may require the submission of such additional information as the Commission deems necessary to determ ine compliance of the proposed use wit h these Regulations.
 

9.4.C	Proceedings


1.	The date of receipt of the Special Permit application shall be determined in accordance with Section 9.98.

2.	An incomplete Special Permit application may be denied in accordance with Section 9.9.C.


3.	If a Special Permit application involves an activity regulated pursuant to CGS Section 22a-36 to 22a-45, inclusive,the applicant shall submit an application for a permit to the Inland Wetlands Commission not later than the day such application is filed w ith the Commiss ion.

4.	.	The Commission shall hold a public hearing on the Special Permit application and:

a.	Publish a legal notice in accordance with the requirement s of Section 9.9.F of these Regulations;

b.	Require that the applicant give notice to property owners in accordance with the requirements of Section 9.9.G of these Regulations;and

c.	Require that the applicant post a sign on the property in accordance with the
requirements of Section 9.9.H of these Regulations .

5.	.	Notification by the Commission may be required to:

a.	Adjoining municipalities in accordance with the requirement s of Section 9.9 .1.

b.	Water companies in accordance with the requirements of Section 9.9.J.

c.	.	The Department of Energy and Environmental Protection (DEEP) in accordance with the requirements of Section 9.9.K.

6.	Unless otherwise provided in CGS Section 8-7d,the Commission shall process the Special Permit as follows:

a.	.	The public hearing shall commence within sixty-five (65) days after receipt of the application ;

b.	The public hearing shall be completed within thirty -five (35) days after such hearing
commences;

c.	.	All decisions shall be rendered within sixty-five (65) days after completion of such hearing;and

d.	The applicant may consent to one or more extensions of any period specified herein
prov ided the total extension of all such periods s hall not be for longer than sixty-five
(65) days.
 

7.	Notwithstanding the provisions of this Section, if an application involves an activity regulated pursuant to CGS Section 22a-36 to 22a-45, inclusive, and the time for a decision by the Commission would elapse prior to the thirty-fifth day after a decision by the Inland Wetlands Commission, the time period for a decision shall be extended to thirty-five (35) days after the decision of such agency .

8.	The applicant may,at any time prior to action by the Commission ,withdra w such application.



9.4.D	Special Permit Criteria


In considering an application for a Special Permit, the Commission shall evaluate the application w ith respect to the following factors , except that the Commission may determine that some factors may not be applicable to certain type s of applications:



1.	Zoning Purposes


Whether the proposed use or activity is consistent with the purposes of the Regulations.


2.	Environmental Protection and Conservation


Whether appropriate consideration has been given to the protection, preservation, and/or enhancement of natural,scenic, historic,or unique resources including, where appropriate, the use of conservation restrictions to protect and permanently preserve natural,scenic, historic, or unique features which enhance the character and env ironment of the area.

3.	Overall Neighborhood Compatibility


Whether the proposed use will have a detrimental effect on neighboring properties or the development of the district .

4.	Suitable Location For Use


Whether the nature and intensity of the operations involved with the use or resulting from the proposed use and the location of the site are such that the use will be in harmony with the appropriate and orderly development in the district in which it is located.

5.	Appropriate Improvements


Whether design elements of the proposed development (such as location, type,size and height of buildings and other structures, parking, access, landscaping,screening,lighting, signage,etc.) will be suitable in relation to the site characteristics ,the style of other buildings in the immediate area,and the existing and desirable future character of the neighborhood in which the use is located.
 




6.	Suitable Transportation Conditions


Whether the streets and other rights-of-way are or will be of such s ize,condition and capacity (width,grade, a lignment and visibility) to adequately accommodate the traffic to be  generated by the particular proposed use and not create traffic problems .

7.	Adequate  Public Utilities and Services


Whether the provisions for water supply, sewage disposal, storm water drainage, and emergency access conform to accepted engineering practices,comply with all standards of the appropriate regulatory authorities, and will not unduly burden the capacity of such facilities.

8.	Long Term Viability


Whether adequate provision has been made for the sustained maintenance of the proposed development (structures, streets,and other improvements) .

9.	Nuisance Avoidance


Whether the use, configurat ion, design and/or hours of operation are appropriate in order to contro l noise,light,odors, parking visibility, unsightly appearance, erosion, water contamination and storm-water runoff on the site and in relation to the surrounding area .

10.	Plan of Conservation and Development


Whether the proposed use or activity is in accordance with or facilitates achievement of one or more of the goals, objectives, policies, and recommendations of the Plan of Conservation and Development,as amended.

11.	Mitigation


Whether adequate provisions have been made to moderate or mitigate neighborhood impacts by limiting the intensity of use of the property (including, without limitation, such considerations as the area devoted to the use, the number of people involved in the use,the number of events or activities proposed, the hours of operation, etc .) or by modifying the location or configuration of the proposed use.
 

9.4.E	Decision Considerations


1.	Special Permit uses are declared to possess such special characteristics that each shall be considered on an individual basis subject to the standards and requirements of these Regulations.

2.	The applicant shall bear the burden of demonstrating that the applicable Special Permit criteria
in Section 9.4.D of these Regulations are addressed.


3.	Before the Commission approves a Special Permit application, it shall determine that the application:

a.	Has, in the sole discretion of the Commission, satisfied the applicable Special Permit criteria in Section 9.4.D of these Regulations; and

b.	Is in conformance with other applicable provisions of these Regulations; and

c.	Is in harmony with the purposes and intent of these Regulations.

4.	For a Special Permit application involving an activity regulated pursuant to CGS Section 22a-36 to 22a-45, inclusive, the Commission shall:

a.	Wait to render its decision until the Inland Wetlands Commission has submitted a report
with its final decision; and

b.	Give due consideration to any report of the Inland Wetlands Commission when making its decision.

5.	On a Special Permit application involving notice to adjoining municipalities under Section 9.9.1 or notice to water companies under Section 9.9.J or notice to DEEP under Section 9.9.K, the Commission shall give due consideration to any report or testimony received.

6.	On a Special Permit application involving new construction or remodeling of the exterior of a building within an area designated within these Regulations as a "village district" in accordance with CGS Section 8-2j (such as the Waterfront Business Residence District or the Five Corners District), the Commission shall give due consideration to any report or testimony received from the village district consultant.

7.	In granting a Special Permit, the Commission may determine whether and to what extent permitted uses may be undertaken and stipulate such conditions as are reasonable and necessary to:

a.	.	Protect or promote the public health, safety or welfare;

b.	Protect or promote public convenie nce or property values; or

c.	Enhance overall neighborhood compatibility.
 

8.	A Special Permit and any condition attached to the granting of a Special Permit shall:

a.	Remain with the property as long as the Special Permit use is in operation; and

b.	Continue in force and effect regardless of any change in ownership of the property.

9.	The Commission shall not approve any Special Permit for any property on which there exists a zoning violation, unless such Special Permit application will remedy such violation.

9.4.F	Action Documentation


1.	The Planning and Zoning Commission shall approve, disapprove or approve with conditions the proposed Special Permit.

2.	Whenever it acts on a Special Permit application, the Commission shall state upon its record the reason(s) for its decision.

3.	In granting a Special Permit, the Commission may attach such conditions and safeguards as may be required to protect the public health, safety and genera l welfare and to ensure continued compliance with these Regulations. Such conditions and safeguards may include, but shall not be limited to:

a.	A maximum number of employees.

b.	Hours of operation.

c.	Periodic review and renewal of the Special Permit by the Commission to determine continuing comp liance therewith.

d.	Conservation restrictions necessary to protect and permanently preserve unique natural site features.

e.	Soil erosion and sediment control measures in accordance with the provisions of Section
7.8.C.10.

f.	A bond in accordance with the provisions of Section 9.9 .L.

4.	Whenever it acts on a Special Permit application, the Commission may:

a.	Establish a condition that commencement of the use or construction begin within a certain time frame.

b.	Require a performance guaranty in accordance with Section 9.9.L of these Regulations in an amount and in a form satisfactory to the Commission, based upon a cost estimate of improvements provided by the applicant, to ensure satisfactory completion of s ite improvements other than buildings.
 

5.	Any decision to grant a Special Permit shall:

a.	State the name of the owner of record;

b.	Contain a description of the premises to which it relates;

c.	Identify the Section and/or Section of the Regulations under whic h the Special Permit
was granted; and

d.	Specify the nature of the Special Permit; and

e.	State the conditions of approval, if any.


6.	The Commission shall send, by certified mail,a copy of any decision on a Special Permit
applicat ion to the applicant within fifteen (15) days after such decision is rendered.


7.	The Commission shall cause notice ofthe approval or denial of the Special Permit application to be published within fifteen (15) days afte r such decision is rendered in a newspaper having a substantia l circulation in Groton.

8.	In any case in which such notice is not published within the fifteen-day period after a decision has been rendered,the person who submitted suc h application may provide for the publication of such notice within ten (10) days thereafter.

9.4.G	Following Approval


1.	A Special Permit granted by the Commission sha ll become effective only upon the filing of a copy, certified by the Commission, in the land records of the Town of Groton, in accordance with the provisions of CGS Section 8-3d.

a.	A Special Permit shall expire if the Special Permit approval is not filed in the Town of Groton's land records within 1(one) year after approval.

b.	A Special Permit shall expire if the Site Plan associated therewith is not submitted and approved within 12 months following approval of the Special Permit.  However, an extension of not more than six months may be granted by the Commission upon written request by the applicant prior to the ex piration date.

2.	A Special Permit shall authorize only the particular use or uses specified in the Commission's approval.

3.	Failure to strictly adhere to the documents, plans, terms,conditions and/or safeguards approved by the Commission or its staff shall be a violation of these Regulations. The Zoning and Building Official shall notify the applicant in writing of the specifics of the non-compliance and shall provide a reasonable time period for compliance therewith. Unless there is full compliance within such time period, the Commission may,following a duly advertised public hearing, rescind and revoke such Special Permit.
 

4.	.     An approved Special Permit may be amended or modified, provided that application shall be made in the same manner as the original application and subject to the same procedures for approval.

a .	Amendments to the Special Permit found to be of a minor nature or which would not substa ntially alter the Special Permit as determined by the City Planner may be approved by the Commission without another public hearing.

b.	Amendments to the Special Permit which wou ld substantially alter the Specia l Permit or increase the existing building coverage or gross floor area of the use by 10% or more may be approved by the Commission only after a public hearing.

5.	The Special Permit uses as set forth in these Regulations are deemed to be permitted uses in their respective districts when granted by the Commission, subject to compliance with the requirements and standards set forth in this Section in addition to all other requirements of these Regulations .

6.	Unless otherwise established by the Commission, a Special Permit, along with any conditions and safeguards attached thereto,shall remain w ith the property as long as the use allowed by the Special Permit remains in operation.  Such conditions and safeguards shall continue in force regardless of any change in ownership of the property.
 

9.5.	Text Amendment Application


9.5.A	Applicability


A Text Amendment  application shall be submitted for any proposal to amend, change, or repeal any Section of these Regulations.

9.5.B	Submission  Requirements


l.	A Text Amendment application shall be submitted to the Commission or agent and shall include a completed application form and the appropriate fee. The Commission shall not be required to pay a fee for a text amendment application made on its own initiative.

2.	A Text Amendment application shall be accompanied by ten (10) copies of the wording of the existing and proposed text and any other supporting information, including reason(s) for the proposed amendment.

3.	The Text Amendment application and accompanying documents shall be submitted to the City Planner three weeks prior to any regularly scheduled meeting of the Commission.

4.	In addition to paper copies of the application a PDF of the initial application and all subsequent
revisions and supplemental materials shall be provided.


5.	The Commission shall not be required to hear any petition or petitions relating to the same text changes,or substantially the same text changes, more than once in a period of twelve (12) months unless it finds, on facts presented in writing, that a material change in the situation justifies this action . A change of ownership of property or any interest therein shall not be deemed a material change in the situation for the purpose of this Section.

9.5.C	Proceedings


1.	The date of receipt for the Text Amendment application shall be determined in accordance with Section 9.9.B.

2.	An incomplete Text Amendment application may be denied in accordance with Section 9.9.C.


3.	The Commission shall hold a public hearing on the Text Amendment  application and:

a.	.	Shall cause a legal notice to be published in accordance with the requirements of Section 9.9.F of these Regulations .

b.	May publish the full text of such proposed regulation in full in such notice.
 

4.	In accordance with CGS Section 8-3b, the Commission shall give written notice to the regional planning agency when any portion of the land affected by a regulation change affecting the use of a zone is located within five hundred (500) feet of the boundary of another municipality and:

a.	Such notice shall be made by certified mail, return receipt requested.

b.	Such notice shall be made not later than thirty {30) days before the public hearing.

c.	The regional planning agency may submit its advisory findings and recommendations to the Commission at or before the hearing but if such report is not submitted, it shall be presumed that such agency does not disapprove of the proposal.

5.	Notification by the Commission may be required to:

a.	.	Adjoining municipalities in accordance with the requirements of Section 9.9.1.

b.	Water companies in accordance with the requirements of Section 9.9.J.

c.	The Commissioner of Connecticut Department of Energy and Environmental Protection in accordance with CGS Section 22a-104 .

6.	The Commission may refer any application to amend these Regulations to any City department or  other agency the Commission deems appropriate and may request any such department or agency to submit a report to the Commission on matters that are of concern to such department or agency.

7.	A copy of the proposed regulation shall be filed by the applicant in the office of the City Clerk for public inspection at least ten {10) days before the public hearing.

8.	The Commission shall process the Text Amendment application within the period of time
provided under CGS Section 8-7d:

a.	.	The public hearing shall commence within sixty-five (65) days after receipt of the
application.

b.	The public hearing shall be completed within thirty -five (35) days after such hearing commences.

c.	All decisions shall be rendered within sixty-five (65) days after completion of such
hearing.

d.	The applicant may consent to one or more extensions of any period specified herein provided the total extension of all such periods shall not be for longer than sixty-five
(65) days.

e.	These provisions shall not apply to any action initiated by the Commission regarding adoption or change of any Regulation .

9.	The applicant may, at any time prior to action by the Commission ,withdraw such application.
 

9.5.D	Decision Considerations

l.	The Commission shall act upon the changes requested in such Text Amendment application.

2.	On a Text Amendment application involving notice to adjoining municipalities under Section
9.9.1 or notice to water companies under Section 9.9.J or notice to a regional planning agency under CGS Section 8-3b:

a.	Any report received from those agencies shall be made a part of the record of such
hearing.

b.	The Commission shall give due consideration to any report or testimony received.

3.	In making its decision the Commission shall:

a.	.	Consider w hether the text amendment will be in accordance with a comprehensive plan (the overall scheme of the zoning map and these Regulations); and

b.	Take into consideration the Plan of Conservation and Development,prepared pursuant to CGS Section 8-23 .

4.	Before approving any Text Amendment application, the Commission shall determine that the proposed regulation change will aid in:

a.	.	Protecting the public health, safety, welfare, or property values; a nd

b.	Attaining the purposes of these Regulations.

5.	In accordance with CGS Section 8-3(b), such text change(s) shall be established,changed or repealed only by a majority vote of all the members of the Commission except that, if a protest against a proposed change is filed at or before a hearing with the Commission, signed by the owners of twenty (20) percent or more of the area of the lots affected by such proposed change or of the lots within five hundred feet in all directions of the property included in the proposed change, such change shall not be adopted except by a vote of two-thirds of all the members of the Commission.
 

9.5.E	Action Documentation

l.	Whenever the Commission acts upon a Text Amendment application, it shall state upon the
record the reason(s) for its decision.

2.	In accordance with CGS Section 8-3a(a), the Commission shall state on the record its findings on consistency of a proposed zoning regulation or text change with the Plan of Conservation and Development, as may be amended .

3.	As part of approving a Text Amendment application:

a.	The Commission shall establish an effective date for the Regulation change provided that a notice of the decision of the Commission shall have been published in a newspaper  having a substantial  circulation  in Groton before such effective date;or

b.	If an effective date is not so specified, the text amendment shall become effective upon publication in a newspaper having a substantial circulation in Groton.

4.	The Commission shall send, by certified mail, a copy of any decision on a Text Amendment application to the applicant within fifteen (15) days after such decision is rendered.

5.	The Commission shall cause notice of the approval or denial of the Text Amendment application to be published within fifteen (15) days after such decision is rendered in a newspaper having a substantial circulation in Groton.

6.	In any case in which such notice is not published within the fifteen-day period after a decision has been rendered, the person who submitted such application may provide for the publication of such notice within ten (10) days thereafter.

9.5.F	F	Following Approval

A regulation amendment approved by the Commission shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk before
the effective date .
 

9.6.	Zone Change Application

9.6.A	Applicability

A Zone Change application (a map amendment) shall be submitted for any proposal to alter the zoning designation of any parcel(s) of land or part thereof.

9.6.B	Submission  Requirements

1.	A Zone Change application shall be submitted to the Commission or agent and shall include a completed application form and the appropriate fee. The Commission shall not be required to pay a fee for a zone change application made on its own initiative.

2.	A Zone Change application shall be accompanied by:

a.	.	Two (2) full-size copies of a map at an appropriate scale indicating existing and proposed
zone boundaries;and

b.	Ten (10) copies of an 11x 17 map indicating existing and proposed zone boundaries.

3.	The Zone Change application and accompanying documents shall be submitted to the City
Planner three weeks prior to any regularly scheduled meeting of the Commission.

4.	In addition to paper copies of the application a PDF of the initial application and all subsequent revisions and supplemental materials shall be provided.

5.	The Commission shall not be required to hear a Zone Change application that has been rejected within one (1) year from the date of rejection unless it finds, on facts presented in writing, that a material change in the situation justifies this action. A change of ownership of property or any interest therein shall not be deemed a material change in the situation for the purpose of this Section.

9.6.C	Proceedings

1.	The date of receipt for the Zone Change application shall be determined in accordance with Section 9.9.B.

2.	An incomplete Zone Change application may be denied in accordance with Section 9.9.C.

3.	The Commission shall hold a public hearing on the Zone Change application and shall:

a.	Publish a legal notice in accordance with the requirements of Section 9.9.F ofthese Regulations;

b.	Require that the applicant post a sign on the land affected by the application in accordance with the requirements of Section 9.9.G of these Regulations; and

c.	Require that the applicant give notice to property owners in accordance with the requirements of Section 9.9.H of these Regulations.
 

4.	In accordance with CGS Section 8-3b, the Commission shall give written notice to the regional planning agency when any portion of the land affected by a map change is located within five hundred (500) feet of the boundary of another municipality and:

a.	Such notice shall be made by certified mail, return receipt requested .

b.	Such notice shall be made not later than thirty {30) days before the public hearing.

c.	The regional planning agency may submit its advisory findings and recommendations to the Commission at or before the hearing but if such report is not submitted, it shall be presumed that such agency does not disapprove of the proposal.

5.	Notification by the Commission may be required to :

a.	Adjoining municipalities in accordance with the requirements of Section 9.9.1.

b.	Water companies in accordance with the requirements of Section 9.9.J.

c.	The Commissioner of Connecticut Department of Energy and Environmental Protection in accordance with CGS Section 22a-104 .

6.	The Commission may refer any application to amend the zoning map to any City department or other agency the Commission deems appropriate and may request any such department or agency to submit a report to the Commission on matters that are of concern to such department or agency .

7.	A copy of the proposed zoning map change shall be filed by the applicant in the office of the City Clerk for public inspection at least ten (10) days before the public hearing.

8.	The Commission shall process the Zone Change application within the period of time provided under CGS Section 8-7d :

a.	.	The public hearing shall commence within sixty-five (65) days after receipt of the application .

b.	The public hearing shall be completed within thirty-five (35) days after such hearing
commence s.

c.	All decisions shall be rendered within sixty-five (65) days after completion of such
hearing.

d.	The applicant may consent to one or more extensions of any period specified herein provided the total extension of all such periods shall not be for longer than sixty-five
(65) days.

e.	These provisions shall not apply to any action initiated by the Commission regarding a zoning map change.

9.	The applicant may, at any time prior to action by the Commission, withdraw such application.
 

9.6.D	Decision Considerations

l.	The Commission shall act upon the changes requested in such Zone Change application.

2.	On a Zone Change application involving notice to adjoining municipalities under Section 9.9.I or notice to water companies under Section 9.9.J or notice to a regional planning agency under CGS Section 8-3b:

a.	.	Any report received from those agencies shall be made a part of the record of such
hearing.

b.	The Commission shall give due consideration to any report or testimony received from
such agencies.

3.	Changes in zone district boundaries:

a.	Should be in harmony with the Plan of Conservation and Development for Groton, as amended.

b.	Shall,where possible,constitute logical extensions of like or compatible districts.

c.	Where appropriate, follow property lines or geo-physical features.

4.	Except where a proposed zone change is to extend an existing zoning district, no area of land having less than 300 feet of frontage on one street shall be changed from one zoning district to another zoning district except by the affirmative vote of two-thirds of the Commission.

5.	Before approving any Zone Change application, the Commission shall determine that the proposed regulation change:

a.	.	Is in accordance with the Plan of Conservation and Development;

b.	Is suitable for the intended location;

c.	Will aid in protecting the public health, safety, welfare, or property values; and

d.	Will aid in attaining the purposes of these Regulations .

6.	In accordance with CGS Section 8-3(b), such zone change(s) shall be established, changed or repealed only by a majority vote of all the members of the Commission except that, if a protest against a proposed change is filed at or before a hearing with the Commission, signed by the owners of twenty (20) percent or more of the area of the lots affected by such proposed change or of the lots within five hundred feet in all directions of the property included in the proposed change,such change shall not be adopted except by a vote of two-thirds of all the members of the Commiss ion.
 

9.6.E	Action Documentation

1.	Whenever the Commission acts upon a Zone Change application,it shall state upon the record :

a.	The reason(s) for its decision.

b.	Its findings on consistency of the proposed zone change with the Plan of Conservation
and Development, as amended .

2.	As part of approving a Zone Change app licat ion:

a.	The Commission shall establish an effect ive date for the zoning map change provided that a notice of the decision of the Commission shall have been published in a newspaper having a substantial circulation in Groton before such effective date; or

b.	If an effective date is not so specified, the zoning map change shall become effective
upon publication in a newspaper having a substantial circulation in Groton.

3.	The Commission shall send, by certified mail, a copy of any decision on a Zone Change
application to the applicant within fifteen (15) days after such decision is rendered.

4.	The Commission shall cause notice of the approval or denial of the Zone Change application to be published within fifteen (15) days after such decision is rendered in a newspaper having a substantial circulation in Groton.

5.	In any case in which such notice is not published within the fifteen-day period after a decision has been rendered, the person who submitted such application may provide for the publication of such notice within ten (10) days thereafter.

9.6.F	Following Approval

1.	A zoning map change approved by the Commission shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk before the effective date.

2.	When a zone boundary is changed by the Commission, such change shall:

a.	.	Be made on the Zoning Map; and

b.	Be noted w ith an entry on the Zoning Map as follows: "Amended to (date)," such date to be the effective date of the boundary amendment.
 

9.7.	Zoning Board of Appeals


9.7.A	Powers and Duties

The Zoning Board of Appeals (ZBA) shall have all the powers and duties prescribed by Chapter 124, Section 8 and by Chapter 250, Section 14 of the Connecticut General Statutes, and by these Regulations, which powers and duties are summarized and more particularly specified below. None of the following provisions shall be deemed to limit any of the authority of the ZBA that is conferred by general law.

1.	Adopt Rules - The ZBA shall have the authority to adopt such rules and procedures as may be deemed necessary to carry into effect the provisions of these Regulations .

2.	Appeals - The ZBA sha ll have the authority to hear and decide upon any appeal where it is alleged that there is an error in the order, requirements, decision or determination of the Zoning and Building Official. No question of hardship shall be involved in such an appeal, and the action of the ZBA thereon shall be limited to the question of whether or not, and to what extent such order, requirement, decision, or determination was a correct interpretation of the subject provision of these Regulations.

3.	Extend Zone - Where a zone boundary line divides a lot in a s ingle ownership at the time of the passage of these Regulations, the ZBA sha ll have the authority to permit a use authorized on either portion of such lot to extend to the entire lot, but not more than 25 feet beyond the boundary line of the zone in which such use is authorized.

4.	Var iances - The ZBA shall have the authority to vary or adjust the strict application of these Regulations in only those cases where the unusual size, shape or topography of a lot or other unusual physical conditions pertaining to it or to any building situated thereon make it impossible to strictly apply a specific provision of these Regulations to such lot without resulting in exceptional difficulty or unusual hardship, so that substantia l justice sha ll be done and the public health, safety and welfare secured.

5.	Location of Motor Vehicle Uses - The ZBA shall have the authority to hear and decide upon all requests for Certificates of Approval for motor vehicle sales, services and repair uses in accordance with the Connecticut General Statutes . Such authority shall not supe rsede the Commission's authority to hear and decide upon requests for Special Permits for such uses.

9.7.B	Appeals

1.	All appeals to the ZBA from an order,requirement, decision or determination of the Zoning and Building Official sha ll be taken within s uch time as is prescribed by a rule adopted by the ZBA.

2.	.	Such appea ls sha ll be made in writ ing on a form prescribed by the ZBA,in conformance with Appendix C, and shall be accompanied by a filing fee to cover the cost of processing the appeal.

3.	Each appeal shall fully set forth the circumstances of the case, sha ll refer to the specific provision of the Regulations involved and shall exact ly set forth the interpretation that is claimed and the gro unds on which it is claimed that the same should be granted.
 

4.	No appeal shall be granted that would alter, revise or otherwise change any of the conditions attached to the granting of a Special Permit by the Commission, if such conditions are more restrictive than otherwise provided for in these Regulations or if such conditions do not refer to specified standards in these Regulations.

9.7.C	Variances

1.	All applications for variances shall be submitted in writing in a form prescribed by the ZBA and in conformance with Appendix C. The ZBA may deny an application for incomplete information having been submitted.

2.	Each variance application shall fully set forth the circumstances of the case, shall refer to the specific provision of the Regulations involved and shall exactly set forth the details of the variance that is applied for and the grounds on which it is claimed that the same should be granted.

3.	The Board may require the filing of a survey prepared by a land surveyor licensed to practice in Connecticut when the variance is dimensional in nature or such survey is integral to the understanding of the application .

4.	The date of receipt for the Va riance application shall be determined in accordance with Section 9.9.B.

5.	The ZBA shall hold a public hearing on all appeals and applications for variances, sha ll decide thereon, and shall give notice of the date of the public hearing on the application and on its decision in accordance with the provisions of the Connecticut General Statutes.

6.	To assist with its consideration of an appeal or applicat ion, the ZBA may refer such appeal or application to any department, agency or official it deems appropriate, to review and comment upon those technical matters w hich are the concern or responsibility of suc h department , agency or official.

7.	All va riance applications shall be referred to the Planning and Zoning Commission at least
fourteen (14) days prior to the date assigned for a public hearing on that request and :

a.	The Planning and Zoning Commission, or its staff, may submit an advisory opinion on such referrals prior to the public hearing.

b.	Any finding of the Planning and Zoning Commission, or its staff, shall be read into the
record of the public hearing.

c.	The failure of the Planning and Zoning Commission, or its staff, to submit a report to the Zoning Board of Appeals shall not prevent the Zoning Board of Appeals from reaching a decision on any matter before it.

8.	The applicant may, at any time prior to action by the Commission, w ithdraw suc h application.
 

9.	The concurring vote of four (4) members of the Board shall be necessary to vary the applicat ion of the Zoning Regulations .

10.	No variance shall be granted by the ZBA unless it finds:

a.	.	That there are specia l circumstances or conditions, fully described in the findings of the ZBA, apply ing to the lot or structure for which the variance is sought, which are peculiar to such lot or structure and do not apply genera lly to lots or structures in the neighborhood and which have not resulted from any willful act of the applicant subsequent to the date of adoption of the regulation from which the variance is sought , whether in vio lation of the provisions herein or not;

b.	That, for reasons fully set forth in the findings of the ZBA,the aforesaid circumstances or conditions are such that the particular application of the provisions of these Regulations would deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of the lot or structu re, that the granting of the variance is necessary for the reasonable use of the lot or structure,and that the variance as granted by the ZBA is the minimum adjustment necessary to accomplish this purpose;

c.	That the granting of the variance shall be in harmony with the general purposes and
intent of these Regulations and the City's Plan of Conse rvation and Development and
sha ll not be injurious to the neighborhood or otherwise det rimenta l to the public health,
safety and welfare;and;

d.	That the granting of the variance is not based upon the nonconformity of neighboring lots, uses, buildings or structures,nor upon a financial or economic hardship.

11.	Whenever the ZBA grants a variance , it shall include in its minutes as part of the record the reason for its decision,the specific provision of these Regulations which was va ried, the extent of the variance and the specific ha rdship upon which its decis ion was based.

12.	In exercising any of its authority,the ZBA may attach any conditions and safeguards as may be
required to protect the public health, safety and general welfare ,and to ensure ongoing comp liance with these Regulations . Violation of such conditions and safeguards shall be deemed to be a vio lation of these Regulations and any variance granted with the prescribed conditions or safeguards sha ll be subject to revocation by the ZBA if the said conditions or limitations are not adhered to strictly provided that, before the ZBA may revoke its action in granting such variance(s), it shall hold a public hearing thereon, of which the applicant and property owner in each case shall be given notice and afforded an opportunity to be hea rd.

13.	Any variance granted by the ZBA shall become effective upon its filing by the applicant in the Town land records.

14.	Any variance granted by the ZBA which is not recorded within one yea r from its effective date shall be null and void .

15.	If the ZBA denies a variance , it s hall not be required to hear an application for the same variance or substantia lly the same variance for a period of twelve months after the date of denial, unless
 

the circumstances assoc iated with the application have substantially changed.  A change in
ownership of property or any interests therein shall not be deemed a substantial change.

16.	No variance shall be granted that would alter, revise or otherwise change any of the conditions attached to the granting of a Special Permit by the Commission, if such conditions are more restrictive than otherwise provided for in these Regulations or if such conditions do not refer to specified standards in these Regulations.

9.7.D	Use Variances

1.	Use variances may be granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals only in the Industrial zone.

2.	No use variance shall be granted by the ZBA which would permit:

a.	A  use prohibited either  implicitly or explicitly by these Regulations;

b.	The expansion of a non-conforming use;

c.	The number of dwelling units on a lot to exceed the maximum allowed in the district in
which the lot is located;or;

d.	A use otherwise allowed by Special Permit in the district in which the use is located.

3.	.	No use variance shall be granted where a dimensional variance would relieve the exceptional
difficulty or unusual hardship.

4.	Prior to a public hearing on any application for a use variance, the ZBA shall transmit the application to the Commission for its review and comment.  Any report submitted by the Commission to the ZBA shall be read into the record of the public hearing of the subject application .
 
Administration and Enforcement

9.8.	Admin istration and Enforcement

9.8.A	Enforcement

1.	These Regulations shall be adm inistered a nd enforced by the Zoning and Building Official or his/her designee who is hereby empowered to cause any building, structure, place or premises to be inspected and examined and to order in writing the remedying of any condition found to exist therein or thereon in violation of any provisions of these Regulations or to iss ue in wr iting a cease and desist order to be effective immediately.

2.	The Zoning and Building Official shall keep records of all applications for Building Permits and Cert ificates of Occupancy,of all identifiable violations of these Regulations, of all inspections made under these Regulations, and of all notices of violation served by him/her and the actio n taken thereon .

3.	The owner or agent of a building or premises where a violation of any provision of these Regulations has been committed or exists; or the lessee or tenant of an entire building or an entire premises where s uch violation has been committed or exists; or the owner,agent, lessee or tenant of any part of a building or premises in which such violation has been committed or exists; or the agent, architect , builder, contractor, or any other person who commits, take s part or assists in any such violation or who maintains any building or premises in wh ich any s uch violation exists sha ll be subject to penalties in accordance with the provisions of CGS Section
8-12, as may be amended.

9.8.B	Penalties

1.	Any perso n shall be subject to penalties in accordance with the provisions of CGS Sectio n 8-12, as may be amended, who:

a.	Having been served by the Zo ning a nd Building Official with an order to discontinue any such violation, fails to comply with such order w ithin 10 days after such service; or;

b.	Having been se rved with a cease and desist order with respect to a violation involving grading of land or removal of earth, fails to comply with such order immediately; or;

c.	Co ntinues to violate any provision of these Regulations in the ma nner named in such order.
 
ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS
Procedural Details

9.9.	Procedural Details

9.9.A	Application Submittal Requirements

1.	Applications to the:

a.	Planning and Zoning Commission shall be submitted to the City Planner.

b.	Zoning Board of Appeals shall be submitted to the Zoning and Building Official.

2.	Applications shall be submitted on forms obtained from the City Planner or the Zoning and Building Official or agent for the type of application being subm itted.

3.	Applications shall be accompanied by the appropriate fee(s) except that the Commission or the City of Groton shall be exempt from any application fee.

4.	Applications shall be submitted with such supporting plans, materials, and other information as  required by these Regulations.

5.	Applications shall be signed by the applicant or an authorized agent.

6.	Applications shall be signed by the owner of the property affected unless the application is for a text change or is a map change initiated by the Commission.




7.	Applications should be subm itted at least fourteen (14) days prior to the monthly Commission meeting.

8.	If the application involves land located within an area designated in these Regulations as a village district, the applicant shall submit a narrative describing compliance with the guidelines of Section 8.4.F of these Regulations.

9.9.B	Date of Receipt

For the purposes of calculating statutory timeframes for processing applications, the date of receipt of an application to the Commission or the Board shall be:

1.	The day of the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Commission or the Board immediately following the day of submission of the application ;or

2.	Thirty-five (35) days after submission, whichever is sooner.

9.9.C	Incomplete Applications

1.		Each application shall be reviewed to determine whether the application is substantially complete .
 

2.	An application  requiring approval from the Commission or Board shall not be considered actually complete until all of the information as required by these  Regulations, the Commission, or the Board has been received by the Commission or the Board.

3.	An incomplete application or an application submitted without the requisite fee may be denied.

9.9.D	Sequence of Hearings

Where a proposed development or activity requires multiple applications, the Commission or the Board may conduct any public hearings simultaneously or in the order they deem appropriate.

9.9.E	Consultations

1.	On any application, the Commission or Board may seek the advice and opinion of other officials,
boards, or commissions to assist it in evaluating applications.

2.	In accordance with any ordinance adopted in accordance with CGS Section 8-lc, the Commission or Board may also, at the applicant's expense, retain a civil engineer, a traffic engineer, an environmental professional, an architect, a landscape architect, a professional land use planner, and/or other consultant(s) to review, comment, and guide its deliberations on any application.

3.	The Zoning a nd Building Official or the City Planner may make a preliminary determination of the need for such technical assistance to be provided by non-City personnel following a review of the application  provided that such preliminary determination shall be subject to review by the Commission or the Board.

4.	Prior to actually retaining such outside consultant(s), the Commission or the Board shall make findings that the nature and intens ity of the proposal may have a significant impact on Groton and that:

a.	.		City staff will not be able to complete a technical review of the application in a  timely fashion; or

b.	That the proposal is of such a nature as to require expertise not available from staff.

5.	The Commission, Board,Zoning and Building Official,or City Planner shall estimate the projected expense s for reviewing, evaluating and processing the application based upon information received from the potential consultant(s) and shall notify the applicant of such supplemental fee estimate .

6.	The applicant shall submit funds sufficient to cover the basic application fee plus the cost of the consultant review within fifteen (15) calendar days of being notified by the Zoning and Building Official or the City Planner and the application shall be deemed incomplete until the fee(s) have been submitted.

7.	Should the estimate of supplemental funds prove inadequate,the Commission, Board, Zoning
and Building Official, or City Planner shall recalculate the projected ex penses for reviewing,
 
ADMINISTRATIVE PRDVISIDNS
Procedural Details

evaluating and processing the application and notify the applicant of such supplemental fee estimate.

8.	The applicant shall submit funds sufficient to cover the supplemental fee estimate within fifteen
(15) calendar days of being notified by the Zoning and Building Official or the City Planner and the application shall be deemed incomplete until the fee(s) have been submitted.

9.	Any portion of the estimated processing fee not expended by the City on the project shall be refunded to the applicant upon completion of the review, evaluation and processing of the application.

10.	In accordance with any ordinance adopted in accordance with CGS Section 8-lc, the Commission or Board shall bill the applicant for any costs incurred by the City of Groton in processing the application in excess of the estimated processing fee(s) paid by the applicant and this bill shall
be paid by the applicant within fifteen (15) calendar days of such notice regardless of whether
the application is approved, denied, or withdrawn.

11.	No permits shall be issued until all processing fees are paid.

9.9.F	Notice by Newspaper

1.	When a public hearing is required by these Regulations or scheduled by the Commission or Board, the City shall cause notice of the hearing to be published in a newspaper having a substantial circulation in Groton.

2.	Such notice shall be published at least twice at intervals of not less than two (2) days, the first not more than fifteen (15) days, nor less than ten (10) days, and the last not less than two (2) days before the date of the hearing.

9.9.G	Notification to Property Owners

1.	When required by these Regulations, the applicant (other than the Commission which is exempt as per PA 06-80) shall notify owners of property within two hundred (200) feet of the subject property (including owners of all condominium units both on and adjacent to the subject property), whether inside or outside Groton, of a pending application by mailing a notice at least seven (7) days prior to the first scheduled hearing.

2.	At a minimum, such notice shall consist of:

a.	A description of the proposed activity;

b.	Notification of the date, time, and place of the first scheduled hearing.

3.	Proof of mailing forms from the United States Postal Service shall serve as evidence that the notice was given in accordance with this Section.

4.	The most recent Assessor's records on file in the Assessor's Office shall be utilized to determine the owner of each property for the purpose of this mailing.
 

5.	The applicant shall certify to the Commission or the Board prior to or at the public hearing that the required notices were mailed to all parties identified in Section 9.9.G.1.

6.	Prior to the first scheduled hearing regarding the application ,the applicant shall submit the following to the City or the application shall be considered incomplete:

a.	A copy of the complete package of information sent to abutters;

b.	A list of the abutters to whom the notices were sent;and

c.	Proof of mailing from the United States Postal Service.

9.9.H	Posting of Sign

1.	When required by these Regulations, the applicant shall post one or more signs at his or her expense, in conspicuous locations on the property or properties affected by the application.

2.	In the event any such property has frontage on or access to more than one street,there will be posted a minimum of one sign on each street on which the property has frontage or access.

The City Planner may require multiple signs for properties with frontage of more than two hundred (200) feet on any one street .

3.	The sign shall be no smaller than two feet high by three feet wide.

4.	The sign shall be approved by the City Planner prior to posting, installed at least seven (7) days prior to the public hearing and consist of the following content and format:


3'


Text: Helvetica Format: Bold
-- Height: 3 inches








Text:Helvetica Format: Normal
1----1--• Height: 1Yi inches
 

5.	The applicant shall file a written statement with the Commission at the time of the public hearing certifying that the required signs were posted as required by these Regulations.

6.	Failure to post and maintain the signs as required by this Section shall constitute grounds for continuation of the public hearing or denial of the application.

7.	Any signs shall be removed following the close of the public hearing.

9.9.1	Notification to Abutting Municipalities

1.	In accordance with CGS Section 8-7d(f), the Commission or Board shall notify the clerk of an adjoining municipality of any application concerning any project on any site in which:

a.	Any portion of the property affected by a decision is within five hundred (500) feet of the boundary of the adjoining municipality;

b.	A significant portion of the traffic to the completed project shall use streets within the adjoining municipality to enter or exit the site;

c.	A significant portion of the sewer or water drainage from the project shall flow through and significantly impact the drainage or sewerage system within the adjoining municipality; or

d.	Water runoff from the improved site shall impact streets or other municipal or private property within the adjoining municipality.

2.	Such notice shall be made by certified mail, return receipt requested and shall be mailed within seven (7) days of the day of the submission to the City of the application, petition, request or plan.

3.	No hearing shall be conducted on any such application unless the adjoining municipality has received the notice required under this Section.

4.	Such adjoining municipality may, through a representative, appear and be heard at any hearing on any such application, petition, request or plan.

9.9.J	Notification to Water Companies

1.	In accordance with CGS Section 8-3i, an applicant shall provide written notice to a water company  and the Commissioner  of Public Health when an application is filed with the Commission or Board concerning any project on any site that is within:

a.	An aquifer protection area provided such area has been delineated in accordance with CGS Section 22a-354c; or

b.	The watershed of a water company, provided such water company or said commissioner has filed a map with the Commission or the Board and on the Groton land records showing boundaries of the watershed.
 

2.	Such notice shall be made by certified mail, return receipt requested and shall be mailed not later than seven days after the date of the day of the submission to the City.

3.	Prior to the scheduled meeting regarding the application, the applicant shall submit the following to the City or the application shall be considered incomplete:

a.	A copy of the complete package of information; and

b.	Proof of mailing.

4.	Such water company and the Commissioner of Public Health may, through a representative, appear and be heard at any hearing on any such application, petition, request or plan.

9.9.K	Notification of DEEP

1.	If any portion of the property which is the subject of the application is located within a "shaded area" identified on the most current Natural Diversity Database maps for Groton, the applicant shall notify the Connecticut Department of Energy and Environmental Protection (DEEP) of the pending project.

2.	A report from DEEP shall be a required for any application for a Site Plan or a Special Permit for  property located within a "shaded area"  identified on the most current  Natural Diversity Database maps for  Groton.

3.	Any application submitted without a DEEP report shall be considered incomplete (see Section
9.9.C).

4.	Additional information is available on the DEEP website (www.ct.gov/deep).

9.9.L	Performance Guaranty

1.	Where a performance guaranty is required by any Section of these Regulations, an itemized estimate of the cost of the site improvements shall be prepared by the applicant, including a separate inflation factor for the estimated construction period, and shall be submitted to the Commission's Engineer for approval.

2.	The performance guaranty shall be posted with the City for an initial period of 18 months unless an extension of time shall be requested by the applicant and granted by the Commission.

3.	Where a performance guaranty is required by any Section of these Regulations, it shall be in one
(1)	of the following forms and the City Planner shall require evidence of compliance with the following standards before accepting any performance guaranty:

a.	Cash deposited with the City.

b.	Certified bank check to the order of the City when the amount of the check is fully insured by the FDIC.
 

c.	Bank deposit (such as a passbook savings account or a statement savings account) assigned irrevocably and solely to the City when the amount of the deposit is fully insured by the FDIC.

d.	Irrevocable letter of credit naming the City as sole beneficiary provided that:

i.	Such letter of credit shall be issued by, and drafts thereunder presentable at, a branch of a bank in Connecticut provided that;

ii.	Such bank is included in the most recent list issued by the Securities Valuation Office of the National Association of Insurance Commissioners  (or any successor office or organization, "NAIC") as a bank meeting NAIC standards for issuing letters of credit for reinsurance purposes; or

iii.	The long-term unsecured debt of such bank (or the long-term unsecured debt of its holding company) is rated BBB or better by Standard & Poor's rating service or Baa or better by Moody's rating service.

iv.	The terms and conditions of such letter of credit shall be acceptable in form and substance to the City; and

v.	If and when such letter of credit shall, through the passage of time, have less than thirty (30) days remaining until its expiration or lapse date, and such date shall not have been extended, the City may draw under said letter of credit the full amount thereof and the proceeds may be retained by the City as the bond.

e.	Other form of bond (such as a performance bond) acceptable in form and substance to the City.

4.	Upon the completion of at least 25%, 50% or 75% of the cost of the bonded site improvements, the applicant may request in writing a reduction of the bond. The Commission shall cause the site to be inspected by the City Planner, the Commission's Engineer, and/or other appropriate City officials to determine if the portion of the required site improvements for which the reduction is being requested has been satisfactorily completed in accordance with the approved Site Plan. Based upon these findings, the Commission may authorize the reduction of such bond.

5.	No portion of any required performance guaranty shall be released by the Commission or the City Planner until:

a.	A release has been requested, in writing, by the applicant;

b.	The applicant's engineer or surveyor has certified to the City, in writing, that an appropriate level of improvements in relation to the requested release have been satisfactorily completed in accordance with approved plans;
 

c.	If such release is a final release, the applicant's engineer or surveyor has submitted a set of detailed "Record" plans on mylar, that all improvements and other work are in accordance with approved plans; and

d.	the City Planner has confirmed, in writing, that the appropriate level of improvements in relation to the requested release have been satisfactorily completed and that all conditions and requirements of the Commission's approval have been satisfied.

6.	In accordance with CGS Section 8-3, if the person posting a performance guaranty requests a release of all or a portion of such performance guaranty, the Commission or the City Planner shall, not later than sixty-five days after receiving such request:

a.	Release any such performance guaranty or portion thereof, provided the Commission or the City Planner is reasonably satisfied that the improvements for which such performance guaranty or portion thereof was posted have been completed, or

b.	Provide the person posting such performance guaranty with a written explanation as to the additional work that must be completed before such performance guaranty or portion thereof may be released.

7.	Before the release of a performance guaranty, the Commission:

a.	May require the applicant to submit "as-built" drawings; and

b.	May require that the applicant post a maintenance performance guaranty to be retained for a period of two years after vegetative cover and plantings have been installed in order to guarantee the survival of landscaping and to ensure any other relevant improvements.

8.	Any cost of collecting a performance guaranty, including without limitation, attorney's fees, bank fees, and other collection fees and expenditures, shall be for account of the applicant and may be deducted from amounts released.

9.9.M	Beneficiaries of a Trust

Any person who makes an application to the Commission or Board pertaining to real property, the record title to which is held by a trustee of any trust, shall file with said application a sworn statement disclosing the name(s) of the equitable owner (s) of such real property or the beneficiary(ies) of the trust.
 

Appendix A: Site Plan Requirements


Sheet Size	24" x 36"; (12" x 18" or 18" x 24" if approved in advance by City
Planner)
Number of Plan Sets	The number of plans submitted shall be determined by the City
Planner depending on staff referrals.

When approval of a Site Plan is required under these Regulations, application for approval shall contain the following minimum documentation. Additional information may be required by the City Planner at time of, or following, application submission:

A.	A completed application form(s), fee, and a written statement of the proposed use of the
building, structure or use of property for which the application is made.

B.	Locations and use of structures in any residential zone abutting the site or lying immediately across the street from the site of the proposed use and within 100 feet thereof and the approximate distance of any street intersections w ithin 500 feet of the site of the proposed use.

C.	A Zoning Table outlining the required bulk zoning and dimensional requirements of the zone and
the proposed dimensions or calculation associated with each requirement .

D.	The following note:

"Afoundation  location as-built drawing shall be submitted to the City Planner following completion of the foundation's  installation and prior to backfill and the construction of any vertical walls or other features  attached to the foundation  structure.  Said plan shall depict the location of all foundation  walls and finished  elevation of the top of all foundation  walls when the elevation varies and demonstrate the location is consistent with the approved plans.   The foundation  location as-built shall be prepared  in accordance with Sec. 20-300b-2 (b) (1) and Sec. 20-300b-4 of the Department of Consumer Protection Concerning Survey and Map Standards, conforming to A-2 and T-2 classes of accuracy and shall be signed & sealed by a licensed site surveyor registered to do business in the State of Connecticut with appropriate references attesting  to the above noted standards  and accuracy."

E.	A ll plans s hall be prepared, signed, and sealed by a Connecticut registered engineer, surveyor, architect, or landscape architect, whichever is appropriate. All Site Plans shall be prepared at a scale of not more than 40 feet to 1inch and each plan shall include:

1.	Date, north arrow, numerical and graphical scale;
2.	Sheet title and sheet number;
3.	Property address as depicted on the assessor's card;
4.	Signature and sea l of the professional responsible for the preparation of the drawing, as
applicable;
5.	The following s ignature block:
 

CITY OF GROTON: APPROVED  PLAN
The plans upon which this stamp is affixed are approved. All work must conform to the representations made herein and other applicable documents or conditions.  It is the applicant's responsibility to secure additional permits as may be required. Any modifications to these plans required in order to secure other permits or address field conditions during construction must first be approved by the City Planner or Planning and Zoning Commission, as may be applicable, and prior to commencing with said improvements.




Chairman	Date




F.	The Planning and Zoning Commission may require approval of the Site Plan by any City of Groton agency, department, and/or official, other than the Planning and Zoning Commission or the Zoning and Building Official of said City; however, the approval of such agency, department, and/or official shall be obtained by the applicant.

G.	As part of the Site Plan requirement in all zones, sidewalks shall be provided along all street frontages where such sidewalks are absent. Such walks shall be S feet wide and built to City of Groton Highway Department specifications. The Commission shall require such walks to be extended a reasonable distance beyond the site frontage in order to connect to existing walks. Such extensions shall not exceed a total of 100 feet.

H.	Drawings shall include enough detail to demonstrate, to the satisfaction of staff and the Commission that all improvements are in compliance with all applicable local, state and federal land use, building and fire codes. General statements that compliance will be achieved following site plan approval or at time of building permit application will not be accepted.

I.	All drawings shall be collated and edge bound. The following minimum information shall be provided along with the completed Site Plan Application & Fee and depicted on its own drawing as noted below or as otherwise approved by the City Planner:

1.	Site Surveys.  Provide a Property Survey in accordance with Sec. 20-300b-2 (b) (1) of the Department of Consumer Protection Concerning Survey and Map Standards, conforming to A-2 Class of Horizontal Accuracy; and a Topographic Survey in accordance with Sec. 20-300b-4 (a) of the Department of Consumer Protection Concerning Survey and Mop Standards, conforming to T-2 Vertical Class of Accuracy.  Both surveys shall be signed & sealed by a licensed site surveyor registered to do business in the State of Connecticut with appropriate  references attesting to the above noted standards and accuracy.   In addition to the minimum  requirements to meet the above standards the surveys shall
include:

a.	The name of abutting property owners & location of intersecting property lines;
 
b.	All existing improvements including buildings, pavement, utilities (above and below grade), fences, walls, curbing, walkways, etc.;

c.	Existing vegetation and trees with a diameter of 12 inches or more, as measured at the base located on site;

d.	Existing contours at 2 feet intervals and appropriate spot elevations;

e.	Limits of wetlands and watercourses as delineated by a licensed CT Soil Scientist;

f.	Limits of Special Flood Hazard Areas;

g.	Limit of Moderate Wave Action (LiMWA) Boundary Line

h.	Coastal resources;

i.	The general location of existing buildings within fifty feet of the property line situated on other properties;

j.	Location of significant physical/natural features on and within 100 feet of the Lot;

k.	Edge of roadways and other existing improvements within the public right of way for the entire Lot frontage (both sides of the street) extending 100' beyond the corner of the Lot;

I.	Easements and setback lines;

m.	Existing deed restrictions or covenants applying to the Lot.

Information provided upon the Site Survey(s) shall be depicted on all plans noted below to convey the relationship of existing conditions to future Lot improvements.

2.	Demolition Plan showing all existing improvements and vegetation to be removed including limits of sawcut lines and construction fencing.

3.	Layout Plan depicting all proposed improvements, clearly labeled and corresponding to the applicable construction detail provided; critical dimensions provided for such items as walks, drives, setbacks, parking spaces, etc. to demonstrate code requirements (building and zoning). At minimum the Layout Plan shall depict the following proposed information:

a.	Building and structure locations and decks/balconies (including roof overhangs);

b.	Walks;

c.	Fences and Bollards;
 
d.	Pavement materials and markings;

e.	Curbing and parking;

f.	Handicap parking and ramps;

g.	Outdoor storage areas;

h.	Trash enclosures and mechanical equipment (i.e. HVAC, transformers, heat pumps, etc;

i.	Signage (including those used for traffic control);

j.	Setback lines and building/structure distance to property lines;

k.	Existing and proposed easements;

I.	Existing and proposed deed restrictions or covenants applying to the Lot.

4.	Sedimentation and Erosion Control Plan depicting the information contained upon the Layout Plan as required above and, at minimum, containing:

a.	Silt fence, hay bales, etc

b.	Temporary sedimentation trap (with supporting calculations)

c.	Stockpile areas

d.	Staging and storage of equipment

e.	Location of construction trailer and contractor parking

f.	Erosion control narrative and sequence of construction

g.	Inspection requirements and schedule

h.	Contact information for individual responsible for ES measures

i.	All other items necessary to conform to the requirements of Section 7.8 of these regulations.

5.	Stormwater Management Plan prepared by a CT licensed Professional Engineer demonstrating compliance with Section 7.7 of these Zoning Regulations and including the following:

a.	Grading and Drainage Plan(s) depicting at minimum:
i.	Proposed contours at a minimum of 2' intervals;
ii.	Spot elevations at high and low points, top and bottom of stairs and ramps, intermediate landings of ramps, top and bottom of all walls
 
(retaining and free standing);
iii.	All drainage structures, piping (including inverts, size, slope and material);
iv.	Stormwater facilities (above and below ground);
v.	Finished floor elevations of all structures;
vi.	Existing and proposed easements;
vii.	Existing and proposed deed restrictions or covenants applying to the Lot;
viii.	Location and base flood elevation of all Special Flood Hazard Areas;
ix.	Cut and fill calculations when material is to be imported to, or exported from, the Lot;
x.	Nature and character of material to be imported to, or exported from,
the Lot

b.	Stormwater report with supporting calculations and consistent with the provisions Section 7.7

c.	A narrative describing the methods of low impact development implemented into the plan

d.	Construction details of all materials and techniques used to control stormwater and address water quality

6.	Utility Plan showing all proposed electrical, telecommunications, fiber optics, sanitary sewer, water, transformers, and other above and below grade utilities, including those to remain.

7.	Landscape Plan, Tree Survey, Tree Protection Plan depicting the location of all plant material and protection measures. The plan shall include all proposed and existing features to remain, below and above grade utility improvements, signage and lighting in order to confirm no conflicts exist with proposed landscape materials. Plan shall also include a Landscape Schedule, provide on each landscape plan when more than one is necessary, and contain the following information:

a.	Plant Code or Symbol

b.	Scientific  Name

c.	Common Name

d.	Size at time of planting using American Nursery & Landscape Association standard size nomenclature

e.	Method of planting (i.e. container grown, balled and burlapped, etc)
 
f.	Notes as may be applicable to plant species

8.	Lighting Plan depicting the location of all exterior lighting, including those mounted on the exterior of a building. Provide lighting details and product cuts to demonstrate compliance with the zoning regulations. Lighting may be combined with the Site Layout Plan or Landscape Plan as long as legibility is not affected.

9.	Photometric Plan prepared by a Connecticut licensed professional engineer depicting foot candles on the ground, in relationship to all property lines and site improvements and demonstrating conformance with the zoning regulations. This plan must be separate from all other plans.

10.	Building Floor Plans with clearly labeled space/room uses, provide critical dimensions, location of windows, exterior and interior doorways, utility and storage rooms, location of utilities entering the building.

11.	Building Elevations (Including existing buildings with additions) depicting all exterior improvements and accurately illustrating roof lines, wall/roof height, window location and styles, siding, shutters, trim, roof/building mounted mechanical/utility equipment, etc.

12.	Phasing Plan, when the improvements upon the Lot will be constructed at different times, clearly showing the limits of each phase and associated improvements. Provide a schedule and duration of each phase.

13.	Construction details depicting the methods and means of installation of major site improvements.

14.	Information pertaining to development in a Special Flood Hazard Area, as applicable, and as outlined in Section 5.3 of these regulations.

15.	Additional items that may be required include:

a.	Traffic report and identification of necessary offsite improvements;
b.	Environmental reports;
c.	Architectural product samples;
d.	Noise study;
e.	Structural analysis;
f.	Geotechnical reports;
g.	Illustrative renderings;
h.	Cross section of buildings or site improvements;
i.	Other supporting information found necessary  by staff or the Planning and Zoning Commission.
 
Appendix  B: Coastal Site Plan Requirements

Sheet Size	24" x 36"; (12" x 18" or 18" x 24" if approved in advance by City
Planner)
Number of Plan Sets	The number of plans submitted shall be determined by the City Planner depending on staff referrals.

Coastal Site Plan Contents
1.	A Coastal Site Plan application and accompanying plans shall be submitted to the City Planner three weeks prior to any regularly scheduled meeting of the Commission.

2.	In addition to paper copies of the application a PDF of the initial application and all subsequent revisions and supplemental materials shall be provided .

3.	A coastal site plan shall include a plan showing the location and special relationship of coastal resources on and contiguous to the site; a description of the entire project with appropriate plans, indicating project location, design, timing and methods of construction; an assessment of the capability of the resources to accommodate the proposed site; evaluation of the potential beneficial and adverse impacts of the project and a description of proposed resources.

4.	"Any person submitting a coastal site plan, as defined above,shall demonstrate that the adverse impacts of the proposed activity are acceptable and shall demonstrate that such activity is consistent with the goals and policies of Section 22a-92 of the Connecticut General Statutes."

5.	To evaluate the potential impacts upon coastal resources the Commission or its designated agent may require the submission  of a stormwater  management  plan or soil erosion and sedimentat ion control plan prepared in accordance  with these  Regulations.

6.	Coastal Site Plan Action:


a .	The Board or Commission reviewing the coastal site plan shall, in addition to the discretion granted in any other sect ions of the Connecticut General Statutes or in any special act,approve, modify, condition or deny the activity proposed in a coastal site plan on the basis of the criteria listed in Chapter 444, Section 22a-106 of the Connecticut General Statutes. Further, pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes Section 22a-106(e), the reviewing commission must find that the proposed activity is consistent with all applicable goals and policies of Section 22a-92 and incorporate as conditions or modifications all reasonab le measures which would mitigate the adverse impacts of the proposed activity on both coastal resources and future water-dependent development  activities .

b.	The Board or Comm ission approving, modifying, conditioning or denying a coastal site plan on the basis of criteria listed above shall state in writing the findings and reasons for its action.

c.	In accordance with CGS Section 22a-105,fai lure to act on a coasta l site plan within 65
days of the date of receipt (plus any extensions)  shall be deemed a rejection.
 
Appendix  C:ZBA Application  Requirements

Sheet Size	Standard letter or legal size sheets of paper although plot plans prepared on larger sheets of paper may be accepted by the Zoning Board of Appeals, provided that such plot plans are duly certified.
Number of Plan Sets	8 plot plans

1.	All applications for variances shall show the location of the buildings on abutting property, drawn to the same scale as the plot plan and the specific location of all proposed buildings,if applicable . This does not in any way authorize trespassing for any purpose .

2.	.		No division of a lot, reduction in lot area, reduction in lot width, or relocation of common lot lines shall be considered by the Zoning Board of Appeals unless a certified plot plan is submitted with the application .

3.	No division of a lot which would reduce the area of the resulting lots below the minimum required lot area of the applicable zoning district shall be considered by the Zoning Board of Appeals unless the lot abuts a public sewer or the owner obtains a satisfactory sanitation report from the Ledge Light Health District and submits same with the application .

4.	All applications for approval of location for new gas stations, motor vehicle dealerships and motor vehicle repair garages shall be accompanied by an approved site plan and an a uthorized special permit.

5.	The Board may wa ive or modify any or all of the requirements set forth above.


6.	Failure of the applicant to meet any of the requirement s set forth in Sections 6.22 and 6.23 sha ll
in no event invalidate any decision made by the Board on the merits of such application .
 
Chronology of Text Amendments

	Section Affected	
Date		Number		Title		Description of Amendment	
5/15/75
	All		Adoption of Zoning Ordinance
12/1/16
	All		Comprehensive reorganization and amendments
12/21/17
	2.2	Definitions	A dded definition for Historic/Institutiona l Adaptive Reuse
	6.13 NEW	Historic/Institutiona IAdaptive
Reuse	New Sectio n
2/12/18
	4.3.C	Principal Uses Permitted by Site
Plan	New use Cultu ral/Historic Memorial Parklet
4/3/19
	All		Reformatting of page numbers, section titles and headers
	2.1.B.1	Common Terms	Added 'site'
	2.2	Definitions	Deleted incorrect subsect ion cross reference
	2.2	Definitions	Added definition of 'structural fill' to comp lement
amendme nts to 7.3
	4.1.C; 4.2.C;
4.3.C; 4.4.B;
4.5.B	Business and Industrial Zones	Added 'and City Planner'; see Section 9.3 for complementing  amendments
	4.1.J	Design  Considerations	Corrected cross reference to Section 8.4
	4.2.H	Design Considerations	Corrected cross reference to Section 8.4
	5.2.C	A pplicability	Added cross reference to Appendix B
	5.3	FP - Flood Protection Overlay
Zo ne	Vario us amendments to respo nd to State of Connecticut
building code revisions
	7.1.8	(Parking) Other Uses	Added item 'g. Mixed Use'
	7.3	Earthwor k and the Importing
and Expo rting of Earth Products	Va rious amendments to clarify importing and export ing rather tha n using the terms 'fill' and 'cut'; Amendments clarify applicability  of brining or removing earth products to a site
	7.8.C.10	Erosion and Se dimentation	added "planned,engineered and..." to distinguish that ES measures shou ld not only be instal led per the CT manual but also designed in accordance w ith the Manual
	9.3.B.2.b	Applicabil ity	Change of use only requires zoning permit based upon
listed thresholds
	9.3.B.2.d.iv	A pplicability	Defined 'site' for its use in this section only
	9.3.B.3 NEW	App licability	City Planner may review and approve site plans in non-
residential districts; CAM shall be reviewed by Commiss ion by CGS
	9.3.B.4	A pplicability	Defined minor v. major modifications
	9.3.C	Submission Requirements	Cross referenced Appendix A; clarified timing of submission and requirements
	9.4.B	Submiss ion Requ irements	Clarified timing of submission and requirements
	9.5.B	Submiss ion Requirements	Clarified timing of submission and requirements
	9.6.B	Submission Requirements	Clarified timing of submission and requirements
	9.7.C.l	Varia nces	Cross referenced Appendix C
	9.9.H	Posting of Sign	Added specific sign dime nsions and formatting
requirements
		Append ix A	Redraft of submission requireme nts
		Appendix B	Clarified timing of submission
9/2/20
	5.4	Planned Development Districts	Mixed Use Development Districts
	5.4.A;
5.4.A.1	Mixed Use Development Distr ict	Mixed-Use Development District ("MUDD") will be a
floating zone governed by a Master Plan
 

	Section Affected	
Date		Number		Title		Description of Amendment	
9/2/20
	5.4.A.2	Application Procedure for MUDD	Submitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission
	5.4.A .3	Public Hearing,Personal Notice,
and Action	
	5.4.A.4	Criteria for Decisions on Change of Zone and Master Plan	Genera l Findings and Site Plan Approval
	5.4.A.5	Specific Requirements for All MUDDs	
	5.4.A.6	Specific Requirements for Residential Development in a MUDD	
	5.4.A. 7	Specific Requirements for Commerc ia l and Mixed Use Development in a MUDD	
	5.4.A.8	Conformance to Recorded Documents	
	5.4.A.9	Amendment or Extension of Approved MUDDs	
	5.4.A .10	Commencement and Completion of Construction.	
	5.4.A.ll	Performance Bonds	
	5.4.A.12	Deeds	
	5.4.A.13	Outside Storage Applicab le to Uses in a Mixed Use
Development District	












 
 
CITY OF GROTON


SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS








































Planning and Zoning Commission Effective – December 1, 2016
 


Key Dates

The Subdivisions Regulations for the City of Groton were originally effective on November 2, 1965.

A comprehensive revision of the Subdivision Regulations was undertaken in 2015‐2016 and adopted with an effective date of December 1, 2016.





Key Concepts

A “DIVISION” ‐ A “division of land” is when a parcel of land is cut into two lots. This is sometimes referred to as a “free split.” Check with City Staff to see if your land qualifies for this option.  A “division” of land can be exempt from these Subdivision Regulations provided:
•	Each of the resulting lots complies with the zoning requirements; and
•	The parcel has not been previously divided since November 2, 1965.

A “SUBDIVISION” OR “RESUBDIVISION” ‐
•	A “subdivision of land” is when a parcel of land is cut into three or more lots.  A subdivision of land is subject to these Subdivision Regulations and requires approval by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
•	A “resubdivision of land” is when an approved subdivision is modified by changing the street layout, changing any area reserved for public use, or adding an additional building lot (see full definition in Section 2.03 of these Regulations) .  A resubdivision of land is subject to these Subdivision Regulations and requires approval by the Planning and Zoning Commission.





Key Resources

CITY STAFF ‐ The City Planner and other City Staff are available to help answer questions about the Subdivision Regulations or other relevant regulations. You may contact them at City Hall.

CGS SECTION 8‐25 ‐ Section 8‐25 of the Connecticut General Statutes may also provide useful information.

SURVEYORS / ENGINEERS ‐ Any division of property will need an accurate property survey.  There are a number of private surveyors and engineers in the area experienced with preparing the necessary documentation and shepherding an application through the process. You may already know of a surveyor or engineer or you can search for one on‐line.
 
 	TABLE OF CONTENTS 	




ARTICLE 1.00  INTRODUCTION	1
1.1	AUTHORITY	1
1.2	PURPOSES	1
1.3	APPLICABILITY	2
1.4	MODIFICATION OF STANDARDS	2
1.5	ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS.	3
ARTICLE 2.00  INTERPRETATION	4
2.1	INTERPRETATION OF REGULATIONS	4
2.2	USE OF TERMS	4
2.3	DEFINED TERMS	5
ARTICLE 3.00  PARCEL AND LOT REQUIREMENTS	10
3.1	LAND SUITABILITY	10
3.2	PROTECTION OF IMPORTANT FEATURES	11
3.3	FLOOD PROTECTION	11
3.4	LOT LAYOUT	12
3.5	OPEN SPACE	13
3.6	SOLAR ACCESS	16
3.7	SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL	16
ARTICLE 4.00  INFRASTRUCTURE REQUIREMENTS	17
4.1	STREETS	17
4.2	SIDEWALKS	25
4.3	DRIVEWAYS	25
4.4	SEWAGE	26
4.5	WATER.	26
4.6	FIRE PROTECTION	26
4.7	STORM DRAINAGE	27
4.8	WIRE UTILITIES	30
4.9	STREET LIGHTS	30
4.10	STREET TREES	30
 
ARTICLE 5.00  APPLICATION PROCEDURES	31
5.1	GENERAL	31
5.2	PRELIMINARY STAFF REVIEW (OPTIONAL)	32
5.3	PRELIMINARY COMMISSION REVIEW (OPTIONAL)	32
5.4	FORMAL SUBDIVISION APPLICATION	33
5.5	RECEIPT AND SCHEDULING	34
5.6	NOTICE PROVISIONS	35
5.7	PUBLIC HEARINGS	36
5.8	APPLICATION PROCESSING AND ACTION	37
ARTICLE 6.00  POST‐ APPROVAL PROCEDURES	38
6.1	FINALIZING APPROVED PLANS	38
6.2	PROVISION OF FINANCIAL GUARANTEE	39
6.3	SUBMISSION FOR SIGNATURE	40
6.4	FILING OF APPROVED PLANS	41
6.5	MODIFICATION OF APPROVAL	41
ARTICLE 7.00  CONSTRUCTION PROCEDURES	42
7.1	CONSTRUCTION ‐ EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL	42
7.2	CONSTRUCTION ‐ CLEARING AND GRADING	42
7.3	CONSTRUCTION OF IMPROVEMENTS	43
7.4	INSPECTION OF IMPROVEMENTS	44
7.5	PERIOD FOR COMPLETION OF IMPROVEMENTS	45
7.6	MONUMENTS AND MARKERS	46
7.7	FINAL ACCEPTANCE AND MAINTENANCE	47
A graphic illustrating the conceptual subdivision approval process is presented on the inside back cover of these Regulations.
 

ARTICLE 1.00	INTRODUCTION


1.1	AUTHORITY


These Regulations have been adopted by the Planning and Zoning Commission of the City of Groton, Connecticut pursuant to the authority conferred by Chapter 126 of the Connecticut General Statutes (CGS 8‐18 et seq.), as amended.


1.2	PURPOSES

These Regulations have been adopted to accomplish the purposes identified in Section 8‐25 of the Connecticut General Statutes (CGS) including:

1.	Promoting the orderly development of the City;

2.	Protecting the public health, welfare and safety;

3.	Ensuring that land to be subdivided is of such character that it can be used for building purposes without danger to health or the public safety;

4.	Making proper provision for water, sewage and drainage;

5.	Making proper provision for protective flood control measures;

6.	Ensuring that proposed streets are in harmony with existing streets, or proposed streets shown in the Plan of Conservation and Development, especially in regard to safe streets and intersections;

7.	Ensuring that proposed streets are arranged and of such width as to provide an adequate and convenient system for present and prospective traffic needs;

8.	Ensuring that open spaces, parks and playgrounds are provided when deemed proper by the Commission and in places deemed proper by the Commission;

9.	Making proper provision for soil erosion and sediment control;

10.	Making proper provision for the extent to and the manner in which streets shall be graded and improved and public utilities and services provided;

11.	Encouraging energy‐efficient patterns of development and land use, the use of solar and other renewable forms of energy, passive solar energy techniques, and energy conservation;

12.	Promoting the coordinated development of the community; and

13.	Guiding future growth and development in accordance with the Plan of Conservation and Development.
 
INTRODUCTION
APPLICABILITY


1.3	APPLICABILITY


1.	These Regulations shall apply to any subdivision or resubdivision of land within the City of Groton, Connecticut and set forth the required procedure for subdivision and re‐subdivision of land in the City of Groton.

2.	No subdivision of land shall be made and no land in any subdivision shall be sold or offered for sale until:
a.	An application for a plan of subdivision, prepared in accordance with the requirements of these regulations, has been approved by the Commission;
b.	The subdivision plans have been signed by the Chairman to indicate approval by the Commission; and
c.	The subdivision plans have been recorded in the office of the Town Clerk of the Town of Groton within the
time period specified in Section 6.04 of these Regulations.

3.	Any subdivision plan recorded on the land records without the subdivision having been approved by the Commission and the subdivision plans having been signed by the Chairman shall be null and void.



1.4	MODIFICATION OF STANDARDS


1.	Overview ‐ In accordance with the provisions of CGS Section 8‐26(a), the Commission may waive a regulation or standard contained in these regulations by the approval of a three‐quarters (3/4) vote of all members of the Commission.

2.	Modification of Design Standard ‐ Where the Commission finds that extraordinary hardships or practical difficulties may result from compliance with these Regulations, it may approve waivers to the design standards within these subdivision regulations so that substantial justice may be done and the public interest secured, provided that such waiver shall not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of these Regulations; and further provided the Commission shall not approve waivers unless it shall make findings based upon evidence presented to it in each specific case that:
a.	The granting of the waiver will not be detrimental to the public safety, health, or welfare or have a
significant adverse effect on other adjacent property;
b.	The conditions upon which the request for a waiver is based are unique to the property for which the
waiver is sought and are not applicable generally to other property;
c.	Because of the particular physical surroundings, shape or topographical conditions of the specific property
involved, a particular hardship to the owner would result, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience, if these Regulations are carried out.

3.	Procedure ‐ As part of granting any modification or waiver of a design standard, the Commission shall:
a.	Have received a specific written request from the applicant for the modification or waiver; and
b.	State upon the record its reasons for which such a modification or waiver was granted.
 
INTRODUCTION
ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS


1.5	ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS


1.	Application of General Statutes ‐ Definitions and all mandatory provisions governing public hearings and approval of plans set forth in these Regulations shall at all times be automatically superseded or modified by any of the provisions of Chapter 126 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as the same may be from time‐to‐ time amended, which are inconsistent with or expand or restrict the definitions and provisions for public hearings and approval of plans contained herein.

2.	Amendments ‐ In accordance with CGS Chapter 126, as amended, these regulations may be amended by the Planning and Zoning Commission after a public hearing called for such purpose. Notice of the public hearing shall be given by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality at least twice, at  intervals of not less than two (2) days, the first not more than fifteen (15) days nor less than ten (10) days, and the last not less than two (2) days prior to the date of such hearing and by sending a copy thereof by  registered or certified mail to the applicant if a person other than the Commission.

3.	Enforcement
a.	These Regulations shall be enforced by the Planning and Zoning Commission and/or its designated
representative(s).
b.	The Commission shall have the authority to determine whether the existing or proposed division of any
land constitutes a subdivision or resubdivision under the provisions of these Regulations.
c.	Any person making any subdivision of land without the approval of the Commission shall be fined as
provided by CGS Section 8‐25 et seq.

4.	Appeals ‐ Any person aggrieved by an action or decision of the Commission may appeal as provided by CGS Section 8‐8, as amended.

5.	Severability ‐ Should any section or provision of these Regulations be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional, invalid or unlawful; or become inoperative by virtue of the operability shall not affect the validity of these Regulations as a whole, or any part thereof other than the section or provision so declared to be unconstitutional, invalid or unlawful.

6.	Effective Date –
a.	The Subdivisions Regulations for the City of Groton were originally effective on November 2, 1965.
b.	A comprehensive revision of the Subdivision Regulations was undertaken in 2015 and adopted with an
effective date of December 1, 2016.
 
INTERPRETATION OF REGULATIONS

ARTICLE 2.00	INTERPRETATION


2.1	INTERPRETATION OF REGULATIONS


1.	In their interpretation and application, the provisions of these Regulations shall be the minimum requirements unless the context clearly indicates that such provisions are intended to be a maximum limitation.

2.	In the event that any conflict arises between the provisions of these Regulations and any other law, ordinance, easement, covenant, rule, regulation, or permit, the provision that establishes the greatest restriction or imposes the highest standard shall control.

3.	In the event that any conflict arises between any graphic or illustration contained in these Regulations and any text provision of these Regulations, the text shall control.


2.2	USE OF TERMS


1.	Definitions To Be Applied ‐ In the interpretation and enforcement of these Regulations, the words and phrases set forth in these Regulations shall be construed as defined in this Article, unless otherwise clearly qualified by their context.

2.	Specific Terms ‐ In the interpretation and enforcement of these Regulations, certain words contained herein shall be interpreted as follows:
a.	The word “shall” is mandatory and not discretionary.
b.	The word “may” is permissive.
c.	When not inconsistent with the context:
i.	Words in the present tense include the future and vice‐versa.
ii.	Words in the singular include the plural and vice‐versa.
iii.	Words in the masculine, the feminine, or the neuter include the others.
d.	The word “person” also includes a partnership, association, trust, corporation, limited liability company, or other legal entity.

3.	Terms Not Defined ‐ In the interpretation and enforcement of these Regulations, words not defined in this Article shall be interpreted by the Commission after consulting one or more of the following:
a.	The Zoning Regulations, as may be amended;
b.	The State Building Code, as may be amended;
c.	The Connecticut General Statutes, as may be amended;
d.	The “Illustrated Book of Development Definitions” (Rutgers University, Center for Urban Policy Research),
as may be amended;
e.	Black's Law Dictionary;
f.	A comprehensive general dictionary.
 


2.3	DEFINED TERMS


A‐2 Survey – Survey information meeting the standards for an “A‐2” survey as specified in the “Code of Recommended Practice for Standards of Accuracy of Surveys and Maps” by the State Board of Registration for Professional Engineers and Land Surveyors of the State of Connecticut.

Accelerated Erosion ‐ see “Erosion, Accelerated.”

Acre ‐ A land area equivalent to forty‐three thousand five‐hundred and sixty (43,560) square feet.

Applicant ‐ Any property owner, contract purchaser, person, firm, or other legal entity or their successor who shall create any subdivision or resubdivision, for the purpose of sale or building development or any person, firm,  or other legal entity that applies for a subdivision, either for themselves or as an agent for others.

Application ‐ The maps, prescribed forms duly and correctly completed, fees, reports, and any additional supporting data required by these Regulations for approval of a subdivision or resubdivision and submitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission.

City ‐ The City of Groton, Connecticut.

CGS ‐ Connecticut General Statutes.

Commission ‐ The Planning and Zoning Commission of the City of Groton, Connecticut.

Conservation Restriction ‐ An encumbrance on real property filed on the land records of the City for the protection of natural features, natural habitats, open space, buffer zones, scenic areas, historic sites, riding or walking trails, or similar purposes.

CTDOT ‐ Connecticut Department of Transportation.

Cul‐de‐sac ‐ See “Street, Cul‐De‐Sac”.

Date of Approval ‐ The date an application is considered approved based upon the latest of the following dates:
•	by reason of failure of the Commission to act within the statutory timeframe;
•	by affirmative action of the Commission under any provision of these Regulations; or
•	if a decision of the Commission is appealed, by conclusion of any appeal which results in a judgment approving or affirming approval of the application.

Developer ‐ see “Applicant.”

Development ‐ Any construction or grading activities to improved or unimproved real estate and includes but is not limited to the installation of required improvements and the disturbance of land related to the construction of a structure; installation of appurtenant utilities and access from the existing or proposed public right‐of‐way.

Director of Health ‐ The person or persons responsible for enforcement of the Public Health Code of the State of Connecticut within the City of Groton (Ledge Light Health District).
 

Disturbed Area ‐ An area where the ground cover is destroyed or removed leaving the land subject to accelerated erosion.

Drainage ‐ The controlled or uncontrolled removal or discharge of surface or ground water from land by drains, grading or other means which may include runoff controls to minimize erosion, reduce suspended solids and maximize groundwater recharge during and after construction or development.

Driveway ‐ A paved or unpaved way providing access from a street to a parcel or lot.

Elevation ‐ The height of a point above mean sea level based on the U.S. Coastal & Geodetic survey datum.

Easement ‐ A right of use for a specific purpose or purposes which one person or agency may have of a designated portion of land of another.

Engineer ‐ A professional engineer as defined in CGS 20‐299, licensed in the State of Connecticut, qualified to design and construct streets, utilities and structures.

Erosion ‐ The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by water, wind, ice or gravity.

Erosion, Accelerated ‐ Any increase over the rate of natural erosion as a result of a change in the natural cover or topography due to any activity or use of the land, including development.

Erosion and Sediment Control Manual ‐ The “Connecticut Guidelines For Soil Erosion and Sediment Control” as prepared by the Connecticut Council on Soil and Water Conservation in Cooperation with the Connecticut Department of Energy and Environmental Protection (2002), as amended.

FEMA ‐ Federal Emergency Management Agency.

Final Approval ‐ The approval of the Final Plan by the Commission under the provisions of CGS Section 8‐26, as amended.

Financial Guarantee ‐ A financial obligation and commitment acceptable in amount, form and substance to the City for the purpose of ensuring that improvements or obligations required by these Regulations or to be provided by the applicant will be completed.

Flood Plain ‐ That area designated as subject to periodic flooding by a flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (a “one‐hundred‐year‐flood”), consisting of the floodway and the floodway fringe of the one‐hundred‐year flood as shown on the Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps in the Flood Insurance Study, as amended, prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency.

Frontage ‐ The boundary of a lot abutting and having permitted vehicular access to an accepted public street or an approved street consistent with these regulations.

Grading ‐ Any excavating, grubbing, filling (including hydraulic fill) or stockpiling of earth materials or any combination thereof, including the land in its excavated or filled condition which results in a change of contour or elevation, either permanent or temporary.

Improvement ‐ Any change or alteration to the existing conditions of the subdivision site for the purpose of complying with these Regulations or rendering the site more suitable for development and/or habitation.
 

Lot ‐ A plot or parcel of land :
•	occupied, or capable of being occupied, by one (1) principal building and accessory buildings as allowed under the Zoning Regulations, and/or
•	a unit of land created from a larger tract of land for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale or building development, expressly excluding development for municipal, conservation or agriculture purposes.

Open Space ‐ Land set aside for conservation, recreation, park or play area.

Owner ‐ The person shown by the land records of the City of Groton to be the holder of the fee title.

Parcel ‐ The land contained within one continuous property line or a larger tract of land that is to be divided to create smaller lots.

Pavement ‐ That portion of the street line especially prepared for vehicular traffic and lying between curbs.

Plan ‐ The plan for a subdivision referred to in CGS Section 8‐25 and 8¬26, as amended, and prepared in accordance with the requirements of these Regulations.

Plan, Preliminary A tentative plan for a subdivision, submitted to the Commission for advice and recommendations only, and prepared in accordance with the requirements of these Regulations.

Plan of Conservation and Development ‐ A comprehensive plan for the future growth, protection and development of the City of Groton adopted by the Planning and Zoning Commission in accordance with CGS Section 8‐23.

Preliminary Plan See “Plan, Preliminary”.

Recreation Area ‐ Land dedicated for recreation, park, or playground purposes.

Regulations ‐ The Subdivision Regulations of the City of Groton, unless otherwise specified.

Reserve Strip ‐ A privately‐owned strip of land within a subdivision which could prevent, limit, or control access from land outside the subdivision to a street within or adjacent to the subdivision.

Resubdivision – As per CGS Section 8‐18, a change in a map of an approved or recorded subdivision (See “Subdivision”) if such change:
	affects any street layout shown on such map; or
	affects any area reserved thereon for public use; or
	diminishes the size of any lot shown thereon, and creates an additional building lot if any of the lots shown thereon have been conveyed after the approval or recording of such map.

Road ‐ See “Street”.

Sediment ‐ Solid material, either mineral or organic, that is in suspension, is or has been transported or has been moved from its site of origin by erosion.

Slope ‐ An inclined surface, typically expressed as a percent, representing the number of feet of vertical rise over a horizontal distance.
 

Soil ‐ Any unconsolidated mineral or organic solid material of any origin.

Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Plan ‐ A plan that is proposed to be implemented in order to minimize soil erosion and sedimentation resulting from development and includes, but is not limited to, a map and narrative.

Soil Scientist ‐ A person who is qualified as a soil scientist in accordance with the standards set by the United States Civil Service Commission.

Solar Energy Techniques ‐ Site design techniques which:
•	maximize solar heat gain, minimize heat loss and/or provide thermal storage within a building during the heating season, and/or
•	minimize heat gain and provide for natural ventilation during the cooling season.

State – The State of Connecticut. Statute ‐ Connecticut General Statutes.
Steep Slope – A grade in excess of twenty percent (20%).

Street ‐ A way (including highways, throughways, thoroughfares, parkways, avenues, roads, lanes, alleys, or other arteries of vehicular traffic, but not private driveways) which is permanently dedicated to movement of vehicles and pedestrians and providing the principal means of access to abutting property and which is:
•	a State highway;
•	a City street;
•	a private street; or
•	a street shown on a subdivision plan approved by the Commission.

Street, Accepted ‐ Any street which has become a public highway by virtue of official acceptance by the City of Groton.

Street, Approved ‐ Any street whose location has been approved by official action of the Commission.

Street, Cul‐De‐Sac ‐ A street having only one intersection with another street or only one (1) vehicular outlet, whose primary function is to provide access to abutting property.

Cul‐De‐Sac Street, Permanent ‐ A cul‐de‐sac street not designed to be extended into adjoining undeveloped land.

Cul‐De‐Sac Street, Temporary ‐ A cul‐de‐sac street designed to be extended into adjoining undeveloped land.

Street, Private ‐ A street which is not a State highway or an accepted street.

Street, City – See “Street, Accepted”.

Street‐Line ‐ The line separating the street right‐of‐way and adjoining lots or parcels.

Street Right‐Of‐Way ‐ That area of land between private properties over which a City street and its appurtenances has been built or that area reserved for the construction of a City street and its appurtenances.
 

Street Width ‐ The distance between property lines measured at right angles to the direction of the centerline of the street.

Subdivider ‐ see “Applicant.”

Subdivision – As defined in CGS Section 8‐18, the division of a tract or parcel of land into three (3) or more parts or lots made subsequent to the adoption of subdivision regulations by the Commission (November 2, 1965), for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale or building development expressly excluding development for municipal, conservation or agricultural purposes.  The word “subdivision” shall include re‐subdivision. See “Resubdivision”.

Surveyor ‐ A land surveyor as defined in CGS 20‐299, licensed in the State of Connecticut, qualified to practice the profession of land surveying.

Travelway ‐ That portion of the surface of the street intended to be used by vehicular traffic.

Turnaround ‐ The area at the end of a cul‐de‐sac street usually circular in shape, provided for the purpose of enabling vehicular traffic to reverse direction without having to back up.

Watercourses ‐ As set forth in the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations of the City of Groton, Connecticut, any rivers, streams, brooks, waterways, lakes, ponds, marshes, swamps, bogs, and all other bodies of water, natural or artificial, public or private, vernal, intermittent, or perennial, which are contained within, flow through, or border upon the City of Groton or any portion thereof.

Wetlands ‐ As set forth in the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations of the City of Groton, Connecticut, land, including submerged land, not regulated pursuant to CGS Sections 22a‐28 to 22a‐35 inclusive, as amended, which consists of any of the soil types designated as poorly drained, very poorly drained, alluvial or flood plain by the National Cooperative Soil Survey, as may be amended from time‐to‐time, by the Soil Conservation Service of the U.S. Department of Agriculture. Such areas may include filled, graded or excavated sites, which possess an aquic (saturated) soil moisture regime as defined by the USDA Cooperative Soil Survey.

Zoning Regulations ‐ The Zoning Regulations of the City of Groton in effect at the time of application for subdivision or resubdivision.
 
PARCEL AND LOT REQUIREMENTS
LAND SUITABILITY

ARTICLE 3.00	PARCEL AND LOT REQUIREMENTS


3.1	LAND SUITABILITY


1.	Land to be subdivided shall be of such character that it can be used for building purposes without danger to health and public safety.

2.	Land which the Commission finds to be unsuitable in its present condition for building purposes because of flooding, inadequate drainage, steep slopes, depth to bedrock, erosive soils, utility easements or similar features which might pose a threat to the public health, safety or welfare shall not be approved as a building lot unless adequate provisions are made by the applicant to mitigate the unsuitable conditions in a manner satisfactory to the Commission.

3.	Unless not required by the Commission, any application for a subdivision shall include a site inventory / analysis map prepared, signed and stamped by a landscape architect, civil engineer, or surveyor licensed to practice in Connecticut and such site inventory / analysis map shall identify:

Primary Conservation Areas	•	Watercourses and waterbodies
•	Any area designated as 100‐year floodplain
•	Coastal wetlands
•	Inland wetlands and vernal pools
•	Steep slopes (15 percent or more)
Secondary Conservation Areas	•	Areas within 200 feet of a watercourse or waterbody
•	Any area designated as 500‐year floodplain
•	Areas within 50 feet of an inland wetland or coastal wetland
•	Areas within 100 feet of a vernal pool
•	Natural diversity database sites or wildlife corridors
•	Resources listed on the National or State Register of Historic Places
•	Archeological sites
•	Scenic views / vistas and stone walls
•	Notable individual trees (>18 inches DBH) and/or mature woodlands
•	Possible open space and trail connections between conservation areas on the site and adjacent protected and unprotected open space.

4.	The overall lot / roadway layout plan for the subdivision should reflect the site inventory / analysis map:
a.	Areas of the site which are considered Primary Conservation Areas shall be considered for permanent
protection which may include preservation as open space deeded to the City, a land trust or other conservation organization, or a homeowners association if acceptable to the Commission.
b.	Areas of the site which are considered Secondary Conservation Areas should be considered for conservation or integration into the design of the subdivision.
c.	Areas of the site which are not considered Primary Conservation Areas or Secondary Conservation Areas may be considered potential development areas and lots, streets, trails, and other improvements may be sited in these areas.
 
PROTECTION OF IMPORTANT FEATURES


3.2	PROTECTION OF IMPORTANT FEATURES


1.	Every effort shall be made to locate streets, building lots, and open space in a manner that is in harmony with the landscape and results in a minimal disturbance to the natural terrain and vegetation.

2.	All subdivisions shall be designed and arranged and provision shall be made to:
a.	Preserve natural features and similar resources;
b.	Preserve and enhance scenic features, significant trees, and similar community resources;
c.	Preserve and enhance archeological sites, historic sites, and similar cultural resources; and
d.	Comply with flood management ordinances and regulations adopted by the City.

3.	During the review process, the Commission may require:
a.	The preservation or enhancement of features identified in Section 3.02.2, and/or
b.	The submission of additional information that demonstrates the applicant’s proposals (such as a conservation restriction and/or the deeding of open space) for protecting the types of resource(s)
identified in Section 3.02.2 of these Regulations.



3.3	FLOOD PROTECTION

1.	All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage and the Commission shall determine that any proposed subdivision is reasonably safe from flooding.

2.	When a subdivision is proposed for land in areas of special flood hazard the Commission shall require written confirmation from the Zoning and Building Official that utilities, water, and sanitary sewer systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage or infiltration.

3.	Any proposed subdivision involving any land within a special flood hazard area shall:
a.	Have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards;
b.	Include the base flood elevation data for the property,.
c.	Provide assurances, such as an approval of the application by the Conservation and Inland Wetlands
Commission that the flood‐carrying capacity is maintained within any altered or relocated portion of any watercourse.

4.	In areas of special flood hazard as identified on Flood Insurance Rate Maps and in the Flood Insurance Study, and in other areas contiguous to water bodies or subject to tidal flooding, proper provisions shall be made for protective flood control measures including, but not limited to, the following:
a.	Water supply and sewage disposal systems shall be designed and located so as to avoid impairment or contamination from flooding, erosion or related circumstances.
b.	Gas, electrical equipment, and transmission lines shall be located and constructed to minimize or
eliminate flood damage.
c.	Storm drainage systems shall be designed to reduce exposure to flood hazards;
d.	Streets shall be of such elevation or shall be suitably protected so as to allow emergency access during flood conditions;
e.	Streets, drainage and other improvements shall be safe from flood damage;
f.	Public and private improvements shall be designed to minimize flood damage and shall be capable of use
without danger from flooding or flood related damages;
g.	All utilities and similar services shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage.
 
LOT LAYOUT


3.4	LOT LAYOUT


1.	All lots in proposed subdivisions shall conform in all respects to the requirements of the Zoning Regulations for the zoning district in which the lot is located in terms of lot size, frontage, lot access, and other requirements.

2.	Lots shall be generally square or rectangular in shape, except where other design criteria make it impractical or undesirable.

3.	All corner lots shall have at least a 5 foot radius at street intersections.

4.	Double frontage and rear lots shall be avoided except as provided for in the Zoning Regulations.

5.	All lots must be capable of receiving emergency and regular City services.

6.	Insofar as practical, lot lines shall be laid out:
a.	Such that side lot lines shall be at right angles to the street and radial to curves, unless a variation from this provision would result in a better street or lot layout; and
b.	So as not to cross municipal boundary lines.

7.	In the case of lots on sloping land, the lot shall be laid out so that:
a.	A driveway can service the property with the driveway slope not exceeding fifteen percent (15%) slope at
any point nor exceeding a total average of twelve percent (12%); and
b.	The finished floor of the principal structure shall, wherever practical, be higher than the grade of the
street on which its fronts.

8.	The shape, size, location, topography, character, and arrangement of a lot shall be such that there will be no foreseeable difficulties, for reasons of topography or other conditions, in:
a.	Securing permits to develop the lot in compliance with applicable regulations, codes, and ordinances;
b.	Occupying and using such lot for building purposes without danger to the health and safety of the occupants or the public;
c.	Providing safe and convenient access to principal buildings on such lot; and
d.	Providing for grading and drainage without adversely affecting abutting or downhill or downstream
properties.

9.	The Commission may determine that any parcel of land, regardless of size, shall be unsuitable for building if it:
a.	Does not meet the minimum zoning requirements;
b.	Is found unsuitable for occupancy or building by reason of lack of provision for sewage disposal, lack of
adequate water supply, topography, water, flooding, or other conditions; or
c.	Does not conform to the requirements of these or other applicable codes and regulations.

10.	No parcel of land shall be created with the notation “not an approved building lot.”

11.	Unless designated and preserved in perpetuity for open space, municipal, conservation, or agricultural purposes, no parcel, reserve strip, or any other remnant of land unsuitable for building shall be left in any subdivision.

12.	No land or building lot shall be configured in such a way that, in the opinion of the Commission, it could control access to other property or would landlock an adjacent property unless the control of such land or building lot is placed within the jurisdiction of the abutter, the City, or other entity acceptable to the Commission under conditions approved by the Commission.
 

3.5	OPEN SPACE


Since reservation of open space, as provided in CGS Section 8‐25, may not be appropriate in all situations or may be modified by the Commission, applicants are encouraged to meet informally with Staff and/or the Commission prior to submitting a formal application.


1.	Unless modified by the Commission in accordance with Section 3.05.7, every subdivision shall provide for open space in order to provide for:
a.	Active recreation including parks and playgrounds which shall be suitable and conveniently accessible for their intended use;
b.	Passive recreation in the form of land in its undisturbed or "natural" state;
c.	Protection of wetlands or watercourses and the buffering of the same;
d.	The preservation of outstanding natural or historical features and the like; or
e.	Implement the open space and other recommendations in the Plan of Conservation and Development.

2.	This open space requirement may, with approval of the Commission, be met through:
a.	Deeding of land within the subdivision in accordance with Section 3.05.5;
b.	Deeding of land elsewhere in the City of Groton in accordance with Section 3.05.5;
c.	A fee‐in‐lieu‐of‐open‐space donation in accordance with Section 3.05.6;
d.	Deeding of land and a fee‐in‐lieu‐of‐open‐space‐donation in accordance with Section 3.05.5 and Section 3.05.6; or
e.	Some other arrangement that shall be found by the Commission to be acceptable (such as a trail easement, a conservation restriction, or similar proposal).

3.	If the applicant proposes a fee‐in‐lieu‐of‐open‐space donation or other open space arrangement which does not involve land within the subdivision, the applicant shall still submit a map showing where the open space land could be located within the subdivision if the fee‐in‐lieu‐of‐open‐space donation or other open space arrangement were not to be accepted by the Commission.

4.	The Commission may solicit comments from the Conservation and Inland Wetlands Commission, the Beach and Park Commission, the City Council, or any other person or entity regarding the best method of preserving open space as part of the subdivision.
 
OPEN SPACE

5.	Deeding of Land
a.	Where the open space requirement shall be met through the deeding of land, at least ten (10) percent of the total area of the subdivision shall be set aside for open space.
b.	Such open space shall be shown on the subdivision plan or on another suitable map if located elsewhere in the City of Groton.
c.	In determining the appropriateness of an area proposed for open space or other public purposes, the Commission shall consider:
i.	Recommendations in the Plan of Conservation and Development;
ii.	The presence or absence of any existing open spaces in the area;
iii.	The opportunities to interconnect existing, proposed, and potential future open space reservations into a comprehensive greenway and trail system;
iv.	The opportunity to preserve or protect significant natural features; and
v.	Comments from City departments or other agencies or persons regarding need, resources, connection to the open space system of the City, and preferred ownership.
d.	When a subdivision abuts an existing open space, the Commission may require that the lot lines of the land to be dedicated form a continuation of the existing open space to provide a single, unified area.
e.	Open space shall not include power line right‐of‐ways.
f.	The applicant shall designate which entity is, or entities are, proposed to own the open space to ensure its
permanent protection as provided in these Regulations. The following is the order of preference for evaluating the ownership of open space:
i.	The City of Groton.
ii.	A non‐profit organization, acceptable to the Commission, legally constituted to accept and maintain open space for conservation purposes (such as a Land Trust).
iii.	A neighborhood association reviewed and approved by the Commission.
g.	Such open spaces shall be deeded in perpetuity except that any open spaces deeded to a private
organization or to a private association shall provide in such deed that ownership shall revert to the City or other conservation organization for recreational or conservation purposes if such corporation or association shall cease to exist or shall relinquish ownership.
h.	If an applicant transfers land to the City for municipal purposes, such transfer may be considered by the
Commission as a credit toward any open space requirements.
i.	The Commission may require that any open space land have direct access to a City street or a State highway through a right‐of‐way dedicated to public use and that it be graded and improved to allow for
pedestrian access.
j.	Open space areas shall not be used as a depository for brush, stumps, earth, building materials, or debris.
 

6.	Fees in Lieu of Open Space
a.	As provided in CGS Section 8‐25, the Commission may authorize the applicant to pay a fee to the City, or pay a fee to the City and transfer land to the City or other approved entity in lieu of the requirement to provide land as open space.
b.	The Commission may also request the applicant pay a fee to the City or pay a fee to the City and transfer
land to the City or other approved entity in lieu of the requirement to provide open space where deeding of land as open space will not meet the purposes of this Section 3.05.
c.	If payment of such a fee is proposed by the applicant, the Commission may refuse such fee if it determines, in its sole discretion, that there are areas within the parcel which merit preservation by one of the methods set forth in these Regulations.
d.	Payments generated under the provisions of this section shall be placed in a designated fund account to be utilized for the purposes of reserving dedicated open space, acquisition of new public open space, for
recreational or agricultural purposes or improvement of existing open space dedicated to the City.
e.	Unless otherwise agreed to by the Commission and the applicant, fee in lieu of open space procedures
shall be in accordance with CGS Section 8‐25, as amended:
i.	Payments or combination of both payment and land shall be equal to ten percent (10%) of the fair
market value of the total land area prior to subdivision.
ii.	The fair market value of the land shall be determined by a licensed appraiser jointly approved by the
Commission and the applicant and the appraisal made part of the record except that, for subdivisions of 3 lots or fewer, the applicant may utilize the Assessor’s estimate of the market value of the property.
iii.	The cost of any appraisal shall be the responsibility of the applicant.
f.	With regard to payment of the fee in lieu of open space:
i.	The fee in lieu of open space payment shall be provided to the City by the applicant in the form of a cashier’s check prior to the release of the subdivision mylar signed by the Chairman of the Commission.
ii.	Such cashier’s check shall be held in escrow by the City and shall not be cashed or deposited by the
City until the subdivision mylars have been filed on the land records.
g.	In cases where there is a combination of both payment and deeding of land, the transfer of land shall
occur when the public improvements are accepted by the City of Groton. If there are no other public improvements, the deed for the land shall be transferred at the time the subdivision plans are filed.

7.	Modification of Open Space Reservation ‐ The open space requirements of this section shall not apply if:
a.	The transfer of all land in the subdivision of less than five (5) parcels is to a parent, child, brother, sister,
grandparent, grandchild, aunt, uncle or first cousin of the applicant for no consideration.
b.	The subdivision is to contain affordable housing, as defined in CGS Section 8‐39a, equal to twenty percent
(20%) or more of the total number of housing units to be constructed in such subdivision.
 
SOLAR ACCESS


3.6	SOLAR ACCESS


1.	These subdivision regulations are intended to encourage energy‐efficient patterns of development and land use, the use of solar and other renewable forms of energy, and energy conservation.

2.	The applicant shall consider using solar energy techniques and site design techniques which would not significantly increase the cost of the housing to the buyer, after tax credits, subsidies and exemptions, and that have the potential to:
a.	Maximize solar heat gain, minimize heat loss, and provide thermal storage within a building during the heating season; and
b.	Minimize heat gain and provide for natural cooling during the cooling season.

3.	The site design techniques shall include, but not be limited to:
a.	House orientation;
b.	Street and lot layout;
c.	Vegetation;
d.	Natural and man‐made topographic features;
e.	Protection of solar access within the subdivision.

4.	As part of the application, the applicant shall demonstrate that these techniques have been considered.


3.7	SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL


1.	An erosion and sedimentation control plan shall be submitted with any subdivision application.

2.	Such plan shall demonstrate adherence to the erosion and sedimentation control standards set forth in the:
a.	City of Groton Zoning Regulations;
b.	“Connecticut Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control (2002)”, as amended; and
c.	“Connecticut Stormwater Quality Manual (2004)”, as amended.

3.	Such plan shall demonstrate proper provision to:
a.	Minimize and adequately control accelerated erosion and sedimentation during construction;
b.	Result in a stabilized development protected from erosion when completed; and
c.	Utilize the best available technology for erosion and sedimentation control.
 

ARTICLE 4.00	INFRASTRUCTURE REQUIREMENTS


4.1	STREETS


1.	Overall Layout
a.	Proposed streets shall be in harmony with existing or proposed thoroughfares as shown on any Plan of Conservation and Development adopted by the Commission, especially with regard to safe intersections within such thoroughfares.
b.	Proposed streets shall be designed and constructed to provide a safe and convenient system for prospective traffic and for continuation onto adjoining properties when subdivided.
c.	Proposed streets shall connect to:
i.	An existing State highway; or
ii.	An existing City street; or
iii.	A proposed City street which has been approved by the Commission and for which a financial
guarantee is on file with the City in accordance with these Regulations.
d.	Proposed streets shown on the subdivision plan shall be in harmony with any existing or proposed streets
shown in the Plan of Conservation and Development, especially in regard to safe intersections with such streets.
e.	In general, proposed streets shall be designed to follow the contour of the land with consideration given
to preserving natural features and other important resources as identified in Section 3.01 and Section
3.02 of these Regulations.
f.	All streets within a subdivision shall be completed at the same time in order to service all improved lots except that a subdivision may be developed in sections or phases with separate financial guarantees and/or approval types provided:
i.	Such sections or phases shall have been shown on the plan; and
ii.	The concept of phasing and the arrangement of the phases shall have been approved by the Commission.

2.	Improvement Of Existing Streets ‐ Where a subdivision is proposed which has frontage on an existing State highway or an existing City street where said existing street does not meet the right‐of‐way requirements of these Regulations, does not meet the appropriate street requirements or design standards or has a dangerous condition, the Commission:
a.	Shall require that the applicant dedicate the required right‐of‐way and any appurtenant slope or other easements to the City along the frontage of the subdivision owned or controlled by the applicant to correct the deficiency; and
b.	May require that the applicant evaluate and determine the improvements required to meet the
appropriate street requirements or design standards or resolve a dangerous condition and propose a resolution wherein the street deficiency will be addressed.
 

3.	City Street Standards

a.	The design and surfacing of all streets, roads, facilities and improvements within the public right‐of‐ way shall be undertaken by the applicant in accordance with all City of Groton Public Works Department specifications and said design shall be incorporated into the subdivision plans submitted by the developer for plan approval.

 


Right Of Way Width	50 feet
Pavement Width
 
City Street
 
•	Where lot sizes or land uses suggest that on‐ street parking will likely occur



•	Where lot sizes or land uses suggest that on‐ street parking will likely not occur
 
32 feet, except that 26 feet may be permitted on a cul‐de‐sac street where it is not anticipated such road will be connected to an existing street or extended in the future
26 feet, except that 22 feet may be permitted on a cul‐de‐sac street where it is not anticipated such road will be connected to an existing street or extended in the future
 
Curbing	Concrete curb 6 inches wide and 18 inches deep constructed of 4500 PSI concrete
Street Base	Per City of Groton
Street Construction Specifications
Street Surface	Per City of Groton
Street Construction Specifications
Minimum Street Grade	1 percent
Maximum Street Grade	10 percent

except that 10% grades may be used for short distances not greater than 500 feet
Cross Slope	Crown on the centerline with
¼ inch / foot cross‐slope to the gutter

b.	All necessary slope rights and easements shall be acquired by the applicant and dedicated to the City and any exceptions:
i.	Shall only be under extenuating circumstances; and
ii.	Shall be specifically approved by the Commission.
 


City Street –Section Diagram
 


 
1.	Pavement
a.	Width as specified by Regulations (26 feet shown)
b.	2” Class I Pavement for a finish course
c.	2” Class I pavement for a base course
d.	4” of processed gravel (compacted)
e.	18” of bank run gravel (compacted)
f.	Graded and compacted subgrade
g.	Roadway surface to have a parabolic curve camber of ¼ inch per foot from the
centerline



4.	Curbing
a.	6” wide by 18” high concrete curb
b.	6” reveal at gutter line
c.	See specifications for concrete for curb
 
2.	Sidewalk
a.	5 foot width placed at edge of street right‐ of‐way (street‐line)
b.	Graded and compacted subgrade
c.	See specifications for concrete for
sidewalk







3.	Side Slopes
a.	Side slope grade to be applied at edge of
right‐of‐way (street‐line)
b.	Maximum slope to be 2 feet horizontal for
each 1 foot vertical except that may be changed to 6 feet vertical for each 1 foot horizontal in ledge
c.	Side slope to meet approval of the Director of Public Works
 

 
 

4.	Intersection Design
a.	Proposed streets shall intersect other streets so that the centerline of the proposed street shall be a straight line for a distance of at least 100 feet from the intersecting street‐lines unless otherwise approved by the Commission on the recommendation of the Director of Public Works.
b.	Intersections between adjoining street lines should be laid out with an angle of approximately 90 degrees,
and never less than 60 degrees.
c.	Multiple streets intersecting at one location shall generally be avoided and, except when the Commission
finds conditions are present which justify a variation from these requirements, the centerlines of intersecting streets shall be spaced far enough apart to avoid conflicting movements or unsafe situations.
d.	Proposed streets shall intersect other streets such that the slope of the travelway on the proposed street shall not exceed two (2) percent within fifty (50) feet of the intersection unless otherwise approved by the Commission on the recommendation of the Director of Public Works.
e.	Street‐lines at intersections shall be connected by a curve having a minimum radius of 25 feet.
f.	Clear visibility at any proposed intersection shall be provided from a driver’s eye (located at a height of
3.5 feet above the surface of the proposed street and a location twenty feet (20 feet) back from the edge of the travelway of the intersected street) for at least 300 feet measured along the centerline except the Commission may require that an applicant demonstrate that this will result in unobstructed view along both directions of the intersected street that is in conformance with current CTDOT standards for the 85th percentile speed for:
i.	The “minimum” sight distance.
ii.	The “desirable” sight distance.
iii.	Such sight distance shall not be impaired by curvature or slope, except in extreme conditions, in which case adequate alternative safety measures shall be designated.
 

5.	Cul‐De‐Sac Street Length Limitation
a.	Unless otherwise approved by the Commission, no temporary or permanent cul‐de‐sac street or streets shall serve more than twenty (20) lots or extend more than 1,200 feet from the nearest intersection, whether inside or outside the subdivision, that has two means of access.
b.	A greater length of a cul‐de‐sac street may
be permitted by the Commission, in its sole discretion, due to adverse topographic or soil conditions, difficult site configuration, future street extension or similar circumstances.
c.	It is recommended that when an applicant wishes to request approval of cul‐de‐sac streets with a length greater than 1,200 feet or serving more than 20 lots, the Preliminary Plan procedures established in these Regulations be followed.






 
6.	Design of Permanent Turnaround
a.	A permanent cul‐de‐sac street shall terminate in a turnaround with:
i.	A right‐of‐way that is at least 100 feet in diameter (50 feet in radius), and
ii.	A paved travelway having an outside diameter of 80 feet (40 feet in radius).
b.	The right‐of‐way of such turnaround shall not be located closer than one‐hundred (100) feet from the property line of the parcel being subdivided or the minimum lot depth prescribed by the Zoning Regulations, whichever is greater.
c.	The turnaround shall have a landscaped island at its center unless modified or waived by the Commission and the subdivision plans shall contain a note that the maintenance of such island shall be the responsibility of the abutting landowners and not the City of Groton.
 


Permanent Cul‐De‐Sac
 
d.	The turnaround shall not exceed a slope of three percent (3%) measured from the start of the turnaround to its end.
e.	The Commission may require that pedestrian, drainage and/or utility easements of appropriate width be
provided from the terminus to the abutting property line(s).
 

7.	Street Extensions and Temporary Cul‐De‐Sac Streets
a.	The Commission may require that the arrangement of streets in a subdivision provide for the extension of existing streets and for the future extension of proposed streets into abutting property not yet subdivided.
b.	The Commission may require the applicant to demonstrate the feasibility and practicality (or the
infeasibility or impracticality) of extending the proposed street onto or through adjacent property.
c.	When any such provision for extension is required by the Commission, the applicant shall provide for
access to the adjacent undeveloped land via a City street to the abutting property.
 
d.	When any such provision for extension is
required and is an extension or continuation of a proposed street, the proposed subdivision  street shall:
i.	Have the full width of the right‐of‐way extended to the property line of the subdivision plus any grading rights required for the future street;
ii.	Have the area of a temporary turnaround brought as close to the boundary as is practical,
iii.	Have a travelway spur extending 10 feet
from the turnaround area toward the undeveloped land, and
iv.	Have temporary easements provided to the
City, where such easements shall automatically terminate when the street is extended, outside the standard right‐of‐way for:
a.	The temporary turnaround area; and
b.	Grading associated with the future
street extension.
 
Temporary Cul‐De‐Sac

Property which reverts to abutters when road is extended (both sides)




















Pavement to be removed by adjacent subdivision when road is extended (both sides of street)
 

e.	If the proposed access to abutting property is not an extension or continuation of a proposed street (such as being perpendicular to a proposed street), the applicant shall have:
i.	The future street area graded with all slopes made necessary by such street prepared and stabilized;
and
ii.	No reserve strips left at the end or side of any access which adjoins abutting property.
f.	The applicant of the adjoining land shall be responsible for:
i.	Preparing drawings showing and including all work required to extend, connect and complete the sidewalks, utilities and other improvements between the existing street and the proposed subdivision; and
ii.	Removing all segments of any temporary turnaround or other temporary improvements outside the
normal paved surface and suitably grading and seeding the ground at such time as the street is extended.
 

8.	Street Names
a.	All streets shall be named and proposed street names shall be indicated on the subdivision plan and shall be approved by the Commission.
b.	Proposed street names shall be selected so as to avoid similarity in spelling or pronunciation with existing public or private street names in the City of Groton or the Town of Groton.

9.	Street Signs and Traffic Controls
a.	Prior to the issuance of any certificate of occupancy within the subdivision, City acceptance of a City street, or final release of a financial guarantee related to street construction, the applicant shall provide and install at the applicant’s sole cost and expense:
i.	Suitable traffic control devices and signs in accordance with the standards set forth in the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices; and
ii.	Suitable permanent street name signs at all street intersections in accordance with City standards.
b.	During street construction and prior to the issuance of any building permit, temporary street name signs
and suitable traffic control devices of a durable, weatherproof material shall be installed by the applicant at street intersections if required by the Department of Public Works.

10.	Other Requirements
a.	Side slopes shall be designed to assure adequate stabilization and shall not be steeper than one foot (1 foot) vertical to two feet (2 feet) horizontal in earth and in ledge 6 feet vertical and 1 foot horizontal.
b.	The surface of the travelway shall be centered within the right‐of‐way.
c.	During construction:
i.	All trees and roots shall be stripped to below the base course of the pavement and for the full width
of the pavement.
ii.	All soft spots, peat, organic material, soft clay, spongy soil, boulders and other unsuitable material
shall be removed and replaced by material approved by the Director of Public Works.
iii.	The subgrade shall be rolled with a ten‐ton roller before placing the base course.
d.	Monuments and markers shall be laid out and established in accordance with Section 7.06.

11.	Special Considerations For Non‐Residential Subdivisions
a.	In a non‐residential subdivision, the applicant shall demonstrate the street, parcel, and block pattern proposed is specifically adapted to the uses anticipated and takes into account other uses in the vicinity.
b.	Street rights‐of‐way and pavement width and thickness shall be adequate to accommodate the type and volume of traffic anticipated to be generated thereupon.
c.	The applicant shall demonstrate that the design and construction of streets, curbs and sidewalks and the design and installation of public utilities including water, sewer, electric, gas and storm water drainage complies with the standards in these Regulations and the City of Groton Public Works Department specifications.
d.	Streets carrying non‐residential traffic, especially truck traffic, shall not normally be extended to the boundaries of adjacent, existing or potential residential areas.
 
SIDEWALKS


4.2	SIDEWALKS


1.	Five‐foot (5 feet) wide concrete sidewalks are required along both sides of streets except that, on a temporary cul‐de‐sac street, a sidewalk shall not be required on the area of the temporary turnaround.

2.	The outer edge of the sidewalk shall be set at the street line and this will generally result in a grassed strip between the concrete curbing and the sidewalk.

3.	All concrete sidewalks shall be constructed of 4500 PSI concrete and comply with all City of Groton Public Works Department specifications.

4.	Where a subdivision which has frontage on an existing street is proposed, the applicant shall be required to install sidewalks along said street frontage or bring existing sidewalks up to current City standards.

5.	As part of a subdivision, the applicant may offer and the Commission may accept the extension of an existing sidewalk or the installation of a new sidewalk in lieu of or in addition to the above requirements if doing so would enhance pedestrian accessibility in the general area of the subdivision.



4.3	DRIVEWAYS


1.	Driveways shall be 12 feet wide at the street line.

2.	Wherever feasible, driveways shall be 1½" higher at the streetline than the centerline of the pavement with a 1½" lip at the edge of the pavement.

3.	Each proposed lot shall be served by a driveway with a maximum slope of 15 percent and no Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued unless this requirement is met.

4.	Within the City street right‐of‐way, no driveway shall be graded such that it would receive drainage from the City street.

5.	The Commission may require driveway locations be shown on the plan to assure proper sight line, proposed slope, drainage and intersection with the street.

6.	The Commission may require a specific driveway location, grade, width, surface or other design requirement in order to provide for reasonable access for emergency and other services.
 
SEWAGE


4.4	SEWAGE


1.	It is the responsibility of the applicant to supply satisfactory evidence to the Commission and the Director of Health that adequate sewage disposal will be provided for each lot and the Commission shall not approve any lot where insufficient evidence has been provided with regard to sewage disposal to satisfy the requirements of the Public Health Code of the State of Connecticut.

2.	Where the City sewer system is available:
a.	It shall be utilized; and
b.	All sewer mains and laterals within the street right‐of‐way shall be installed prior to the final surfacing of
the street unless otherwise approved by the Director of Public Works.

3.	Where private sewage disposal (a septic system) is to be used, approval by the Director of Health shall be obtained.



4.5	WATER


1.	It is the responsibility of the applicant to supply satisfactory evidence to the Commission and the Director of Health that a potable water supply will be provided for each lot and the Commission shall not approve any lot where insufficient evidence has been provided with regard to water supply to satisfy the requirements of the Public Health Code of the State of Connecticut.

2.	Where a public water supply system is available:
a.	It shall be utilized;
b.	Provision shall be made for the installation of water mains and fire hydrants within the proposed
development; and
c.	All water lines and supply connections within the street right‐of‐way shall be installed prior to the final surfacing of the street unless otherwise approved by the Director of Public Works.

3.	In accordance with CGS Section 8‐25a, any subdivision using water supplied by a water company incorporated on or after October 1, 1984 shall not be approved unless such company has been issued a certificate pursuant to CGS Section 16‐262m.



4.6	FIRE PROTECTION


1.	Each applicant shall provide fire hydrants to protect public safety where required by the Commission based on the recommendation of the Fire Marshal and/or Fire Chief.
 


4.7	STORM DRAINAGE


1.	General
a.	The applicant shall be responsible for constructing adequate facilities for the control, collection, treatment, conveyance and acceptable disposal of storm water, other surface water and subsurface water, whether originating in the subdivision or in a tributary drainage area in order to:
i.	Minimize degradation of water resources within the City of Groton from pollution from non‐point source runoff;
ii.	Mitigate impacts to the hydrologic system from development, including reduced groundwater recharge and pollutants found in stormwater runoff;
iii.	Reduce or prevent flooding, stream channel erosion, and/or other negative impacts created by the volume of stormwater runoff resulting from development; and
iv.	Promote the application of low impact development (LID) strategies for the analysis and design of stormwater treatment systems.
b.	All drainage facilities shall be designed by an engineer and shall be subject to review by the Director of
Public Works and the approval of the Commission.
c.	The Commission may, at the applicant’s expense, seek independent evaluation of the proposed drainage
design.

2.	Low Impact Development
a.	Curbing, catch basins and pipes shall generally be required to control drainage except that the
Commission may accept alternative arrangements (such as vegetated swales and/or other techniques, where appropriate) which demonstrate best management practices for implementation of “green infrastructure” or “low impact development” when appropriate after considering recommendations from the Director of Public Works and other parties designed to implement the following provisions of Chapter 7 of the Connecticut Stormwater Quality (CSQ) Manual (2004), as amended:
i.	Pollutant Reduction (CSQ Manual Section 7.4).
ii.	Groundwater Recharge and Runoff Volume Reduction (CSQ Manual Section 7.5).
iii.	Peak Flow Control (CSQ Manual Section 7.6) for the 10‐year, 25‐year, and 100‐year storm events.
b.	The Commission may, at the applicant’s expense, seek independent evaluation of the proposed drainage
design.
 
STORM DRAINAGE

3.	Design of Drainage Facilities
a.	Storm drainage facilities shall be designed and constructed in accordance with CTDOT Construction Standards and Specifications, unless modified by the Commission with the approval of the Director of Public Works.
b.	Lots shall be laid out so as to provide positive drainage away from all buildings and individual lot drainage
shall be coordinated with the general storm drainage pattern for the area.
c.	Drainage facilities shall be laid out so as to prevent the discharge of water to the City street, including the
right‐of‐way.
d.	Drainage shall be designed to avoid concentration of storm water from each lot to adjacent lots and shall
be shown on the subdivision plan.
e.	The design and construction of storm drainage facilities shall:
i.	Be adequate for present and potential future uses based upon the maximum ultimate development
of the upstream watershed as permitted under existing Zoning Regulations;
ii.	Not cause flooding of abutting property from the headwater and backwater produced by bridges,
culverts, and other structures;
iii.	Make proper provision (including easements or manholes) for drainage from development of
adjacent properties; and
f.	All drainage design formulas and analyses shall adhere to acceptable engineering practice and the
calculations and their method of derivation shall be indicated as part of the application.
g.	The following information shall be submitted to the Commission:
i.	Plan showing the catchment areas for each structure;
ii.	Calculations showing the design criteria used to determine the pipe diameter and other parameters for each pipe length; and
iii.	Information showing that drainage pipes will provide a self‐cleansing velocity of at least 2.5 feet per second when flowing full.
h.	Rainfall intensities used for storm drainage design shall be taken from the U.S. Weather Bureau “Rainfall Intensity ‐ Duration Frequency Curves” for the nearest rain gauge.
i.	Drainage structures shall be designed to accommodate the following storm frequency:
i.	A 25‐year storm frequency for streets within the subdivision and detention/retention on individual
lots (including catch basins, inlets, pipes, underdrains and gutters); and
ii.	A 100‐year storm frequency for culverts, bridges through watercourses, and detention/retention basins.
j.	Catch basins shall be provided so that surface water is not carried across or around any intersection, nor for a distance greater than 200 feet in the gutter.
k.	When capacity is exceeded at any point, catch basins shall be provided.
l.	All drainage pipes shall be capable of carrying two inches (2 inches) of rainfall per hour for six (6) hours
over the immediate catchment area.
m.	Catch basins shall have footings and the basins shall be concrete.
n.	Type "C" grate‐and‐frame catch basin covers shall be built to State of Connecticut specifications.
o.	The sump of the catch basin shall have a minimum depth of two feet (2 feet).
 

4.	Drainage Facilities
a.	Within the road right‐of‐way, long diagonal drainage crossings under the pavement that can cause differential street settling shall be avoided. Where a development connects to existing streets, the applicant shall provide appropriate drainage at the intersections.
b.	Drainage facilities outside of the street right‐of‐way shall be enclosed in suitable underground pipes
wherever desirable.
c.	Easements for drainage facilities shall be:
i.	Perpetual, unobstructed drainage easements;
ii.	At least 20 feet wide;
iii.	Centered on the pipe and, where possible, centered on property lines; and
iv.	Deeded to the City of Groton if the drainage facilities serve a City street and deeded to the association if the drainage facilities serve a private street.
d.	Where it is necessary to discharge storm water across private property not included in the subdivision,  the applicant shall obtain, in writing, permanent drainage rights in favor of the City for flows across such properties. If the system is to be accepted by the City, the rights for the City to enter and maintain existing or proposed facilities shall be included.  The applicant shall submit copies of all agreements to the Commission prior to final approval of the subdivision. Such drainage easements shall be shown on the subdivision plan and filed on the land records.
e.	The Director of Public Works shall approve the location and spacing of drainage structures, if provided.
f.	Unless modified by the Commission based on a recommendation of the Director of Public Works, the
minimum pipe size for all storm drain systems constructed under these Regulations shall be 15‐inch inside diameter.
g.	The material for all storm drain systems constructed under these Regulations shall be reinforced concrete,
except that the Director of Public Works may allow the use of High Density Polyethylene (HDPE) in appropriate circumstances.
h.	Unless modified by the Director of Public Works, a minimum cover of two (2) feet shall be provided for all storm drains.
i.	Proper bedding, grading, and cover shall be provided around and for all drainage structures.

5.	Drainage Outlets and Channels
a.	All storm drain system outlets shall be terminated with an approved outlet structure and stabilized as necessary. Easements for outlet pipes shall extend to a suitable existing storm drain or a natural
watercourse. No storm drain system shall discharge into a natural watercourse, without the approval of the Conservation and Inland Wetlands Commission. No storm drain system shall outlet into a natural watercourse, whether continually flowing or intermittent, so as to exceed the capacity of the watercourse.
b.	A detention basin may be required by the Commission to prevent silting of streams, wetlands, or other areas contiguous to the drainage outfall and/or to reduce the rate of runoff to pre‐construction conditions.
c.	When drainage outlets or channels are required by the Commission for drainage purposes, the applicant
shall provide the City with a plan and any required rights‐of‐way for long‐term maintenance.
 
WIRE UTILITIES


4.8	WIRE UTILITIES


1.	New electric, telephone, television, cable and other utility wires shall be installed underground unless the Commission determines, based on a written report submitted by the applicant and reviewed by the Director of Public Works, that such underground installation is inappropriate or infeasible for all or a part of the subdivision or resubdivision after considering:
a.	The type of service existing in the area adjacent to the subdivision;
b.	Topographic and construction conditions; and
c.	The size of the subdivision or resubdivision.

2.	All pipes and conduits for wire utilities shall be installed:
a.	In the side strips of the right‐of‐way and outside the paved area wherever possible, and
b.	Prior to final surfacing of the street.

3.	Any wire utility located outside of the right‐of‐way shall be located in an easement adequate in width to allow for present or future connections or extensions of such utilities and for the maintenance thereof.

4.	All wire utilities associated with the subdivision shall be installed at the applicant’s expense prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy and/or, if a City street, prior to acceptance of the street by the City.

5.	Electric, telephone, cable television, and any other wire utilities shall be installed in proposed and existing streets as specified by the appropriate utility company and shall be subject to the inspection and acceptance of such company and the Director of Public Works.

6.	For a City street, all wire utilities shall be located and mapped on an as‐built drawing prior to acceptance of the street by the City.


4.9	STREET LIGHTS


1.	Street lights shall be shown on the subdivision plan in quantity and location sufficient to assure public safety.

2.	The street light pole, fixture, and lamp shall be acceptable to the Commission.


4.10	STREET TREES


1.	Trees shall be planted, to provide shade and to enhance the environment, at approximately fifty foot (50 feet) intervals along the sides of every street abutting lots of the proposed subdivision except where, in the opinion of the Commission, existing trees are to be retained by the developer in sufficient number and location to meet the intent of this section.

2.	New trees shall be nursery grown, free from disease, and treated for bark injuries.

3.	Such trees shall be planted on private property within six feet (6 feet) of the street line.

4.	Determination of precise locations for trees shall consider future possible locations of driveways and utility connections.

5.	The size and species of trees shall be of a type so as to fulfill the purposes of this regulation.
 
APPLICATION PROCEDURES
GENERAL

ARTICLE 5.00	APPLICATION PROCEDURES


5.1	GENERAL


1.	Applications for approval of a plan of subdivision or resubdivision shall be made by the developer in writing on a form furnished by the Commission and filed in the office of the City Planning and Zoning Department.


Application forms are available on the City’s website at:

http://www.cityofgroton.com/zoning.asp


2.	Any subdivision or resubdivision application shall be accompanied by forms, fees, maps, plans, profiles and all additional documentation, information and reports as prescribed in these Regulations.

3.	Plans submitted under these Regulations shall be prepared by the following person or persons:

  Stage	Type of Design	Type of Person 	

Preliminary Plan	Schematic / conceptual design.	An engineer, surveyor, architect, land
planner, landscape architect, or other qualified individual.

 
Formal Application	Delineation of the boundary lines of the
outside perimeter of a parcel as well as the interior lots and streets.
Design of streets, drainage systems, sanitary sewer systems, sewage disposal systems, and water supply and distribution.
 
Sealed by a surveyor



Sealed by an engineer
 

4.	Each application shall be signed by the owner of record or his/her duly authorized agent or representative. If the application is signed by an agent or representative, a written instrument executed by the owner of record evidencing the agent's authority to apply must accompany the application.

5.	All applications shall be submitted to the Commission during regular working hours. The application shall be dated as of the actual date submitted.

6.	The Commission retains the right to have any information submitted with regard to an application reviewed by City staff or officials, and to consult with any other agency or person as, in the opinion of the Commission, may be advisable for their information, review and recommendations. In accordance with CGS Section 8‐1c and any Municipal Land Use Fee Ordinance, the applicant shall be responsible for any review fees and related expenses incurred as a result of such consultations.

7.	The applicant shall be present at the meeting of the Commission when the application is presented to the Commission although the Commission may still act on an application if the applicant is not present.
 
PRELIMINARY STAFF REVIEW (OPTIONAL)

8.	Any proposed subdivision located within a coastal area as defined in the Municipal Coastal Program shall be subject to a Coastal Site Plan Review pursuant to the City of Groton Zoning Regulations.

9.	Submission of a subdivision application shall be deemed permission for the Commission and the City or their agents or representatives to enter the property for the purposes of:
a.	Reviewing the proposed subdivision;
b.	Inspecting the property and any proposed improvements, and/or
c.	Installing the proposed and required improvements in the event of failure of the applicant to make such improvements or properly maintain them.



5.2	PRELIMINARY STAFF REVIEW (OPTIONAL)


Review and discussion of preliminary plans with Staff is strongly encouraged.


1.	In order to prevent undue delay or extensive modification to a formal application, the Commission encourages informal discussion with City Staff of the general design of the subdivision and its improvements to assure coordination with the Plan of Conservation and Development and these Regulations.



5.3	PRELIMINARY COMMISSION REVIEW (OPTIONAL)


1.	In the event of a substantive question related to the design of the subdivision, the applicant may submit a non‐binding preliminary plan on an informal basis so that information can be exchanged with City Staff and the Commission to aid in the preparation of an application.

2.	In accordance with CGS Section 7‐159b, the procedure is a preliminary review of a conceptual design by the Commission and:
a.	Receipt of materials shall not constitute a “formal application,” and
b.	Any discussion or opinions rendered are advisory only, are not binding on the Commission or the potential applicant, and shall not be the basis for a claim of predetermination by the Commission.

3.	Three (3) copies of a preliminary plan shall be submitted to the Planning Staff, and the potential applicant shall be advised of the date to appear at a meeting of the Commission for informal review and comment. Every effort will be made to expedite the review.

4.	Any advice or recommendation made by the Commission during such exchange of information is informal and is not binding upon the Commission. The applicant must still obtain final approval as defined by the regulations.
 


5.4	FORMAL SUBDIVISION APPLICATION


1.	A formal application for subdivision or resubdivision shall include the following:
a.	One (1) original of the prescribed application form, fully and properly completed and executed;
b.	The required application processing fee;
c.	Plans and other documents as required by these Regulations and/or as required by the Commission; and
d.	Evidence of the signatory’s authority to sign on behalf of the owner of record and/or the applicant.

2.	The Commission may require the submission of:
a.	Funds to compensate the Commission for any costs of review or guidance as authorized by CGS Section 8‐
1c and any Municipal Land Use Fee Ordinance;
b.	Evidence of application to CTDOT seeking approval of access onto any State highway or discharge of
drainage into a State system or onto State property;
c.	A statement, together with supporting documentation, of the estimated cost of constructing the proposed subdivision streets and other improvements;
d.	Any proposed grant or easement to the City, in form satisfactory to the City;
e.	any additional information and data as may be required from the applicant in order to establish that the
proposed subdivision complies with these Regulations;
f.	Additional copies of application materials as necessary for review by the Commission or other City
agencies.

3.	If the property included in the application is subject to a conservation restriction or a preservation restriction as defined in CGS Section 47‐42d, the applicant shall provide:
a.	Proof that the applicant has, at least sixty days prior to the filing of the permit application, provided written notice of such application, by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the party holding such restriction; or
b.	A letter from the holder of such restriction or from the holder's authorized agent, verifying that the application is in compliance with the terms of the restriction.
 
RECEIPT AND SCHEDULING


5.5	RECEIPT AND SCHEDULING


1.	If a formal application involves land regulated as an inland wetland or watercourse under the provisions of Chapter 440 of Connecticut General Statutes, the applicant is encouraged to acquire permits and approvals from the agency responsible for administration of the inland wetland and watercourses regulations prior to submission to the Commission.  In any event, the applicant shall submit an application to the Conservation and Inland Wetlands Commission no later than the date the application is filed with the Planning and Zoning Commission.

2.	For the purpose of calculating statutory timeframes, the date of receipt of an application shall be the date of the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Commission immediately following the day of submission of the application or thirty‐five (35) days after submission, whichever is sooner.

3.	The Commission shall not be required to consider an application for possible action if:
a.	The date of receipt was less than 14 days prior to the Commission meeting, or
b.	the application is not in good form and accompanied by all required fees, plans and supporting materials needed to document conformity to the requirements of these Regulations.

4.	The Commission shall not be required to consider an application for approval of a subdivision plan while another application for subdivision of the same or substantially the same parcel is pending before the Commission.

5.	Upon receipt of an application for subdivision or a resubdivision, the Commission shall schedule a public hearing.

6.	The Commission may require field staking of proposed improvements, such as proposed streets, for visual inspection. Such stakes shall be installed at intervals of fifty (50) feet along the center lines.  The Commission or its agent shall retain the right to field‐check and inspect the layout prior to acting on the proposed subdivision.

7.	At any time following the submission of an application and prior to final action by the Commission, an application may be withdrawn by filing with the Commission a written statement to that effect.
 


5.6	NOTICE PROVISIONS


1.	Before a public hearing on any application for subdivision or resubdivision, the applicant shall present proof by Certificate(s) of Mailing from the United States Postal Service that notice of the time and place of the public hearing at which the subdivision was to be considered was sent at least ten (10) days in advance of the date of the scheduled hearing to each of the owners of land within 200 feet of the property with regard to which a Subdivision or Resubdivision is requested, as their names appear upon the last completed assessment roll of the City.

2.	In accordance with CGS 8‐26b, when any proposed subdivision or resubdivision will abut or include land in a neighboring municipality:
a.	The Commission shall give written notice of such subdivision plan and send a copy of such subdivision
plan to the regional planning agency in which it and the other municipality is located by certified mail, return receipt requested or by electronic mail, read receipt requested, at least thirty days before the date of the first public hearing to be held in relation thereto except that if the Commission does not receive confirmation of receipt of such electronic mail at least twenty‐five days before the public hearing then it shall send such notice by certified mail, return receipt requested.
b.	If the advisory report from the regional planning agency with its findings on the intermunicipal aspects of the proposed subdivision is not received at or before the hearing, it shall be presumed that such agency does not disapprove of the proposed subdivision.

3.	In accordance with CGS 8‐7d(f), the Commission shall:
a.	Notify the clerk of any adjoining Connecticut municipality by certified mail, return receipt requested,
within seven (7) days of the date of receipt (as specified in Section 5.05.2 of these Regulations) of an application concerning any project on any site in which:
i.	Any portion of the property affected by the decision of the Commission is within five‐hundred (500)
feet of the boundary of the adjoining municipality; or
ii.	A significant portion of the traffic to the completed project on the site will use streets within the
adjoining municipality to enter or to exit the site; or
iii.	A significant portion of the sewer or water drainage from the project on the site will flow through and
significantly impact the drainage or sewerage system within the adjoining municipality; or
iv.	Water run‐off from the improved site will impact streets or other municipal or private property
within the adjoining municipality.
b.	Such adjoining municipality may, through a representative, appear and be heard at any hearing on any
such application.

4.	The Commission shall transmit a copy of the maps and plans to the Director of Public Works with a request for a report concerning the suitability of the construction plans and any relationships between the subdivision layout and existing City streets and drainage systems.
 
APPLICATION PROCEDURES
PUBLIC HEARINGS


5.7	PUBLIC HEARINGS


1.	In accordance with CGS 8‐7d, when a hearing is to be held on an application, such hearing shall:
a.	Commence within sixty‐five (65) days after the date of receipt of such application; and
b.	Be completed within thirty‐five (35) days after such hearing commences, unless a shorter or longer period of time is required or allowed pursuant to CGS Section 8‐7d, as amended.

2.	The applicant may consent to one or more extensions of any period specified in Section 5.07.1 provided the total of all extensions authorized under Section 5.07.2 or Section 5.08.2 of these Regulations shall not exceed sixty‐five (65) days.

3.	In accordance with CGS 8‐7d, notice of the public hearing shall be given by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality at least twice, at intervals of not less than two (2) days, the first not more than fifteen (15) days nor less than ten (10) days, and the last not less than two (2) days prior to the date of such hearing.

4.	Notice of the public hearing shall also be given to the applicant by sending a copy of the notice of the public hearing by registered or certified mail to the applicant.

5.	All applications and maps and documents relating thereto shall be open for public inspection.

6.	At such hearing any person or persons may appear and be heard and may be represented by an agent or by an attorney.
 
APPLICATION PROCEDURES
APPLICATION PROCESSING AND ACTION


5.8	APPLICATION PROCESSING AND ACTION


1.	The Commission shall act upon an application by approving, modifying and approving, or disapproving the application, including the maps and plans submitted therewith, within sixty‐five (65) days after completion of the public hearing unless a shorter or longer period of time is required or allowed pursuant to CGS Section 8‐ 7d, as amended.

2.	The applicant may consent to one or more extensions of any period specified in Section 5.08.1 of these Regulations provided the total of all extensions authorized under Section 5.07.2 or Section 5.08.2 of these Regulations shall not exceed sixty‐five (65) days.

3.	In accordance with CGS Section 8‐26(d), failure of the Commission to act upon an application within the statutory timeframe shall be considered as an approval, and a certificate to that effect shall be issued by the Commission on demand.

4.	If a formal application involves land regulated as an inland wetland or watercourse under the provisions of Chapter 440 of Connecticut General Statutes, the Commission shall not render a decision until the Conservation and Inland Wetlands Commission has submitted a report with its final decision to the Commission. In making its decision, the Commission shall give due consideration to the report of the Conservation and Inland Wetlands Commission.

5.	In making its decision, the Commission shall give due consideration to the material contained in the record.

6.	Any action by the Commission shall:
a.	Set forth the reasons for approval, approval with modifications, or disapproval;
b.	Set forth any conditions to which the approval is subject; and
c.	Be stated on the Commission's records.

7.	Commission approval of the plans shall not be deemed an acceptance by the City of any street or other land shown as offered for public use.

8.	The Commission shall cause notice of its action to be:
a.	Delivered to the applicant by certified mail, return receipt requested; and
b.	Published in a newspaper having substantial circulation in the City of Groton as provided in CGS Section 8‐
26.

9.	If the Commission fails to cause notice of its action to be published as provided in CGS Section 8‐26 (within fifteen days after a decision has been rendered), the applicant:
a.	May publish such notice within ten (10) days following the 15‐day period, and
b.	Such notice shall be a simple statement that such application was approved, modified and approved or disapproved, together with the date of such action.
 
POST‐ APPROVAL PROCEDURES
FINALIZING APPROVED PLANS

ARTICLE 6.00	POST‐ APPROVAL PROCEDURES


6.1	FINALIZING APPROVED PLANS


1.	Based upon the approval by the Commission, the applicant shall have the subdivision plan and supporting plans revised to conform to any modifications called for in the Commission’s action in light of the fact that such plans need to be filed on the land records within 90 days of approval and that the Commission has up to 30 days to have the plans signed by the Chairman.

2.	No other changes, erasures, modifications or revisions shall be made in any subdivision plan or supporting plans without the written consent of the Commission.

3.	Such subdivision plan shall contain the following signature block for the Chairman’s signature:

Final Approval

At a meeting on	, the Planning and Zoning Commission of the City of Groton approved this subdivision plan in accordance with the City’s Subdivision Regulations.




Chairman	Date

In accordance with the timeframes established by CGS Section 8‐26c, the improvements or other requirements shall be completed by:
 	. Date
 
POST‐ APPROVAL PROCEDURES
PROVISION OF FINANCIAL GUARANTEE


6.2	PROVISION OF FINANCIAL GUARANTEE


1.	When public improvements remain to be completed as of the date of filing of the subdivision plan, a financial guarantee shall be provided to the City in a form and amount acceptable to the Commission to guarantee the completion of all public improvements remaining to be constructed including but not limited to storm water management systems, streets, utilities, and monumentation of property as set forth in the requirements of these Regulations.

2.	Acceptable financial guarantees shall include:
a.	One or more savings accounts, money market accounts, or certificates of deposit from financial
institutions approved by the City of Groton provided:
i.	Each such account shall be federally insured for the full amount of the deposit; and
ii.	The account shall be only in the name of the City of Groton.
b.	A certified or official check from a financial institution approved by the City of Groton made payable only to the City of Groton;
c.	An unconditional irrevocable letter of credit approved by the City of Groton and issued by a financial institution authorized to do business in Connecticut naming the City as the sole beneficiary.

3.	Any financial guarantee which has an expiration date shall include the following provisions:
a.	The financial guarantee shall not expire unless the Commission or its designated agent has received written notice of such expiration at least thirty (30) days but not more than forty‐five (45) days before such expiration is to occur; and
b.	In the event such notice is received, the City may draw without further condition the balance of the
financial guarantee; and
c.	Unless such notice is received, the financial guarantee shall automatically be extended for a period of not less than one year until all improvements or other requirements of these regulations are completed.

4.	Any interest or dividend accruing on any account or instrument shall accrue in the name of the applicant but,  if the applicant defaults in completing the work covered by the financial guarantee, such funds may be used by the City in the same manner as the principal.

5.	Before release of any financial guarantee, the Commission may request the applicant to present a statement, signed and sealed by a surveyor or an engineer, certifying that such surveyor or engineer has inspected all of the required construction work and that all of the required improvements have been completed in accordance with plans and specifications as approved.

6.	If the person posting a financial guarantee under this section requests a release of all or a portion of such financial guarantee, the Commission shall, at least sixty‐five days after receiving such request:
a.	Release or authorize the release of any such financial guarantee or portion thereof, provided the
Commission, in its sole discretion, is satisfied that the improvements for which such financial guarantee or portion thereof was posted have been completed; or
b.	Provide the person posting such  financial guarantee with a written explanation as to the improvements that must be completed before such financial guarantee or portion thereof may be released.
 
POST‐ APPROVAL PROCEDURES
SUBMISSION FOR SIGNATURE


6.3	SUBMISSION FOR SIGNATURE


1.	The applicant shall submit six (6) paper sets and one (1) mylar set of the approved plans, with the appropriate signature blocks and any required modifications, to the Commission for signature.

2.	The applicant shall also submit, in a form satisfactory to the City:
a.	Any required deeds or grants to the City in a form ready for execution;
b.	Any required easements for drainage, access, utility, or other purposes in a form ready for execution;
c.	A certificate of title indicating that any proposed conveyance is free of encumbrances;
d.	Evidence of the signatory’s authority to sign on behalf of the grantor.

Such grants or easements shall not be recorded on the land records until the Subdivision Plan shall have been filed on the land records and until any necessary action shall have been taken by any other appropriate City agency or agencies.

3.	In accordance with CGS Section 8‐25, the Commission shall have up to thirty days for the Chairman or Secretary of the Commission to sign the approved plans and to deliver the signed plans to the applicant and such time period shall be measured from the later of:
a.	The date that taking an appeal from the action of the Commission has elapsed;
b.	The date that plans modified in accordance with the Commission's approval and that comply with CGS Section 7‐31 are delivered to the Commission; or
c.	In the event of an appeal, from the termination of such appeal by dismissal, withdrawal or judgment in favor of the applicant or the date that plans modified in accordance with the Commission's approval, and/or the judgment of the Court, are delivered to the Commission.
 
POST‐ APPROVAL PROCEDURES
FILING OF APPROVED PLANS


6.4	FILING OF APPROVED PLANS


1.	Once signed and authorized by the Chairman, the signed mylar set of the approved plans shall be filed with the Town Clerk of the Town of Groton at the applicant’s expense.

2.	Unless otherwise provided by CGS Section 8‐25, as amended, such plans shall be filed in the office of the Town Clerk of the Town of Groton within ninety (90) days of the expiration of the appeal period under CGS Section 8‐8, or in the case of an appeal, within ninety (90) days of the termination of such appeal by dismissal, withdrawal or judgment in favor of the applicant.

3.	The Commission may extend the time for such filing for two (2) additional periods of ninety (90) days, and the approval shall remain valid until the expiration of such extended time.

4.	Any plan not so filed or recorded within the prescribed time shall become null and void.

5.	In the event that any Subdivision Plan, when recorded, contains any changes not approved or required by the Commission, the Plan shall be considered null and void and the Commission may then file a notice with the Town Clerk of the Town of Groton voiding the subdivision.


6.5	MODIFICATION OF APPROVAL


1.	Any applicant requesting to modify an approved plan, or any condition of approval, shall file a written request with the Commission, together with the required fee.

2.	The applicant shall state the reason why a modification is requested, and shall describe any change in facts or circumstances or any unforeseen natural or technical difficulties forming the basis for the request.

3.	The Commission, in its sole discretion, may require a public hearing on any request, or may require the applicant to submit a complete application under Article 5.00 of these Regulations.

4.	The Commission shall require a complete application under Article 5.00 of these Regulations for any change meeting the definition of “resubdivision” under CGS Section 8‐18, as amended.
 
CONSTRUCTION PROCEDURES
CONSTRUCTION ‐ EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL

ARTICLE 7.00	CONSTRUCTION PROCEDURES


7.1	CONSTRUCTION ‐ EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL


1.	No construction activity of any kind, including the removal of trees, shall commence until appropriate erosion and sediment controls are in place.

2.	Prior to the commencement of any construction, the Commission or the Director of Public Works may require that the applicant provide a cash bond or equivalent for erosion and sediment controls.

3.	In the event that soil erosion and sediment control measures are not satisfactorily implemented, the Commission or its authorized agent may:
a.	Issue a cease and desist order, and/or
b.	Order in writing the remedying of any condition found to be contrary to these Regulations or the
approved erosion and sediment control plan, and/or
c.	Redeem the financial guarantee in order to rectify erosion and sediment control issues at the site.


7.2	CONSTRUCTION ‐ CLEARING AND GRADING

1.	Tree stumps, logs, shrubs, other decomposable material or building debris shall not be used as fill material and the burial of such materials shall be prohibited within the limits of the proposed subdivision.
 
CONSTRUCTION PROCEDURES
CONSTRUCTION OF IMPROVEMENTS


7.3	CONSTRUCTION OF IMPROVEMENTS


1.	The applicant shall complete, at their own expense, all of the streets, street and area drainage, sanitary and other improvements in accordance with the approved plans, the Commission's approval, and to the satisfaction of the Director of Public Works.

2.	Fill Materials –
a.	All fill shall be firm.
b.	In fill, no boulders over one (1) cubic foot in volume shall be within eighteen (18 inches) of the top of the subgrade.
c.	Deep fill shall be in layers not to exceed two feet (2 feet) in depth, properly compacted.
d.	No frozen material shall be used as fill.

3.	Undermining Prohibited ‐ After construction is completed the undermining of concrete curbs, sidewalks, streets, etc. for the installation of water services, sewer laterals, electric lines, CATV, etc. is prohibited.

4.	Unanticipated Field Conditions –
a.	Where field conditions (such as, but not limited to, springs, ancient drains, side hill drainage from cuts, ledge rock or other conditions not apparent at the time of the approval by the Commission) require additional construction techniques, such as the need for curtain drains to intercept a previously unknown drainage problem which will interfere with a subdivision improvement, this information shall be brought to the attention of the Commission and the Planner.
b.	The Commission, with the input of the Director of Public Works, may require:
i.	Additional measures be taken to insure the public health, welfare and safety.
ii.	The preparation and submission of proposed construction procedures in conformance with accepted engineering practices to address the field conditions.
iii.	The submission of a supplemental financial guarantee for the additional work.
c.	Failure to inform the Commission or to take the corrective action may result in:
i.	Suspending the issuance of any further building permits within the subdivision until the matter is corrected; or
ii.	Suspending any activities related to acceptance of any City street or other improvement within the subdivision until the matter is corrected.
 


7.4	INSPECTION OF IMPROVEMENTS


1.	The improvements to be completed as part of the subdivision approval shall be inspected by the Director of Public Works or his authorized agent with regard to progress, quality, and adherence to these Regulations and the approved plans.

2.	In order to conduct inspections, the Director of Public Works or his authorized agent shall have free access to the construction work at all times.

3.	Prior to starting a project, the applicant and all contractors and all subcontractors shall meet with the Director of Public Works to:
a.	Review job conditions;
b.	Review erosion and sediment control measures;
c.	Advise the City of the construction schedule; and
d.	Review the City of Groton Street Construction Specifications.

4.	In the case of a new street or a change in an existing street, the work shall generally be inspected at the following stages of construction:
a.	Rough grading completed.
b.	Drainage and all other underground facilities installed, and prior to backfilling.
c.	Graveling and rolling being done.
d.	A screened gravel topping being applied.
e.	Binder course pavement being done.
f.	Finish course pavement being done.

5.	Request for inspection shall be delivered to the Director of Public Works by the applicant or the contractor at least 48 hours in advance. The applicant shall not proceed to work on any subsequent stage until such inspection has been made by the Director of Public Works or his authorized agent on the preceding stage.

6.	The Commission or its agent may take any material, samples, cores and tests as deemed necessary to determine compliance with these Regulations. The Commission shall require the applicant to pay to have such tests made and certified by an engineer selected by the Director of Public Works.

7.	Cessation of work or corrections thereto, to conform with these Regulations may be ordered by the Director of Public Works.

8.	If the Director of Public Works or his authorized agent finds, upon inspection, that any of the required improvements have not been constructed or maintained in accordance with the approved plans, he shall notify the applicant and the Commission, in writing, and the applicant shall be responsible for completing or repairing said improvements according to approved plans.

9.	The Director of Public Works shall maintain records of inspections in order to document that the work is performed in accordance with the approved plans.
 


7.5	PERIOD FOR COMPLETION OF IMPROVEMENTS


1.	Unless otherwise provided in these Regulations or the Connecticut General Statutes, the subdivision improvements shall be completed in accordance with the statutory timeframe as provided in CGS Section 8‐ 26c. The Commission’s endorsement of approval on the plan shall state the date on which completion period expires.

2.	Planned soil erosion and sediment control measures and facilities shall be installed as scheduled according to the certified plan and maintained in effective condition to ensure compliance with the certified plan.

3.	The sub‐grade, sub‐base, pavement binder course (if a City street), and all drainage required for any proposed street shall be completed prior to issuance of any Certificate of Occupancy for any structure served by such street.

4.	Upon application by the applicant, the Commission may make one or more extensions of the time period for completion provided that:
a.	The time for all extensions shall not exceed ten years from the date the subdivision was approved
unless otherwise provided in CGS Section 8‐26c(e);
b.	The Commission may revise the amount of the financial guarantee securing the actual completion of the
work.

5.	Expiration of the time period for completion:
a.	Shall result in expiration of the approval of such plan and filing of a notice of expiration on the land
records which shall prevent the conveyance of any additional lots in the subdivision by the applicant or his/her successor in interest;
b.	Shall require a new application for subdivision approval of the subject land including a new filing fee;
c.	May result in the City redeeming any financial guarantee and completing the improvements.

6.	For a proposed City street, the applicant shall maintain all improvements and provide for snow removal until the improvements are accepted by the City of Groton. If the improvements are not maintained or snow removal is not provided and the situation is not corrected within two (2) days following written notice from the City to the applicant, the City may proceed to put the street or other improvement into suitable condition and the cost of any such work shall be a charge against the financial guarantee.
 


7.6	MONUMENTS AND MARKERS


1.	The street lines of all new streets (angle points, points of curvature, and points of tangency) shall be marked at the applicant’s expense with merestones set by a surveyor and such merestones shall:
a.	Be made of granite or concrete;
b.	Be at least four (4) inches square at the top and at least three (3) feet long.
c.	Have the center of the top of the merestone marked with a metal plug, pin, rod, cross or drill hole;
d.	Be securely set in the ground with the top flush with the finished grade and with the marked point set on
the point of reference after all street construction is completed and prior to release of the financial guarantee and/or acceptance of a City street by the City.
e.	Be installed at all points of curvature, all points of tangency, all angle points and no more than 400 feet apart on straight sections of streets.
f.	Be indicated and located on the subdivision plan and as‐built drawing.

2.	Corners of all lots, open space, conservation restriction areas, and other parcels or areas shall be marked with a one (1) inch steel pipe or a 3/4‐inch reinforcing rod at least eighteen (18) inches long, or with stone or concrete monuments and such markings shall be set by a surveyor.

3.	All open space and conservation areas shall be suitably identified with a conservation marker at reasonable intervals.
 


7.7	FINAL ACCEPTANCE AND MAINTENANCE


1.	For final acceptance of public improvements, the applicant shall submit the following materials or such alternative documents acceptable to the Commission:
a.	A letter requesting a recommendation to the City Council that the City accept the public improvements;
b.	One mylar and one paper copy of plans showing the "as‐built" location of all street and associated
improvements approved by the Commission with indication of where the as‐built plans differ from the approved construction plans due to field conditions or authorized changes;
c.	A letter from a surveyor certifying that all required monuments and property corner pins are properly installed in the correct location;
d.	A letter from the engineer who designed the improvements approved by the Commission stating that all improvements, including all street signs, stop signs, and traffic control signs and devices have been installed or satisfactorily completed in accordance with the approved plans or indicating where exceptions were made;
e.	A letter from any companies providing utility services to the effect that such utilities have been
satisfactorily installed;
f.	If not previously provided, a financial guarantee of up to ten percent (10%) of the cost of the
improvements to protect the City against faulty construction and materials that will remain in effect for a one‐year period after the City has accepted the public improvements;
g.	If not previously provided, copies of all proposed deeds and easements to the City to the satisfaction of the City Attorney and other information as required for review and approval by the City;
h.	If not previously provided, copies of all other proposed deeds and easements to other parties that are integral to public improvements or conditions of approval or the proposed development.

2.	In all subdivisions with ten (10)  or more lots, no streets shall be accepted until:
a.	Final grading has been completed in accordance with the approved final subdivision plan for sixty percent
(60%) of the lots in a subdivision or section or phase thereof where grading is required; and
b.	At least four (4) inches of topsoil shall have been placed and graded on each lot or stockpiled on each lot
for future use on that lot; and
c.	All lots not under construction shall have been seeded in accordance with suggested practices as outlined
in the Connecticut "Guidelines for Soil Erosion & Sediment Control" except that sod or other suitable stabilization techniques may be substituted for seeding.

3.	If the City agrees to accept the street(s), all executed deeds and easements to the City shall be submitted to the City for filing by the City after the street acceptance.

4.	If the public improvements are accepted by the City and the maintenance financial guarantee is in place, the City shall release the financial guarantee for initial construction as set forth herein.
 





This page intentionally left blank.
 
CONCEPTUAL SUBDIVISION PROCESS

Applicant	City Staff	Planning and Zoning Commission

 
Prepare preliminary subdivision design



Refine subdivision design (if necessary)
 



Review plans with applicant	Review plans with applicant
(if necessary)
 






 









Submit additional information as
 
Review for completeness Establish “date of receipt” Notify appropriate agencies Conduct a field visit
Publish a legal notice Prepare staff report(s)
 








OPEN PUBLIC HEARING
 
requested or required	Provide supplemental report(s)
 


CLOSE PUBLIC HEARING
Deliberate / act on application
 


 
Modify plans for conditions of approval (if any) and submit



Provide financial guarantee for public improvements (if required)
File signed plans on land records
 
Review plans for consistency with approval



Exchange signed mylars for financial guarantees
 



Chairman signs record plans (mylars)
 


Review construction as it occurs



Review proposed improvements (Council accepts, when complete)
 















































 
 
Regulations For The Preservation of Inland Wetlands and Watercourses

City of Groton, Connecticut











































Effective June 29, 1974
Amended February 05, 1980
Amended  December 10 , 1985
Amended  July 5, 1988
Amended  July 3, 1990
Amended October 6, 1992
Amended February 7, 1995
Amended September 1, 2007
Amended May 6, 2014




i
 
Table of Contents
Section 1 Title and Authority	1
Section 2  Definitions	3
Section 3 Inventory of Inland Wetlands and Watercourses	6
Section 4 Permitted Uses as of Right & Nonregulated Uses	7
Section 5 Activities Regulated Exclusively by the Commissioner of Energy and Environmental Protection	8
Section 6 Regulated Activities to be Licensed	9
Section 7  Application Requirements	9
Section 8 Application Procedures 	12
Section 9 Public Hearings 	13
Section 10 Considerations for Decision 	14
Section 11 Decision Process and Permit 	16
Section 12 Action by Duly Authorized Agent 	18
Section 13 Bond and Insurance 	19
Section 14 Enforcement 	19
Section 15 Amendments 	20
Section 16 Appeals 	22
Section 17 Conflict and Severance 	22
Section 18 Other Permits 	22
Section 19 Fees 	22
Section 20 RECORDS RETENTION AND DISPOSITION 	24
Section 21 Effective Date of Regulations 	24
APPENDIX A 	25
STATEWIDE INLAND WETLAND ACTIVITY REPORTING FORM 	29
STATEWIDE INLAND WETLAND ACTIVITY REPORTING FORM 	30
APPLICATION FOR A PERMIT 	33
PETITION FOR CHANGE OF INLAND WETLANDS REGULATIONS OR BOUNDARY 	35
PERMIT PROCESSING FLOW CHART 	36
REFERENCES 	38
ii
 


































































iii
 
Title and Authority


1.1	The inland wetlands and watercourses of the State of Connecticut are an indispensable and irreplaceable but fragile natural resource with which the citizens of the state have been endowed. The wetlands and watercourses are an interrelated web of nature essential to an adequate supply of surface and underground water; to hydrological stability and control of flooding and erosion; to the recharging and purification of groundwater; and to the existence of many forms of animal, aquatic and plant life. Many inland wetlands and watercourses have been destroyed or are in danger of destruction, because, of unregulated use by reason of the deposition, fiIling or removal of material, the diversion or obstruction of water flow, the erection of structures and other uses, all of which have despoiled, polluted and eliminated wetlands and watercourses. Such unregulated activity has had, and will continue to have, a significant, adverse impact on the environment and ecology of the state of Connecticut and has and will continue to imperil the quality of the environment thus adversely affecting the ecological, scenic, historic and recreational values and benefits of the state for its citizens now and forever more. The preservation and protection of the wetlands and watercourses from random, unnecessary, undesirable and unregulated uses, disturbance or destruction is in the public interest and is essential to the health, welfare and safety of the citizens of the state. It is, therefore, the purpose of these regulations to protect the citizens of the state by making provisions for the protection, preservation, maintenance and use of the inland wetlands and watercourses by minimizing their disturbance and pollution; maintaining and improving water quality in accordance with the highest standards set by federal, state or local authority; preventing damage from erosion, turbidity or siltation; preventing loss of fish and other beneficial aquatic organisms, wildlife and vegetation and the destruction of the natural habitats, thereof; deterring and inhibiting the danger of flood and pollution; protecting the quality of wetlands and watercourses for their conservation, economic, aesthetic, recreational and other public and private uses and values; and protecting the state's potable, fresh water supplies from the dangers of drought, overdraft, pollution, misuse and mismanagement by providing an orderly process to balance the need for the economic growth of the state and the use of its land with the need to protect its environment and ecology in order to forever guarantee to the people of the state, the safety of such natural resources for their benefit and enjoyment and for the benefit and enjoyment of generations yet unborn.

1.2	These regulations shall be known as the “Inland Wetlands and Watercourse Regulations of the City of Groton”.



1.3	The Conservation Commission of the City of Groton was established in accordance with an ordinance adopted December 17, 1973 and shall implement the purposes and provisions of these regulations and the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Act in the City of Groton (Ordinance #42) August10,1970 Amended Sept 16 1974; February 05, 1980; December 10, 1985; July 05, 1988;
July 03, 1990; October 06, 1992; February 07, 1995; September 01, 2007, and May 6, 2014



1.4	These regulations have been adopted and may be amended, from time to time, in accordance with the provisions of the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Act and these regulations.



1.5	The Agency shall enforce the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Act and shall issue; issue with
 
terms, conditions, limitations or modifications; or deny permits for all regulated activities on inland wetlands and watercourses in the City of Groton pursuant to Sections 22a-36 to 22a-45, inclusive, of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
 


2.1	As used in these regulations:
 
Definitions
 
a.	“Act” means the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Act, Sections22a-36 through 22a-45, inclusive, of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
b.	“Agency” means the City of Groton Conservation Commission acting as the Inlands Wetlands and Watercourses Agency of the City of Groton.
c.	“Agent” see Designated Agent
d.	“Agriculture” shall be defined in Appendix A
e.	“Bogs” are watercourses distinguished by evergreen trees and shrubs underlain by peat deposits, poor or very poor drainage, and highly acidic conditions.
f.	“City” means the City of Groton, New London County in the State of Connecticut.
g.	“Clear-cutting” means the harvest of timber in a fashion which removes all trees down to a two (2) inch diameter at breast height.
h.	“Commission Member” means a member of the Commission acting as the Inlands Wetlands and Watercourses Agency of the City of Groton.
i.	“Commissioner of Energy and Environmental Protection” means the commissioner of the State of the Connecticut Department of Energy and Environmental Protection.
j.	“Consultant” may include, but not limited to, city engineer, soil scientist, biologist, zoologist, botanist, hydrologist, and or landscape architect.  Consultant does not include city staff or legal counsel.
k.	“Continual flow” means a flow of water which persists for an extended period of time; this flow may be interrupted during periods of drought or during the low flow period of the annual hydrological cycle, June through September, but it recurs in prolonged succession.
l.	“DEEP” Department of Energy and Environmental Protection
m.	“Deposit” includes, but shall not be limited to fill, grade, dump, place, discharge or emit.
n.	“Designated Agent” means an individual designated by the agency to carry out its functions and purposes.
o.	“Discharge” means emission of any water, substance or material into waters of the state whether or not such substance causes pollution.
p.	“Disturbing the natural and indigenous character of the land” means that the activity will significantly alter the inland wetlands and watercourses by reason of removal or deposition of material, clear-cutting, alteration or obstruction of water flow, or will result in the pollution of the wetlands or watercourses.
q.	“Essential to the farming operation” means that the proposed activity is necessary and indispensable to sustain farming activities on the farm.
r.	“Farming” shall be consistent with the definition as noted in Section 1-1.  General Statutes. (See Appendix A).
s.	“Feasible” means able to be constructed or implemented: consistent with sound engineering principles.
t.	“Intermittent Watercourse” means those waterways which are characterized by non- persistent flow. For purposes of these regulations, intermittent watercourses are delineated by one (1) or more of the following:
 
A defined permanent channel with the evidence of scour or deposits of recent alluvium or detritus. The presence of standing or flowing water for a duration longer than a particular storm incident. Ordinarily, the presence of water is supported by a component, however small, of groundwater
overflow or exfiltration.
The presence of or ability to support the growth of hydrophytic vegetation.


u.	“License” means the whole or any part of any permit, certificate of approval or similar form of permission which may be required of any person by the provisions of Sections 22a-36 to 22a-45 inclusive.


v.	“Management practice” means a practice, procedure, activity, structure or facility designed to prevent or minimize pollution or other environmental damage or to maintain or enhance existing environmental quality. Such management practices include, but are not limited to: erosion and sedimentation controls; restrictions on land use or development; construction setbacks from wetlands or watercourses; proper disposal of waste materials; procedures for equipment maintenance to prevent fuel spillage; construction methods to prevent flooding or disturbance of wetlands and watercourses; procedures for maintaining continuous stream flows; confining construction that must take place in watercourses to times when water flows are low and fish and wildlife will not be adversely affected.
w.	“Marshes” are watercourses that are distinguished by the absence of trees and shrubs and the dominance of soft-stemmed herbaceous plants. The water table in marshes is at or above the ground surface throughout the year and areas of open water six inches or more in depth are common, but seasonal water table fluctuations are encountered.
x.	“Material” means any substance, solid or liquid, organic or inorganic, including but not limited to soil, sediment, aggregate, land, gravel, clay, bog, mud, debris, sand, refuse or waste.
y.	“Minor activity” means a proposed activity, which is not a significant activity
z.	“Municipality” means the City of Groton.
aa.	“Nurseries” means places where plants are grown for sale, transplanting or experimentation. bb.	“Permit” see license.
cc.	“Permittee” means the person to whom a license has been issued.
dd.	“Person” means any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, limited liability company, organization or legal entity of any kind, including municipal corporations, governmental agencies or subdivisions thereof.
ee.	“Pollution” means harmful thermal effect or the contamination or rendering unclean or impure of any waters of the state by reason of any waste or other materials discharged or deposited therein by any public or private sewer or otherwise so as directly or indirectly to come in contact with any waters. This includes, but is not limited to, erosion and sedimentation resulting from any filling, land clearing or excavation activity.
ff.	“Prudent” means economically and otherwise reasonable in light of the social benefits to be derived from the proposed regulated activity provided cost may be considered in deciding what is prudent and further provided a mere showing of expense will not necessarily mean, an alternative is imprudent.
gg.	“Regulated Activity” means any operation within or use of a wetland, or watercourse, involving removal or deposition of material, or an obstruction, construction alteration or pollution, of such wetlands or watercourses, but shall not include the specified activities in Section 22a-40 of the Connecticut General Statues. Furthermore, any clearing, grubbing, filling, grading, paving,
 
excavating, constructing, depositing, or removing of material and discharging of storm water on the land within 200 feet measured horizontally from the boundary of any wetland or watercourse area (Upland Review Area) is likely to impact or affect wetlands or watercourses and is a regulated activity.
hh.	“Regulated Area” means any wetlands, watercourses, or upland review areas as defined in these guidelines.
ii.	“Remove” includes, but shall not be limited to drain, excavate, mine, dig, dredge, suck, bulldoze, dragline or blast.
jj.	“Rendering unclean or impure” means any alteration of the physical, chemical or biological properties of any waters of the state, including, but not limited to, change in odor, color, turbidity or taste.
kk.	“Significant Activity or Significant Impact” means any activity, including, but not limited to the following activities which may have a major effect or significant impact on the area for which an application has been filed or on another inland wetlands or watercourse system:

1.	Any activity on or within 200 feet of a wetland or watercourse involving a deposition or removal of material which will or may have a major effect or significant impact on the regulated area or on another part of the inland wetlands or watercourse system.
2.	Any activity which substantially changes the natural channel or may inhibit the natural dynamics of a watercourse system.
3.	Any activity which substantially diminishes the natural capacity of an inland wetlands or watercourse to support aquatic, plant or animal life and habitats; prevent flooding; supply water; assimilate waste; facilitate drainage; provide recreation or open space; or perform other functions.
4.	Any activity which is likely to cause or has the potential to cause substantial turbidity, siltation or sedimentation in a wetland or watercourse.
5.	Any activity which causes substantial diminishing of flow of a natural watercourse or groundwater levels of the wetland or watercourse.
6.	Any activity which causes or has the potential to cause pollution of a wetland or watercourse.
7.	Any activity which damages or destroys unique wetland or watercourse areas or such areas having demonstrable scientific or educational value.

ll.	“Soil scientist” means an individual duly qualified in accordance with standards set by the Federal Office of Personnel Management.
mm.	“Swamps” are watercourses that are distinguished by the dominance of wetland trees and shrubs. nn.	“Submerged lands” means those lands which are inundated by water on a seasonal or more
frequent basis.
oo.	“Upland Review Area” an area that extends 200 feet from all wetlands and watercourses and means a non-wetland or non-watercourse area in which certain activities would be regulated because it best conveys the regulatory scheme under the wetlands statues wherein a wetland agency reviews regulated activities case-by-case and approves or disapproves them on their merits. The inland wetland statues do not authorize a blanket prohibition of all activities either in the wetlands or in upland review, buffer or setback areas.
pp.	“Waste” means sewage or any substance, liquid, gaseous, solid or radioactive, which may pollute or tend to pollute any of the wetlands and watercourses of the City.
qq.	“Watercourses” means rivers, streams, brooks, waterways, lakes, ponds, marshes, swamps, bogs,
 
and all other bodies of water, natural or artificial, vernal or intermittent, public or private, which are contained within, flow through or border upon the City or any portion thereof not regulated pursuant to Sections 22a-28 through 22a-35, inclusive, of the Connecticut General Statutes. Intermittent watercourses shall be delineated by a defined permanent channel and bank and the occurrence of two (2) or more of the following characteristics:
1.	evidence of scour or deposits of recent alluvium or detritus,
2.	the presence of standing or flowing water for a duration longer than a particular storm incident, and
3.	the presence of hydrophytic vegetation.


rr.	“Wetlands” means land, including submerged land as defined in this section, not regulated pursuant to Sections 22a-28 through 22a-35, inclusive, of the Connecticut General Statutes, which consists of any of the soil types designated as poorly drained, very poorly drained, alluvial and floodplain by the National Cooperative Soils Survey, as it may be amended from time to time, of the Natural Resources Conservation Service of the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA). Such areas may include filled, graded, or excavated sites which possess an aqutic (saturated) soil moisture regime as defined by the USDA Cooperative Soil Survey.

Section 3
Inventory of Inland Wetlands and Watercourses

3.1	The map of wetlands and watercourses entitled “Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Map, City of Groton, Connecticut” as revised periodically based on Connecticut DEEP soil maps, as amended; delineates the general location and boundaries of inland wetlands and the general location of watercourses. Copies of this map are available for inspection at the office of the City Clerk or the Agency. In all cases, the precise location of wetlands and watercourses shall be determined by the actual character of the land, the distribution of wetland soil types and location of watercourses. The Agency may use aerial photography, remote sensing imagery, resource mapping, soils maps, site inspection observations or other information in determining the location of the boundaries of wetlands and watercourses.


3.2	Any person may petition the Agency for an amendment to the map. All petitions for a map change shall be submitted in accordance with Section 15. The petitioner shall bear the burden of proof regarding the proposed map amendment. Such proof may include, but not be limited to aerial photography, remote sensing imagery, resource mapping or other available information. The Agency may require such person to provide an accurate delineation of regulated areas in accordance with Section 15 of these regulations.


3.3	The Agency shall maintain a current inventory of regulated areas within the city. The Agency may amend its map in accordance with Section 15 as more accurate information becomes available.


3.4	All map amendments are subject to the public hearing process outlined in Section 15 of these regulations.
 
Section 4
Permitted Uses as of Right & Nonregulated Uses

4.1	The following operations and uses shall be permitted in inland wetlands and watercourses, as of right:
a.	Grazing, farming, nurseries, gardening and harvesting of crops and farm ponds of three acres or less essential to the farming operation, and activities conducted by, or under the authority
of, the Department of  Energy and Environmental Protection for the purposes of wetland or watercourse restoration or enhancement or mosquito control. The provisions of this subdivision sha1l not be construed to include road construction or the erection of buildings not directly
related to the farming operation, relocation of watercourses with continual flow, filling or reclamation of wetlands or watercourses with continual flow, clear cutting of timber except for
the expansion of agricultural crop land, the mining of top soil, peat, sand, gravel or similar material from wetlands or watercourses for the purposes of sale;
b.	A residential home (A) for which a building permit has been issued or (B) on a subdivision lot, provided the permit has been issued or the subdivision has been approved by a municipal planning, zoning or planning and zoning commission as of the effective date of promulgation of the municipal regulations pursuant to Subsection (b) of Section 22a-42a, or as of July 1, 1974, whichever is earlier, and further provided no residential home shall be permitted as of right pursuant to this subdivision unless the permit was obtained on or before July 1, 1987;
c.	Boat anchorage or mooring;
d.	Uses incidental to the enjoyment and maintenance of residential property, such property defined as equal to or smaller than the largest minimum residential lot site permitted anywhere in the municipality provided that in any town where there are no zoning regulations establishing minimum residential lot sites, the largest minimum lot site shall be two (2) acres. Such incidental uses shall include maintenance of existing structures and landscaping, but shall not include removal or deposition of significant amounts of material from or onto a wetland or watercourse, or diversion or alteration of a watercourse;
e.	Construction and operation, by water companies as defined by Section 16-1 of the Connecticut General Statutes or by municipal water supply systems as provided for in Chapter 102 of the Connecticut General Statutes, of dams, reservoirs and other facilities necessary to the impounding, storage and withdrawal of water in connection with public water supplies except as provided in Sections 22a-401 and 22a-403 of the Connecticut General Statutes;
f.	Maintenance relating to any drainage pipe which existed before the effective date of any municipal regulations adopted pursuant to Section 22a-42a of the Connecticut General Statutes or July 1, 1974, whichever is earlier, provided such pipe is on property which is zoned as residential but which does not contain hydrophytic vegetation. For purposes of this subdivision, “maintenance” means the removal of accumulated leaves, soil, and other debris whether by hand or machine, while the pipe remains in place; and

g.	Withdrawals of water for fire emergency purposes.




4.2	The following operations and uses sha1l be permitted, as nonregulated uses in wetlands and watercourses, provided they do not disturb the natural and indigenous character of the wetland or watercourse by removal or deposition of material, alteration or obstruction of water flow or pollution of the wetland or watercourse:
a.	Conservation of soil, vegetation, water, fish, shellfish and wildlife;
 
b.	Outdoor recreation including play and sporting areas, golf courses, field trials, nature study, hiking, horseback riding, swimming, skin diving, camping, boating, water skiing, trapping, hunting, fishing and she1lfishing where otherwise lega1ly permitted and regulated; and
c.	The installation of a dry hydrant by or under the authority of a municipal fire department, provided such dry hydrant is only used for firefighting purposes and there is no alternative access to a public water supply. For purposes of this section, “dry hydrant” means a non-pressurized pipe system that: (A) is readily accessible to fire department apparatus from a proximate public road, (B) provides for the withdrawal of water by suction to such fire department apparatus, and
(C) is permanently installed into an existing lake, pond or stream that is a dependable source of water.


4.3	All activities in wetlands or watercourses involving filling, excavating, dredging, clear cutting, clearing, or grading or any other alteration or use of a wetland or watercourse not specifica1ly permitted by this section and otherwise defined as a regulated activity by these regulations shall require a permit from the Agency in accordance with Section 6 of these regulations, or for certain regulated activities located outside of wetlands and watercourses from the duly authorized agent in accordance with Section 12 of these regulations.


4.4	To carry out the purposes of this section, any person proposing a permitted operation and use or a nonregulated operation and use shall, prior to commencement of such operation and use, notify the Agency on a form provided by it, and provide the Agency with sufficient information to enable it to properly determine that the proposed operation and use is a permitted or nonregulated use of a wetland or watercourse. The Agency shall rule that the proposed operation and use or portion of it is a permitted or nonregulated operation and use or that the proposed operation and use is a regulated activity and a permit is required.

Section 5
Activities Regulated Exclusively by the Commissioner of Energy and Environmental Protection

5.1	The Commissioner of Energy and Environmental Protection shall have exclusive jurisdiction over regulated activities in or affecting wetlands or watercourses undertaken by any department, agency or instrumentality of the State of Connecticut, except any local or regional board of education, pursuant to Sections 22a-39 or 22a-45a of the Connecticut General Statues.


5.2	The Commissioner of Environmental Protection shall have exclusive jurisdiction over tidal wetlands designated and regulated pursuant to Sections 22a-28 through 22a-35 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
5.3	The Commissioner of Energy and Environmental Protection shall have exclusive jurisdiction over activities authorized under a dam repair or removal order issued by the Commissioner of Energy and Environmental Protection under Section 22a-402 of the Connecticut General Statutes or a permit issued by the Commissioner of Energy and Environmental Protection under Sections 22a- 403 of the Connecticut General Statutes. Any person receiving such dam repair or removal order or permit shall not be required to obtain a permit from a municipal wetlands agency for any action necessary to comply with said dam order or to carry out the activities authorized by said permit.


5.4	The Commissioner of Energy and Environmental Protection shall have exclusive jurisdiction over
 
the discharge of fill or dredged materials into the wetlands and watercourses of the state pursuant to Section 401 of the Federal Clean Water Act, as amended, for activities regulated by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers under Section 404 of the Federal Clean Water Act.

Section 6
Regulated Activities to be Licensed

6.1	No person shall conduct or maintain a regulated activity without first obtaining a permit for such activity from the Inlands Wetlands Agency of the City of Groton.


6.2	The Agency shall regulate any operation within or use of a wetlands or watercourse involving the removal or deposition of material, or any obstruction, construction, alteration or pollution of such wetlands or watercourse and any other regulated activity, unless such operation or use is permitted or non-regulated pursuant to Section 4 of these regulations.


6.3	Any person found to be conducting or maintaining a regulated activity without the prior authorization of the Agency, or violating any other provision of these regulations, shall be subject to the enforcement proceedings and penalties prescribed in Section 14 of these regulations and any other remedies as provided by law.

Section 7 Application Requirements

7.1	Any person intending to conduct a regulated activity or to renew or amend a permit to conduct such activity, shall apply for a permit on a form provided by the Agency. The application shall contain the information described in this Section and any other information the Agency may reasonably require. Application forms may be obtained in the offices of the Groton City Clerk or the Inlands Wetlands Agency.


7.2	If an application to the City of Groton Planning, Zoning, or Planning and Zoning Commission for subdivision or re-subdivision of land involves land containing a wetland or watercourse, the applicant shall, in accordance with Section 8-3(g), 8-3c, or 8-26, as applicable, of the Connecticut General Statutes, submit an application for a permit to the Agency in accordance with this section, no later than the day the application is filed with such planning, zoning, or planning and zoning commission.


7.3	The application shall contain such information as is  necessary  for  a  fair  and  informed determination thereon by the Agency.


7.4	The Agency and the applicant may hold a pre-application meeting to determine whether or not the proposed application involves significant activity. Whenever possible the determination relative to the significant activities should be made at the pre-application meeting.


7.5	All applications shall include the following information in writing or on maps or drawings:
a.	The applicant's name, home and business mailing addresses and telephone numbers; if the applicant is a Limited Liability Corporation or a Corporation the managing member's or responsible corporate officer's name, address, and telephone number;
 
b.	The owner's name, mailing address and telephone number and written consent of the landowner if the applicant is not the owner of the land upon which the subject activity is proposed;
c.	The applicant's interest in the land;
d.	The geographical location of the land which is the subject of the proposed activity and a description of the land in sufficient detail to allow identification of the inland wetlands and watercourses, the area(s) (in acres or square feet) of wetlands or watercourses to be disturbed, soil type(s), and wetland vegetation;
e.	The purpose and a description of the proposed activity and proposed erosion sedimentation controls and other management practices and mitigation measures which maybe considered as a condition of issuing the permit for the proposed regulated activity including, but not limited to, measures to
1.	prevent or minimize pollution or other environmental damage,
2.	maintain or enhance existing environmental quality, or
3.	in the fo1lowing order of priority: restore, enhance and create productive wetland or watercourse resources;
f.	Alternatives which would cause less or no environmental impact to wetlands or watercourses and why the alternative as set forth in the application was chosen; such alternatives shall be diagramed on a site plan or drawing;
g.	A site plan showing the proposed activity and existing and proposed conditions in relation to wetlands and watercourses and identifying any further activities associated with, or reasonably related to, the proposed regulated activity which are made inevitable by the proposed regulated activity and which may have an impact on wetlands or watercourses;
h.	Names and mailing addresses of adjacent land owners;
i.	Statement by the applicant that the applicant is familiar with all the information provided in the application and is aware of the penalties for obtaining a permit through deception or through inaccurate or misleading information;
j.	Authorization for the members and agents of the Agency to inspect the subject land, at reasonable times, during the pendency of an application and for the life of the permit;
k.	Completed DEEP reporting form; the Agency shall revise or correct the information provided by the applicant and submit the form to the Commissioner of Energy and Environmental Protection in accordance with Section 22a-39-14 of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies;
1.	Any other information the Agency deems necessary to the understanding of what the applicant is proposing; and
m.	Submission of the appropriate filing fee based on the fee schedule established in Section 19 of these regulations.


7.6	At the discretion of the Agency or its agent, or when the proposed activity involves a significant impact, additional information, based on the nature and anticipated effects of the activity, including but not limited to the following, is required:
a.	Site plans for the proposed activity and the land which will be affected thereby which show existing and proposed conditions, wetland and watercourse boundaries, land contours,
boundaries of land ownership, proposed alterations and uses of wetlands and watercourses, and
other pertinent features of the land and the proposed activity, prepared by a professional engineer, land surveyor, architect or landscape architect licensed by the state, or by such other qualified
person;
b.	Engineering reports and analyses and additional drawings to fully describe the proposed
 
activity including any filling, excavation, drainage or hydraulic modifications to watercourses and the proposed erosion and sedimentation control plan;
c.	Mapping of soil types consistent with the categories established by the National Cooperative Soil Survey of the U.S. Natural Resources Conservation Service; the wetlands shall be delineated in the field by a soil scientist and the soil scientist's field delineation shall be depicted on the site plans;
d.	A description of the ecological communities and functions of the wetlands or watercourses involved with the application and the effects of the proposed activity on these communities and wetland functions;
e.	A description of how the applicant will change, diminish, or enhance the ecological communities and functions of the wetlands or watercourses involved in the application and each alternative which would cause less or no environmental impact to wetlands or watercourses, and a description of why each alternative considered was deemed neither feasible nor prudent;
f.	Analysis of chemical or physical characteristics of any fill material; and
g.	Management practices and other measures designed to mitigate the impact of the proposed activity.


7.7	The applicant shall certify whether:
a.	Any portion of the property on which the regulated activity is proposed is located within 500 feet of the boundary of an adjoining municipality;
b.	Traffic attributable to the completed project on the site will use streets within the adjoining municipality to enter or exit the site;
c.	Sewer or water drainage from the project site will flow through and impact the sewage or drainage system within the adjoining municipality; or
d.	Water run-off from the improved site will impact streets or other municipal or private property within the adjoining municipality.
7.8	A reporting form shall be completed during the application process which provides the commissioner of the DEEP with the information necessary to properly monitor the inventory of State wetlands. The reporting form shall be part of the application and specified Sections shall be completed by the applicant. These Sections shall include the following: name of the applicant; name of the project; project description; area of wetlands and/or lineal feet of watercourse proposed to be altered. The Agency shall be responsible for the remaining information and any corrections on the form and for filling it in accordance with Section 22a-29 of the Inland Wetland and Watercourse Regulations of the Department of Energy and Environmental Protection.


7.9	Sixteen (16) copies of all application materials shall be submitted to comprise a complete application. Plans and drawings can be provided as 8 full, and 8 half size plans unless an applicant is otherwise directed by the Agent. (drawing sizes specified by Inland Wetlands Agency 4/25/2012)


7.10	Any application to renew a permit shall be granted upon request of the permit holder unless the Agency: finds that there has been a substantial change in circumstances which requires a new permit application or an enforcement action has been undertaken with regard to the regulated activity for which the permit was issued, provided  no permit, shall be valid for more than ten years and further provide that any permit issued prior to July 1, 2011 that did not expire prior to May 9, 2011 shall be valid for no more than
 
fourteen years.

7.11	For any permit application involving property subject to a conservation restriction or preservation restriction, the following shall apply:

a.	for purposes of this section, "conservation restriction" means a limitation, whether or not stated in the form of a restriction, easement, covenant or condition, in any deed, will or other instrument executed by or on behalf of the owner of the land described therein, including, but not limited to, the state or any political subdivision of the state, or in any order of taking such land whose purpose is to retain land or water areas predominantly in their natural, scenic or open condition or in agricultural, farming, forest or open space use.

b.	for purposes of this section, "preservation restriction" means a limitation, whether or not stated in the form of a restriction, easement, covenant or condition, in any deed, will or other instrument executed by or on behalf of the owner of land, including, but not limited to, the state or any political subdivision of the state, or in any order of taking of such land whose purpose is to preserve historically significant structures or sites.

c.	no person shall file a permit application, other than for interior work in an existing building or for exterior work on an existing building that does not expand or alter the footprint of such existing building, relating to property that is subject to a conservation restriction or a preservation restriction unless the applicant provides proof that the applicant has provided written notice of such application, by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the party holding such restriction, including, but not limited to, any state agency that holds such restriction, not later than sixty days prior to the filling of the permit application.

d.	in lieu of such notice pursuant to subsection 7.11c, the applicant may submit a letter from the holder of such restriction or from the holder’s authorized agent, verifying that the application is in compliance with the terms of the restriction.

Section 8 Application Procedures

8.1	All petitions, applications, requests or appeals shall be submitted to Clerk of the City of Groton who shall act as agent of the City of Groton Conservation Commission acting as the Inlands Wetlands and Watercourses Agency of the City of Groton for the receipt of such petition, application, request or appeal.


8.2	The Agency shall, in accordance with Connecticut General Statutes Section 8-7d(f), notify the clerk of any adjoining municipality of the pendency of any application, petition, appeal, request or plan concerning any project on any site in which:
a.	Any portion of the property affected by a decision of the agency is within five hundred
(500) feet of the boundary of an adjoining municipality;
b.	A significant portion of the traffic to the completed project on the site will use streets within the adjoining municipality to enter or exit the site;
c.	A significant portion of the sewer or water drainage from the project on the site will flow through and significantly impact the drainage or sewerage system within the adjoining municipality; or
 
d.	Water run-off from the improved site will impact streets or other municipal or private property within the adjoining municipality.
NOTE: Such notice shall be made by certified mail, return receipt requested, and shall be mailed within seven days of the date of receipt of the application, petition, appeal, request or plan.


8.3	When an application is filed to conduct or cause to be conducted a regulated activity upon an inland Wetland or watercourse, any portion of which is Within the watershed of a water company as defined in section 25-32a, the applicant shall provide written notice of the application to the water company and the Commissioner of Public Health in a format prescribed by said commissioner, provided such water company or said commissioner has filed a map showing the boundaries of the Watershed on the land records of the municipality in which the application is made and with the inland Wetlands agency of such municipality. Such notice shall be made by certified mail, return receipt requested, and shall be mailed not later than seven days after the date of the application. The water company and the Commissioner of Public Health, through a representative, may appear and be heard at any hearing on the application.


8.4	The date of receipt of a petition, application, request or appeal shall be the day of the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Agency, immediately following the day of submission to the Agency or its agent of such petition, application, request or appeal or thirty-five (35) days after such submission, whichever is sooner.


8.5	At any time during the review period, the applicant shall provide such additional information as the Agency may reasonably require. Requests for such additional information shall not stay the time limitations as set forth in Subsection 11.2 of these regulations.


8.6	All applications shall be open for public inspection.


8.7	Incomplete applications or those unaccompanied by the proper fee may be denied.

Section 9 Public Hearings

9.1	The inland wetlands agency shall not hold a public hearing on an application unless the inland wetlands agency determines that the proposed activity may have a significant impact on wetlands or watercourses, a petition signed by at least twenty-five (25) persons who are eighteen (18) years of age or older and who reside in the municipality in which the regulated activity is proposed, requesting a hearing is filed with the inland wetlands agency not later than fourteen (14) days after the date of receipt of such application, or the inland wetlands agency finds that a public hearing regarding such application would be in the public interest. The inland wetlands agency may issue a permit without a public hearing provided no petition provided for in this Section is filed with the inland wetlands agency on or before the fourteenth (14) day after the date of receipt of the application. Such hearing shall be held no later than sixty-five (65) days after the receipt of such application. All applications and maps and documents relating thereto shall be open for public inspection. At such hearing any person or persons may appear and be heard.
9.2	Notice of the public hearing shall be published at least twice at intervals of not less than two (2) days, the first not more than fifteen (15) days and not fewer than ten (10) days, and the last not less than two  (2) days before the date set for the hearing in a newspaper having a general
 
circulation in each town where the affected wetland and watercourse is located.


9.3	Notice of the public hearing shall be mailed to the owner(s) of record of abutting land no less than fifteen (15) days prior to the day of the hearing certified mail, return receipt requested.


9.4	In the case of any application which is subject to the notification provisions of Section 8.2 of these Regulations, a public hearing shall not be conducted until the clerk of the adjoining municipality(ies) has received notice of the pendency of the application. Proof of such notification shall be entered into the hearing record.

Section 10 Considerations for Decision

10.1	The Agency may consider the following in making its decision on an application:
a.	The application and its supporting documentation;
b.	Reports from other agencies and commissions including but not limited to the City of Groton
1.	Conservation Commission,
2.	Planning, Zoning, or Planning and Zoning Commissions,
3.	Building Official,
4.	Health Officer.
c.	The Agency may also consider comments on any application from the New London County Soil and Water Conservation District, the Southeastern Regional Planning Agency or other regional organizations (i.e. Council of Elected Officials); agencies in adjacent municipalities which may be affected by the proposed activity, or other technical agencies or organizations which may undertake additional studies or investigations;
d.	Non-receipt of comments from state agencies and commissions listed in subdivision 10.1 b and c above within the prescribed time shall neither delay nor prejudice the decision of the Agency;
e.	For an application for which a public hearing is held, public comments, evidence and testimony.


10.2	Factors for consideration of commissioner. Finding of no feasible and prudent alternative. In carrying out the purposes and policies of Sections 22a-36 to 22a-45, inclusive, of the Connecticut General Statutes, including matters relating to regulating, licensing and enforcing of the provisions thereof, the Agency shall take into consideration all relevant facts and circumstances, including but not limited to:
a.	The environmental impact of the proposed regulated activity on wetlands or watercourses;
b.	The applicant's purpose for, and any feasible and prudent alternatives to, the proposed regulated activity which alternatives would cause less or no environmental impact to wetlands or watercourses;
c.	The relationship between the short term and long term impacts of the proposed regulated activity on wetlands or watercourses and the maintenance and enhancement of long-term productivity of such wetlands or watercourses;
d.	Irreversible and irretrievable loss of wetland or watercourse resources which would be caused by the proposed regulated activity, including the extent to which such activity would foreclose a future ability to protect, enhance or restore such resources, and any mitigation
 
measures which may be considered as a condition of issuing a permit for such activity including, but not limited to, measures to
1.	prevent or minimize pollution or other environmental damage,
2.	maintain or enhance existing environmental quality, or
3.	in the following order of priority: restore, enhance and create productive wetland or watercourse resources;
e.	The character and degree of injury to, or interference with, safety, health or the  reasonable use of property, including abutting or downstream property, which would be caused or threatened by the proposed activity, or the creation of conditions which may do so. This include as recognition of potential damage from erosion, turbidity or siltation, loss of fish and wildlife and their habitat, loss of unique habitat having demonstrable natural scientific or educational value, loss or diminution of beneficial aquatic organisms and wetland plants, the dangers of flooding and pollution, and the destruction of the economic, aesthetic, recreational and other public and private uses and values of wetlands and watercourses to the community;
f.	Impacts of the proposed regulated activity on wetlands or watercourses outside the area for which the activity is proposed and future activities associated with or reasonably related to, the proposed regulated activity which are made inevitable by the proposed regulated activity and which may have an impact on wetlands and watercourses; and
g.	Measures which would mitigate the impact of any aspect of the proposed regulated activities. Such measures include, but are not limited to, actions which would avoid adverse impacts or lessen impacts to wetlands and watercourses and which could be feasibly carried out by the applicant and would protect the wetland's or watercourse's natural capacity to support fish and wildlife, prevent flooding, supply water, control sedimentation, prevent erosion, assimilate wastes, facilitate drainage, to control pollution, to support recreational activities and open space, and to promote public health and safety. The burden of proof shall be on the applicant to demonstrate that the proposed alteration or destruction of wetlands or watercourses is unavoidable and that feasible or prudent alternatives to the proposed alteration or destruction of wetlands or watercourses does not exist.
10.3	In the case of an application which received a public hearing pursuant to a finding by the Agency that the proposed activity may have a significant impact on wetlands or watercourses, a permit shall not be issued unless the Agency finds on the basis of the record that a feasible and prudent alternative does not exist. In making this finding the Agency shall consider the factors set forth in Subsection 10.2 of this section. The finding and the reasons therefore shall be stated on the record in writing.
10.4	In reaching its decision on any application after a public hearing, the Agency shall base its decision on the record of that hearing. Documentary evidence or other material not in the hearing shall not be considered by the Agency in its decision. However, the Agency is not precluded from seeking advice from its own experts on information already in the record of the public hearing providing no new evidence or testimony is offered by the Agency's experts, and should do so only after providing notice to the applicant and any other named parties to the proceedings, and providing an opportunity to rebut the comments or opinions of the Agency's experts.


10.5	In the case of an application which is denied on the basis of a finding that there may be feasible and prudent alternatives to the proposed regulated activity which have less adverse impact on wetlands or watercourses, the Agency shall propose on the record in writing the types of alternatives which the applicant may investigate provided this Subsection shall not be construed
 
to shift the burden from the applicant to prove that he is entitled to the permit or to present alternatives to the proposed regulated activity.


10.6	For purposes of this section,
a.	“wetlands and watercourses” includes aquatic, plant or animal life and habitats in wetlands or watercourses, and
b.	“habitats” means areas or environments in which an organism or biological population normally lives or occurs.


10.7	A municipal inland wetlands agency shall not deny or condition an application for a regulated activity in an area outside wetlands or watercourses on the basis of an impact or effect on aquatic, plant, or animal life unless such activity will likely impact or affect the physical characteristics of such wetlands or watercourses.


10.8	In the case of an application where the applicant has provided written notice pursuant to subsection 7.11c of these regulations, the holder of the restriction may provide proof to the inland wetlands agency that granting of the permit application will violate the terms of the restriction. Upon a finding that the requested land use violates the terms of such restriction, the inland wetlands agency shall not grant the permit approval.

10.9	In the case of an application where the applicant fails to comply with the provisions of subsections 7.11c or 7.11d of these regulations, the party holding the conservation or preservation restriction (1) the party holding the conservation or preservation restriction, other than a state agency that holds such restriction, may, not later than fifteen days after the receipt of actual notice of permit approval, file an appeal with the inland wetlands agency, subject to the rules and regulations of such agency relating to appeals. The inland wetlands agency shall reverse the permit approval upon a finding that the requested land use violates the terms of such restriction or (2) the state agency that holds such restriction may, not later than thirty days after receipt of actual notice of permit approval, file an appeal with the inland wetlands agency, subject to the rules and regulations of such agency relating to appeals. The inland wetlands agency shall  immediately reverse such permit approval if the commissioner of the state agency that holds such restriction certifies that the land use authorized in such permit violate the terms of such conservation or preservation restriction.

10.10	Nothing subsections 7.11c or 7.11d of these regulations shall be construed to prohibit the filing of a permit application or to require such written notice when the activity that is the subject of such permit application will occur on a portion of property than is not restricted under the terms of such conservation or preservation restriction.

Section 11
Decision Process and Permit

11.1	The Agency, or its duly authorized agent acting pursuant to Section 12 of these regulations, may, in accordance with Section 10 of these regulations, grant the application as filed or grant it upon other terms, conditions, limitations or modifications of the regulated activity designed to carry out the purposes and policies of the Act, or deny the application. Such terms may include any reasonable measures which would mitigate the impacts of the regulated activity and which would
 
(a)prevent or minimize pollution or other environmental (b) maintain or enhance existing environmental quality, or damage, (c) in the following order of priority: restore, enhance and create productive wetland or watercourse resources. Such terms may include restrictions as to the time in which a regulated activity may be conducted, provided the Agency, or its agent, determines that such restriction are necessary to carry out the policy of Section 22a-36 to 22a-45 inclusive of the Connecticut General Statues.


11.2	No later than sixty-five (65) days after receipt of an application, the Agency may hold a public hearing on such application. At such hearing any person or persons may appear and be heard and may be represented by agent or attorney. The hearing shall be completed within thirty-five (35) days of its commencement. Action shall be taken on applications within thirty-five (35) days after completion of a public hearing. In the absence of a public hearing, action shall be taken on applications within sixty-five (65) days from the date of receipt of the application. The applicant may consent to one or more extensions of the periods specified in this subsection, provided the total extension of all such periods shall not be for longer than sixty-five (65) days, or may withdraw the application. The failure of the Agency to act within any time period specified in this subsection, or any extension thereof, shall not be deemed to constitute approval of the application. An application deemed incomplete by the Agency shall be withdrawn by the applicant or denied by the Agency.


11.3	The Agency shall state upon its record the reasons and basis for its decision.


11.4	The Agency shall notify the applicant and any person entitled to such notice of its decision within fifteen (15) days of the date of the decision by certified mail, return receipt requested, and the Agency shall cause notice of its order in the issuance or denial of the permit, to be published in a newspaper having general circulation in the town wherein the inland wetland or watercourse lies. In any case in which such notice is not published within such fifteen-day (15) period, the applicant may provide for the publication of such notice within ten (10) days thereafter.


11.5	If an activity authorized by an inland wetland permit also involves an activity or project which requires a zoning or subdivision approval, special zoning permit, or variance or special exception, under Sections 8-3(g), 8-3c, or 8-26 of the Connecticut General Statues, the Agency shall file a copy of the decision and report on the application with the City of Groton Planning, Zoning, or Planning and Zoning Commission within fifteen (15) days of the date of the decision thereon.


11.6	Any permit issued by the Agency for the development of land for which an approval is required under section chapter 124, 124b, 126, or 126a of the Connecticut General Statutes shall be valid until the approval granted under such chapter expires or for ten years, whichever is earlier. Any permit issued by the Agency for any activity for which an approval is not required under Chapter 124, 124b, 126 or 126a shall be valid for not less than two years and not more than five years

11.6.1		Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 11.6 of these regulations, any permit issued by the Agency prior to July 1, 2011 that was in effect and did not expire prior to May 9, 2011 shall be valid for aperiod not less than nine years after the date of such approval

11.7	If the Agency denies the permit, or if it grants a permit with terms, conditions, limitations or modifications, the applicant may attempt to modify the proposal to the Agency's satisfaction. The
 
Agency shall determine whether the proposed modification requires the filing of a new application. The rejection of a modified or corrected application by the Agency shall be equivalent to the denial of an application for the purposes of appeal.


11.8	No permit issued by the Agency shall be assigned or transferred without the written permission of the Agency.


11.9	If a bond or insurance is required in accordance with Section 13 of these regulations, the Agency may withhold issuing the permit until such bond or insurance is provided.


11.10	General provisions in the issuance of all permits:
a.	The Agency has relied in whole or in part on information provided by the applicant and if such information subsequently proves to be false, deceptive, incomplete or inaccurate, the permit may
be modified, suspended or revoked;
b.	All permits issued by the Agency are subject to and do not derogate any present or future rights or powers of the Agency or the City of Groton, and convey no rights in real estate or material nor any exclusive privileges, and are further subject to any and all public and private rights and to any federal, state, and municipal laws or regulations pertinent to the subject land or activity;
c.	If the activity authorized by the Agency's permit also involves an activity which requires zoning or subdivision approval, special permit, variance or special exception under Sections 8.3(g), 8-3c, or 8-26 of the Connecticut General Statutes, no work pursuant to the wetland permit may begin until such approval is obtained;
d.	In constructing the authorized activities, the permittee shall implement such management practices consistent with the terms and conditions of the permit as needed to control storm water discharges and to prevent erosion and sedimentation and to otherwise prevent pollution of wetlands and watercourses; and
e.	Permits are not transferable without the prior written consent of the Agency.


11.11	Digital Data Submission for Record Maps. Prior to endorsement of approved mylars, the applicant shall submit a digital file of the Record Map in a digital exchange format, as may be revised from time, specified in Guidelines for Digital Data Submission for Record Maps, available in the office of the Agency.


11.12	Neither the Agency nor its designated agent shall be required to review and act on any application denied by the agency or its agent for the same activity or substantially the same activity for a period of six (6) months following said denial.

Section 12
Action by Duly Authorized Agent

12.1	The Agency may delegate to its duly authorized agent the authority to approve or extend a license for an activity that is not located in a wetland or watercourse when such agent finds that the conduct of such activity would result in no greater than a minimal impact on any wetlands or watercourses provided such agent has completed the comprehensive training program developed by the Commissioner of Environmental Protection pursuant to Section 22a-39 of the Connecticut General Statutes. Requests for such approval shall be made on a form provided by the Agency and shall contain the information listed under Section 7.5 of these regulations and any other
 
information the Agency may reasonably require. Notwithstanding the provisions for receipt and processing applications prescribed in Sections 8, 9 and 11 of these regulations, such agent may approve or extend such an activity at any time.
12.2	Any person receiving such approval from such agent shall, within ten (10) days of the date of such approval, publish, at the applicant's expense, notice of the approval in a newspaper having a general circulation in the town wherein the activity is located or will have an effect. Any person may appeal such decision of such agent to the Agency within fifteen (15) days after the publication date of the notice and the Agency shall consider such appeal at its next regularly scheduled meeting provided such meeting is no earlier than three (3) business days after receipt by such Agency or its agent of such appeal. Any person may appear and be heard at the meeting held by the Agency to consider the subject appeal. The Agency shall, at its discretion, sustain, alter, or reject the decision of its agent or require an application for a permit in accordance with Section 7 of these regulations.


Section 13 Bond and Insurance

13.1	Upon approval of the application and prior to issuance of a permit, the applicant may, at the discretion of the Agency, be required to file a bond with such surety in such amount and in a form approved by the Agency.


13.2	The bond or surety shall be conditioned on compliance with all provisions of these regulations and the terms, conditions and limitations established in the permit.


13.3	The Agency may require the applicant to certify that it has public liability insurance against liability which might result from the proposed operation or use of the wetlands or watercourses covering any and all damage which might occur within two (2) years of completion of such operations in an amount commensurate with the regulated activity.

Section 14 Enforcement

14.1	The Agency may appoint an agent or agents to act in its behalf with the authority to issue notices of violation or cease and desist orders and carry out other actions or investigations necessary for the enforcement of these regulations. In carrying out the purposes of this section, the Agency or its duly authorized agent shall take into consideration the criteria for decision under Section 10.2 of these regulations.


14.2	The Agency or its agent may make regular inspections at reasonable hours of all regulated activities for which permits have been issued with the consent of the property owner or the authorized agent of the owner during the life of the permit.


14.3	In the case in which a permit has not been issued or a permit has expired, the Agency or its agent may make regular inspections at reasonable hours with the consent of the property owner or the authorized agent of the property owner.


14.4	If the Agency or its duly authorized agent finds that any person is conducting or maintaining any
 
activity, facility or condition which is in violation of the Act or these regulations, the Agency or its duly authorized agent may:
a.	Issue a written order by certified mail, return receipt requested, to such person conducting such activity or maintaining such facility or condition to immediately cease such activity or to correct
such facility or condition. Within ten (10) calendar days of the issuance of such order the Agency shall hold a hearing to provide the person an opportunity to be heard and show cause why the order should not remain in effect. The Agency shall consider the facts presented at the hearing
and within ten (10) days of the completion of the hearing notify the person by certified mail that the original order remains in effect, that a revised order is in effect, or that the order has been
withdrawn. The Agency shall publish notice of its decision in a newspaper having general circulation in the municipality. The original order shall be effective upon issuance and shall remain in effect until the Agency affirms, revises or withdraws the order. The issuance of an
order pursuant to this Subsection shall not delay or bar an action pursuant to Section 22a-44(b) of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended; and
b.	Issue a notice of violation to such person conducting such activity or maintaining such facility or condition, stating the nature of the violation, the jurisdiction of the Agency, and prescribing the necessary action and steps to correct the violation including, without limitation, halting work in wetlands or watercourses. The Agency may request that the individual appear at the next  regularly scheduled meeting of the Agency to discuss the unauthorized activity, and/or provide a written reply to the notice or file an application for the necessary permit. Failure to carry out the action(s) directed in a notice of violation may result in issuance of the order provided in Section 14.4a or other enforcement proceedings as provided by law.


14.5	The Agency may suspend or revoke a permit if it finds that the permittee has not complied with the terms, conditions or limitations set forth in the permit or has exceeded the scope of the work as set forth in the application including application plans. Prior to revoking or suspending any permit, the Agency shall issue notice to the permittee, personally or by certified mail, return receipt requested, setting forth the facts or conduct which warrants the intended action. The Agency shall hold a hearing to provide the permittee an opportunity to show that it is in compliance with its permit and any and all requirements for retention of the permit. The permittee shall be notified of the Agency's decision to suspend, revoke, or maintain a permit by certified mail within fifteen (15) days of the date of its decision. The Agency shall publish notice of the suspension or revocation in a newspaper having general circulation in the municipality.

Section 15 Amendments

15.1	These regulations and the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Map for the City of Groton may be amended, from time to time, by the Agency in accordance with changes in the Connecticut General  Statutes or regulations of the Connecticut Department of Energy and Environmental Protection, or as new information regarding soils and inland wetlands and watercourses becomes available.


15.2	An application filed with the Agency which is in conformance with the applicable inland wetlands regulations as of the date of the receipt of such application shall not be required thereafter to comply with any change in inland wetland regulations, including changes to setbacks and buffers, taking effect on or after the date of such receipt and any appeal from the decision of such Agency with respect to such application shall not be dismissed by the Superior Court on the grounds that such a change has taken effect on or after the date of such receipt. The provisions of this Section shall not be construed to apply (1) to the establishment, amendment or change of
 
boundaries of inland wetlands or watercourses or (2) to any change in regulations necessary to make such regulations consistent with the provisions of the Act as of the date of such receipt.


15.3	These regulations and the City of Groton Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Map shall be amended in the manner specified in Section 22a-42a of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended. The Agency shall provide the Commissioner of Energy and Environmental Protection with a copy of any proposed regulations and notice of the public hearing to consider any proposed regulations or amendments thereto, determinations or boundaries except map amendments, at least thirty-five (35) days before the public hearing on their adoption.
(Note: Application fee schedules shall be adopted as Agency regulations or as otherwise provided by city ordinance.)


15.4	Any person who submits a petition to amend the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Map, to City of Groton, Connecticut, shall bear the burden of proof for all requested map amendments. Such proof may include, but is not limited to, professional interpretation of aerial photography and remote sensing imagery, resource mapping, soils mapping, or other information acceptable to the Agency. Petition will be submitted in writing and shall include all relevant facts and circumstances which support the change. Petitions requesting changes or amendments to the Inlands Wetlands and Watercourses Map, City of Groton, Connecticut, shall contain at least the following information:
a.	The petitioner’s name, mailing address and telephone number
b.	The address or location of the land affected by the petition
c.	The petitioner’s interest in the land affected by the petition
d.	Map(s) showing the geographic location of the land affected by the petition and the existing and proposed wetland(s) and watercourse(s) boundaries on such land in accurate detail together with documentation support such proposed boundary locations, and
e.	The reasons for the requested action.


15.6	If such person is the owner, developer or contract purchaser of the land which is the subject of the petition, or if such person is representing the interests of such an owner, developer or purchaser; the petition shall also include:
a.	The name, mailing address, telephone number, and written consent to proposed action of the owner(s) of such land and owner(s) agent or other representative;
b.	The names and mailing addresses of the owners of abutting land;
c.	Documentation by a soil scientist of the distribution of wetland soils on said land. Such documentation shall at a minimum include the report of the soil scientist documenting the location of wetland soils on the land and a map of the said land indicating the flag locations set by the soil scientist and defining the boundaries of wetland soil types; and
d.	Map(s) showing any proposed development of the land in relation to existing and proposed wetland and watercourse boundaries.


15.7	The agency may require the petitioner to present documentation by a soil type classified by the National Cooperative soils survey as poorly drained, very poorly drained, alluvial or flood plain. Such documentation includes a map of the land in question signed by a soil scientist on which flag location defined the boundaries of the regulated soil types are depicted.
15.8	Watercourses  shall  be  delineated  by  a  soil  scientist,  geologist,  ecologist  or  other  qualified
 
individual.


15.9	The agency shall hold a public hearing on a petition to amend the regulations and the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Map within sixty-five (65) days after receipt of such petition. The hearing shall be completed within thirty-five (35) days after commencement. The agency shall act upon the changes requested in such petition within sixty-five (65) days after completion of such hearing. At such hearing, any person or persons may appear and be heard and may be represented by agent or attorney. The petitioner may consent to one or more extensions of any period specified in this subsection, provided the total extension of all such periods shall not be for longer than sixty-five (65) days, or may withdraw such petition. Failure of the agency to act within any time period specified in this Subsection or any extension thereof, shall not be deemed to constitute approval of the petition.


15.10	Notice of the hearing shall be published in a newspaper having a general circulation in the municipality where the land that is the subject of the hearing is located at least twice at intervals of not less than two (2) days, the first not more than fifteen days, nor less than ten days, and the last not less than two (2) days before the date set for the hearing. All materials including maps and documents relating to the petition shall be open for public inspection.


15.11	The Agency shall make its decision and state, in writing, the reasons why the change in the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Map was made.

Section 16 Appeals

16.1	Appeal on actions of the Agency shall be made in accordance with the provisions of Section 22a- 43 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
16.2	Notice of such appeal shall be served upon the Agency and the Commissioner of Energy and Environmental Protection.

Section 17 Conflict and Severance

17.1	If there is a conflict between the provisions of these regulations and the provisions of the Act, the provisions of the Act shall govern.

Section 18 Other Permits

18.1	Nothing in these regulations shall obviate the requirements for the applicant to obtain any other assents, permits or licenses required by law or regulation by the City of Groton, the State of Connecticut, or the Government of the United States including any approval required by the Connecticut Department of Energy and Environmental Protection and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. Obtaining such assents, permits or licenses is the sole responsibility of the applicant.



Section 19 Fees

19.1	Method of Payment. All fees required by these regulations shall be submitted to the Agency by
 
cash, check or money order payable to the City of Groton at the time the application is filed with the Agency.


19.2	No application shall be granted or approved by the Agency unless the correct application fee is paid in full or unless a waiver has been granted by the Agency pursuant to subsection 19.7 of these regulations.


19.3	The application fee is not refundable.


19.4	Definitions. As used in this section:
"Residential uses" means activities carried out on property developed for permanent housing or being developed to be occupied by permanent housing.
"Commercial uses" means activities carried out on property developed for industry, commerce, trade, recreation, business or being ' developed to be occupied for such purposes, for profit or nonprofit.
"Other uses" means activities other than residential uses or commercial uses.


19.5.1 Any person making application for any approval required by these regulations shall pay a fee in accordance with Connecticut General Statute 22a-27, as amended, in addition to any other fee, which may be required.
Fee Schedule. Application fees shall be based on the following schedule:
Minor	Significant Activity	
One (1) lot/one (1) to two (2)	$150.00	$400.00

Two (2) or more lots/three (3)
Or more dwellings units	$150.00	$400.00


One (1) lot / one (1) Commercial
or industrial building	$150.00	$400.00 Permit amendment or modification	$150.00	$400.00
Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulation or Wetlands
And Watercourses Map amendments	$400.00 All fees do not include a $60.00 state land use fee where applicable

Complex Application Fee: The Agency may charge an additional fee sufficient to cover the cost of reviewing and acting on complex applications, and for monitoring compliance of all work associated with approved activity. Such fee may include, but not be limited to, the cost of
 
retaining consultants to analyze, review, and report on issues requiring such experts. The Agency or the duly authorized agent shall estimate the complex application fee, which shall be paid pursuant to Section 19.1 of these regulations within 10 days of the applicant's receipt or notice of such estimate. Any portion of the complex application fee in excess of the actual cost shall be refunded to the applicant no later than 30 days after publication of the Agency's decision. Any portion of the monitoring compliance fee in excess of the actual cost shall be refunded to the applicant no later than 45 days after
project completion.


19.6	Exemption. Boards, commissions, councils and departments of the City of Groton are exempt from all fee requirements.

Section 20
RECORDS RETENTION AND DISPOSITION

20.1	The Agency and the City Clerk for the City of Groton shall retain complete administrative records of Agency actions and dispose of such records in accordance with the Retention/Disposition Schedules set forth in Subsection 20.2.


20.2	The public records administrator of the Connecticut State library established the following New Records Retention/Disposition Schedules for Municipal Inland Wetlands Agencies  effective April 24, 1989:

RECORD TITLE	MINIMUM RETENTION REQUIRED IN AGENCY	CITY CLERK
Applications(Incl. Supporting Materials)	
10 years	
Decision Letters	10 years	Permanent
Approved Site Plans	10 years	—
Legal Notices	10 years	Permanent
Staff and Public Written Testimony (Hearing Records)	
10 years	—
Minutes of Meeting and Public Hearings	
15 years	Permanent
Tapes, Audio—Inland Wetlands Matters	
4 years	
Notices of Violation And Orders	
10 years	
Text of Changes Adopted In Regulations	Continuous Update/Permanent	
General Correspondence Issued or Received	
5 years —	


Section 21
Effective Date of Regulations

21.1	These regulations including the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Map, application forms, fee schedule and amendments thereto, shall become effective upon filing in the Office of the City
 
Clerk and publication of a notice of such filing in a newspaper having general circulation in the City of Groton.

 


Connecticut General Statute Section 1-1 (q)
 
APPENDIX A
 

Except as otherwise specifically defined, the words “agriculture” and “farming” shall include cultivation of the soil, dairying, forestry, raising or harvesting any agricultural or horticultural commodity, including the raising, shearing, feeding, caring for, training and management of livestock, including horses, bees, poultry, fur-bearing animals and wildlife, and the raising or harvesting of oysters, clams, mussels, other molluscan shellfish or fish; the operation, management, conservation, improvement or maintenance of a farm and its buildings, tools and equipment, or salvaging timber or cleared land of brush or other debris left by storm, as an incident to such farming operations; the production or harvesting of maple syrup or maple sugar, or any agricultural commodity, including lumber, as an incident to ordinary farming operations or the harvesting of mushrooms, the hatching of poultry, or the construction, operation or maintenance of ditches, canals, reservoirs or waterways used exclusively for farming purposes; handling, planting, drying, packing, packaging, processing, freezing, grading, storing or delivering to storage or to market, or to a carrier for transportation to market, or for direct sale any agricultural or horticultural commodity as an incident to ordinary farming operations, or, in the case of fruits and vegetables, as an incident to the preparation of such fruits or vegetables for market or for direct sale. The term “farm” includes farm buildings, and accessory buildings thereto, nurseries, orchards, ranges, greenhouses, hoop houses and other temporary structures or other structures used primarily for the raising and, as an incident to ordinary farming operations, the sale of agricultural or horticultural commodities. The term “aquaculture” means the farming of the waters of the state and tidal wetlands and the production of protein food, including fish, oysters, clams, mussels and other mulluscan shellfish, on leased, franchised and public underwater farm lands. Nothing herein shall restrict the power of a local zoning authority under chapter 124.

APPENDIX B

Connecticut General Statute section 8-7d Sec. 8-7d.

Hearings and decisions. Time limits. Day of receipt. Notice to adjoining municipality. Public notice registry.

(a)	In all matters wherein a formal petition, application, request or appeal must he submitted to a zoning commission, planning and zoning commission or zoning board of appeals under this chapter, a planning commission under chapter 126 or an inland wetlands agency under chapter 440 and a hearing is required or otherwise held on such petition, application, request or appeal, such hearing shall commence within sixty-five days after receipt of such petition, application, request or appeal and shall be completed within thirty-five days after such hearing commences, unless a shorter period of time is required under this chapter, chapter 126 or chapter 440. Notice of the hearing shall be published in a newspaper having a general circulation in such municipality where the land that is the subject of the hearing is located at least twice, at intervals of not less than two days, the first not more than fifteen days or less than ten days and the last not less than two days before the date set for the hearing. In addition to such notice, such commission, board or agency may, by regulation, provide for additional notice. Such regulations shall include provisions that the notice be mailed to persons who own land that is adjacent to the land that is the subject of the hearing or be provided by posting a sign on the land that is the
 
subject of the hearing, or both. For purposes of such additional notice, (1) proof of mailing shall be evidenced by a certificate of mailing, and (2) the person who owns land shall be the owner indicated on the property tax map or on the last-completed grand list as of the date such notice is mailed. All applications and maps and documents relating thereto shall be open for public inspection. At such hearing, any person or persons may appear and be heard and may be represented by agent or by attorney. All decisions on such matters shall be rendered within sixty-five days after completion of such hearing, unless a shorter period of time is required under this chapter, chapter 126 or chapter 440. The petitioner or applicant may consent to one or more extensions of any period specified in this subsection, provided the total extension of all such periods shall not be for longer than sixty-five days, or may withdraw such petition, application, request or appeal.

(b)	Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, whenever the approval of a site plan is the only requirement to be met or remaining to be met under the zoning regulations for any building, use or structure, a decision on an application for approval of such site plan shall be rendered within sixty five days after receipt of such site plan. Whenever a decision is to be made on an application for subdivision approval under chapter 126 on which no hearing is held, such decision shall be rendered within sixty-five days after receipt of such application. Whenever a decision is to be made on an inland wetlands and watercourses application under chapter 440 on which no hearing is held, such decision shall be rendered within sixty-five days after receipt of such application. The applicant may consent to one or more extensions of such period, provided the total period of any such extension or extensions shall not exceed sixty five days or may withdraw such plan or application.

(c)	For purposes of subsection (a) or (b) of this section and section 7-246a, the date of receipt of a petition, application, request or appeal shall be the day of the next regularly scheduled meeting of such commission, board or agency, immediately following the day of submission to such commission, board or agency or its agent of such petition, application, request or appeal or thirty-five days after such submission, whichever is sooner. If the commission, board or agency does not maintain an office with regular office hours, the office of the clerk of the municipality shall act as the agent of such commission, board or agency for the receipt of any petition, application, request or appeal.

(d)	The provisions of subsection (a) of this section shall not apply to any action initiated by any zoning commission, planning commission or planning and zoning commission regarding adoption or change of any zoning regulation or boundary or any subdivision regulation.

(e)	Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, if an application involves an activity regulated pursuant to sections 22a-36 to 22a-45, inclusive, and the time for a decision by a zoning commission or planning and zoning commission established pursuant to this section would elapse prior to the thirty-fifth day after a decision by the inland wetlands agency, the time period for a decision shall be extended to thirty-five days after the decision of such agency. The provisions of this subsection shall not be construed to apply to any extension consented to by an applicant or petitioner.

(f)	The zoning commission, planning commission, zoning and planning commission, zoning board of appeals or inland wetlands agency shall notify the clerk of any adjoining municipality of the pendency of any application, petition, appeal, request or plan concerning any project on any site in which: (1) Any portion of the property affected by a decision of such commission, board or agency is within five hundred feet of the boundary of the adjoining municipality; (2) a significant portion of the traffic to the completed project on the site will use streets within the adjoining municipality to enter or exit the site; (3) a significant portion of the sewer or water drainage from the project on the site will flow through and significantly impact the drainage or sewerage system within the
 
adjoining municipality; or (4) water runoff from the improved site will impact streets or  other municipal or private property within the adjoining municipality. Such notice shall be made by certified mail, return receipt requested, and shall be mailed within seven days of the date of receipt of the application, petition, request or plan. Such adjoining municipality may, through a representative, appear and be heard at any hearing on any such application, petition, appeal, request or plan.

(g)	(1) Any zoning commission, planning commission or planning and zoning commission initiating any action regarding adoption or change of any zoning regulation or boundary or any subdivision regulation or regarding the preparation or amendment of the plan of conservation and development shall provide notice of such action in accordance with this subsection in addition to any other notice required under any provision of the general statutes.

(2)	A zoning commission, planning commission or planning and zoning commission shall establish a public notice registry of landowners, electors and nonprofit organizations qualified as tax-exempt organizations under the provisions of Section 50l(c) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, or any subsequent corresponding internal revenue code of the United States, as from time to time amended, requesting notice under this subsection. Each municipality shall notify residents of such registry and the process for registering for notice under this subsection. The zoning commission, planning commission or planning and zoning commission shall place on such registry the names and addresses of any such landowner, elector or organization upon written request of such landowner, elector or organization. A landowner, elector or organization may request such notice be sent by mail' or by electronic mail. The name and address of a landowner, elector or organization who requests to be placed on the public notice registry shall remain on such registry for a period of three years after the establishment of such registry. Thereafter any land owner, elector or organization may request to be placed on such registry for additional periods of three years.

(3)	Any notice under this subsection shall be mailed to all landowners, electors and organizations in the public notice registry not later than seven days prior to the commencement of the public hearing on such action, if feasible. Such notice may be mailed by electronic mail if the zoning commission, planning commission or planning and zoning commission or the municipality has an electronic mail service provider.

(4)	No zoning commission, planning commission or planning and zoning commission shall be civilly liable to any landowner, elector or nonprofit organization requesting notice under this subsection with respect to any act done or omitted in good faith or through a bona fide error that occurred despite reasonable procedures maintained by  the zoning commission, planning commission or planning and zoning commission to prevent such errors in complying with the provisions of this section.
 

 
STATEWIDE INLAND WETLAND ACTIVITY REPORTING FORM


In accordance with the requirements of Section 22a-39(m)-1 of the Regulations of the Connecticut State Agencies, this form is to be competed for each action. Completed forms for all reportable actions during a calendar month shall be mailed to the commissioner no later than the 15 day of the month following the month in which the action was taken. See instructions on back


 
1.	Town:	City of Groton 	

2.	REPORTING PERIOD:   	
 

For State Use Only
 

 
3.	ACTION: (Circle only one action)
a.	Permit Issued	b. Permit deni
 

GIS CODE:
 
c.  Enforcement	d. Map amend     	
e. Jurisdictional ruling

4.	LOCATION: (Attach a 81/2 by 1	ned or pinp 5.  		
6.  	

7. ........................................................................... PROJECT TYPE CODE NUMBER (See list of codes next page)	[
]
 	 If type code is 12 “other”, describe the type of activity involved in the action.


8. ................................................................... PROJECT PURPOSE CODE NUMBER (See list of codes next page)	[
]

9. ............................................. EXPIRATION DATE OF PERMIT OR DATE VIOLATION WAS CORRECTED:	[
/    /	]

10. ....................................................................................WAS A PUBLIC HEARING HELD ON THIS ACTION?
...................................................................................................................................................................YES	NO

11. .................................................................. ACREAGE OF WETLANDS AND WATERCOURSES ALTERED:
..................................................................................................... A. Soil type(s) (If Available)	[
ACRES]
B. Only if soil type is not available specify area altered as follows;
......................................................................................................................................... Swamp	[
 
ACRES] ACRES] ACRES] ACRES]
 

Marsh ...........................................................................................................................................	[

Bog...............................................................................................................................................	[

Open Water ..................................................................................................................................	[
 
12. ..................................................................ACREAGE OF WETLANDS AND WATERCOURSES CREATED:	[ ACRES]

13. ..................................................................................................... LINEAL FEET OF STREAM ALTERATION:	[ FEET]

14. .................................................................................................................. TOTAL LAND AREA OF PROJECT:	[ ACRES]
 

STATEWIDE INLAND WETLAND ACTIVITY REPORTING FORM

INSTRUCTIONS: USE A SEPARATE FORM FOR REPORTING EACH REPORTABLE ACTION TAKEN BY THE AGENCY
1.	TOWN. Enter the name of the municipality for which the Wetland Agency has jurisdiction.
2.	REPORTING PERIOD. Enter only the month in which the action being reported was taken by the agency.
3.	ACTION. Circle the action which is being reported.
4.	LOCATION. Attach a 81/2 by 11 inch photocopy of that portion of the USGS Quadrangle map with the bounds of the project site outlined (where possible) or pinpointed with an arrow.
5.	AME. Enter the name of the applicant for a permit, petitioner for a map amendment or jurisdictional ruling, or recipient of the enforcement action.
6.	PROJECT NAME. Enter the name which the owner or applicant has given to the project or the name by which the project site is generally known.
7.	CTIVITY TYPE. Enter the activity codes which best characterizes the activity being reported. Where possible, enter only one activity code number. Example: a subdivision road or driveway crossings of a wetland which involves excavation to remove unsuitable foundation material, filling, culverting, and channelization of a brook should be coded
as #9 “ROADING CONSTRUCTION”. If the project also involved enclosing the brook in a culvert and filling of
wetlands to make fast land for development, an activity should be coded #9, (as above) plus #7 for “CULVERTING” and #1 for “FILLING”.
8.	CTIVITY PURPOSE. Enter the Purpose code which best characterizes the purpose of the activity. Enter only one purpose code.
9.	XPIRATION DATE. Enter the expiration date for a permit or in case of a corrected violation, the date the violation was to be corrected. Leave  the space blank if the action being reported is a permit denial, map amendment, or jurisdictional ruling.
10.	WAS A PUBLIC HEARING HELD? Circle Yes or No
11.	ACREAGE OF WETLANDS AND WATERCOURSES ALTERED. Soil types and  acreage figures should be provided by the applicant in the application. Enter the total soil type symbols from the County Inland Wetlands soils Symbol Key. In the rare case where the wetland soil type is not classified, specify the area altered by the general categories swamp, marsh, bog, or open water.
In order to convert from square feet to acres, divide square feet by 43,560.
12.	ACREAGE OF WETLANDS AND WATERCOURSES CREATED. Enter the total acreage of wetland and watercourse area created directly or indirectly as a result of the action taken by the Agency.
13.	LINEAL FEET OF STREAM ALTERATION. Enter the total length of river, brook, stream, or other perennial watercourse altered directly as a result of the action taken by the Agency. Include any culvertling, channel improvements, rip rap, relocation or dredging.
14.	TOTAL LAND AREA OF PROJECT. Enter the total size of the property involved in the Agency Action being reported.
MAIL REPORTING FORMS TO:
Water Resources Unit Wetlands Management Section State Office Building
165 Capitol Avenue
Hartford, Connecticut 06106
 
QUESTIONS ABOUT COMPLETING OR FILLING THIS FORM MAY BE DIRECTED TO THE RESOURCES UNIT’S WETLANDS MANAGEMENT SECTION AT 566-7280.

Code #	Activity Type	Code #	Activity Purpose













12.	1. .......................................................................................................................................................
2. .......................................................................................................................................................
3. ...............................................................................................................................................Land
.................................................................................................................................................
4. ..................................................................................................................................................Str
5. .....................................................................................................................................................
6. .......................................................................................................................................................
......................................................................................................................................... (rem
7. ...............................................................................................................................................Culv
8. ...................................................................................................................................................U
.................................................................................................................................................
9. ................................................................................................................................................. Ro
10. ............................................................................................................................................. Drai
11. .............................................................................................................................Pond Dredging
Other	A.
Residential
Improvement by Homeowner
B.
New Residential
Development for
Single Family Units
C.
New
Residential Development for Multi-Family/Condos
D.
Commercial
/Industrial Uses
E.
Municipal
Improvements
F.
State
Agency Improvements

G.
Utility Company
Improvements
H.
Agriculture, Forestry, or
Conservation
I.
Wetland
Creation/Restoration
J.
Storm
Water/Flood Control
K.
Erosion/Sed
imentation Control
L.
Recreation/
Boating/Navigation
M.
Routine
Maintenance
 

 

APPLICATION FOR A PERMIT

FOR USE OF INLAND WETLANDS AND WATERCOURSES CITY OF GROTON, CONNECTICUT


 

Name of Property Owner


Address of Property Owner


Name of Applicant


Address of Applicant
 
(To be completed by Commission)
(Mo.)-(Yr.)
Application No. IW- 	

Date of Receipt

Authorization is hereby given to the commissioners or agents of the agency to inspect the property at reasonable times, both before and after permit
 

GENERAL DESCRIPTION OF PROPOSED ACTIVITY:   	





SKETCH MAP OF PROPERTY, SHOWING RELATIVE LOCATIONS OF WETLANDS AND WATERCOURSES AND PROPOSED REGULATED ACTIVITY. SEE SECTIONS 7 & 8 OF THE CITY OF GROTON REGULATIONS FOR PROTECTION AND PRESERVATION OF INLAND WETLANDS AND WATERCOURSES FOR A COMPLETE DESCRIPTION OF INFORMATION TO BE INCLUDED WITH PERMIT APPLICATIONS.















(To be completed by the commission)

APPLICATION APPROVED (DATE):		CONDITIONS OF APPROVAL, IF ANY:





APPLICATION DENIED (DATE):		REASONS FOR DENIAL, IF ANY:   	



 
Signed:
 


Chairman or Secretary of Commission
 

PETITION FOR CHANGE OF INLAND WETLANDS REGULATIONS OR BOUNDARY

CONSERVATION COMMISSION CITY OF GROTON, CONNECTICUT

 



Applicant’s Name Applicant’s Address
 
(To be completed by Commission)
(Mo.)-(Yr.)
Application No. IW- 	 Date of Receipt   	
 

APPLICATION FOR (Check appropriate Space)

Change of Inland wetlands Regulations Attach description of change desired, noting affected Section of regulations

Change on Official Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Map. Attach map showing present designation and proposed change.

Authorization is hereby given to the commissioners or agents of the agency to inspect the property at reasonable times, both before and after permit approval.

Signed:


(To be completed by the commission)

DATE OF PUBLIC HEARING:		DATE OF COMMISSION ACTION:   	



ACTION TAKEN:   	




REASONS FOR ACTION TAKEN:   	











 
Signed:
 


Chairman or Secretary of Commission
 

PERMIT PROCESSING FLOW CHART


ACTION	TIME TABLE

 








YES
 
Submission of Application


Is the Application
NO, application may be withdrawn or proceed to DECISION, (deny
 


Date of Receipt is: the next regular meeting provided such meeting is at least 3 business days after the day of submission, or 35 days after day of the submission whichever comes first.
 

Is a Hearing Warranted?
e.g. significant impact, or
other regulation

YES			NO	
			



 

Set Hearing Date Publish First Legal
Publish Second Legal Notice

Hold Hearing







Notify Applicant of the Decision by Certified Mail

Publish Notice of Decision
 
Hearing must begin within 65 days of the Date of Receipt

10-15 days before the hearing


At least 2 days after first notice, not less than 2 days before hearing

Close hearing within 45 days



 	If NO hearing, within 65 days of the Date of Receipt.
If a hearing IS held, within 35 days of the end of the hearing.

Within 15 days of the decision

15 day appeal period begins with date of publication
 

Notify DEEP of Decision	No later than the 15th day of the month following
 
(Action)
Use the Report Form*

Inspection & Monitoring
 
the month in which the action was taken
 
REFERENCES


Guidelines, Upland Review Area Regulations Connecticut's Inland Wetlands & Watercourses Act Connecticut State Statutes
