Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
STATUTORY REFERENCES
Oaths generally — See C.G.S. §§ 1-22 to 1-25.
1:1

ARTICLE I
Provisions Applicable to Code
[Adopted 10-7-1963 as Ch. 1 of the 1963 Code1]
§ 1-1. Definitions and word usage.
A. Definitions. In the construction of this Code and of all other ordinances
of the City, the following definitions shall be observed, unless they are
inconsistent with the manifest intent of the City Council or the context
clearly requires otherwise:
CITY — The City of Meriden, in the County of New Haven, in the State of
Connecticut.
COUNCIL — The City Council of the City of Meriden, Connecticut.
COUNTY — The County of New Haven in the State of Connecticut.
GENERAL STATUTES — The General Statutes of the State of
Connecticut and any amendments thereof or additions thereto.
IN THE CITY — Includes any territorial jurisdiction of which for the
exercise of its regulatory power has been conferred upon the City by
public or private law.
MONTH — A calendar month.
PRECEDING and FOLLOWING — Next before and next after,
respectively.
SIDEWALK — Any portion of the street, usually lying on either side
thereof, between the curb and the adjacent property line, intended for
the use of pedestrians.
STATE — The State of Connecticut.
STREET — Includes avenues, boulevards, highways, roads, alleys, lanes,
viaducts, bridges and the approaches thereto, and all other public
thoroughfares in the City, and means all that part thereof between the
property lines of the premises abutting thereon.
YEAR — A calendar year.
B. Word usage. In the construction of this Code and of all other ordinances
of the City, the following rules of construction shall be observed, unless
they are inconsistent with the manifest intent of the City Council or the
context clearly requires otherwise:
(1) Bond. When a bond is required, an undertaking in writing shall be
sufficient.
(2) Computation of time. The time within which an act is to be done
shall be computed by excluding the first and including the last day,
and if the last day is Sunday or a legal holiday, that day shall be
excluded.
1. Editor's Note: Sections 1-1, 1-3, 1-4 and 1-5 of Ch. 1 of the 1963 Code pertained to the
adoption of that Code and as such were deemed to be obsolete and excluded from this
Code. For the adoption of the present Code see Art. II of this chapter.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-1
1:3
(3) Enforcement official. Wherever there is reference to some action by
a City official, whether such reference is general or specific, it shall
be construed to mean that official or the person he shall designate.
[Added 9-15-1980]
(4) Gender. Words importing the masculine gender include the
feminine and neuter.
(5) Joint authority. All words giving a joint authority to three or more
persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to
a majority of such persons or officers unless otherwise specifically
provided.
(6) Number. A word importing the singular number only may extend
and be applied to several persons or things, and a word importing
the plural number may apply to one person or thing.
(7) Oath. The word "oath" includes an affirmation in all cases in which
by law an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such
cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the
words "affirm" and "affirmed."
(8) Owner. The word "owner," applied to a building or land, includes
any part owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership or joint
tenant, with or without right of survivorship, of part of such
building or land.
(9) Person. The word "person" shall extend and be applied to
associations, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate
as well as individuals.
(10) Shall. The word "shall" is mandatory.
(11) Signature or subscription. The word "signature" or "subscription"
includes a mark when the person cannot write.
(12) Tenant or occupant. The words "tenant" and "occupant," applied to
a building or land, mean any person who occupies the whole or a
part of such building or land, whether alone or with others, with or
without a lease, oral or written.
(13) Time. Words used in the past or present tense include the future.
(14) Written or in writing. The words "written" or "in writing" include
any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing
or otherwise.
C. All general provisions, terms, phrases and expressions shall be liberally
construed in order that the true intent and meaning of the City Council
may be fully carried out.
§ 1-2. Enforcement of legislation.
All officers and employees of the City shall enforce obedience to state
statutes, provisions of this Code, ordinances and resolutions and rules,
regulations and orders issued thereunder as may relate to their regular
duties and any other statutes, Code provisions, ordinances and resolutions
and rules, regulations and orders issued thereunder with whose
enforcement they are properly chargeable, by any measures provided
therein, by the proper report of any violation thereof and by instituting such
proceedings as may be necessary to such enforcement.
§ 1-1 MERIDEN CODE § 1-3
1:4
§ 1-3. Violations of rules, regulations and orders.
The violation of any rule, regulation or order promulgated by any officer or
agency of the City under authority vested in him or it by law, ordinance or
resolution or under the provisions of this Code shall be unlawful.
§ 1-4. General penalty.
Wherever in this Code, or in any ordinance or resolution, or rule, regulation
or order promulgated by any officer or agency of the City under authority
vested in him or it by law, ordinance or resolution, any act is prohibited or is
declared to be unlawful or the doing of any act is required or the failure to
do any act is declared to be unlawful and no specific penalty is provided for
the violation thereof, the violator of any such provision of this Code or any
such ordinance, resolution, rule, regulation or order shall be punished by a
fine of not more than $100 or imprisonment for not more than 30 days, or
both, in the discretion of the trial judge. Each day any violation of this Code
or any such ordinance, resolution, rule, regulation or order continues shall
constitute a separate offense.
§ 1-5. Fines to inure to use of City.
All fines imposed for the violation of any ordinance, resolution, order, rule or
regulation, as provided in the preceding section, shall inure to the use of the
City, unless otherwise provided by the Council or by the General Statutes.2
§ 1-6. Liability for violations.
A. Any violation of this Code by any officer, agent or other person acting for
or employed by any corporation, firm or association, while acting within
the scope of his office or employment, shall in every case also be deemed
to be a violation by such corporation, firm or association.
B. Any officer, agent or other person acting for or employed by any
corporation, firm or association shall be subject and liable to
punishment, as well as such corporation, firm or association, for the
violation by it of any provision of this Code where such violation was the
act or omission or the result of the act, omission or order of any such
person.
§ 1-7. Liability for preexisting violations.
No new ordinance or resolution shall be construed to repeal a former
ordinance or resolution as to any offense committed against the former
ordinance or resolution, or as to any act done or penalty, forfeiture or
punishment incurred or as to any right accrued or claim arising under
the former ordinance or resolution, or in any way whatever to affect any
such offense or act committed or done, penalty, forfeiture or punishment
incurred, right accrued or claim arising before the new ordinance or
resolution takes effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall
2. Editor's Note: Former § 1-5.1, Charge for returned checks, which immediately followed
this section, has been moved to Ch. 23, Finances.
§ 1-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-7
1:5
conform, so far as practicable, to the ordinance or resolution in force at the
time of such proceeding.
§ 1-8. Effect of repeal on former legislation.
When an ordinance or resolution which has repealed another shall itself be
repealed, the previous ordinance or resolution shall not be revived without
express words to that effect.3
3. Editor's Note: Former § 1-9, Display of National Colors, which immediately followed this
section, has been moved to Ch. 109, Flag Plaza. Former § 1-10, Voting districts established
and designated, has been moved to Ch. 52, Voting Districts.
§ 1-7 MERIDEN CODE § 1-8
1:6
ARTICLE II
Adoption of Code
[An
ordinance
adopting
the
Code
of
the
City
of
Meriden
is
presently
proposed
before
the
City
Council.
Upon
final
adoption,
it
will
be
included
here
as
Article
II
of
this
chapter.]
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-8
1:7
Chapter 3
ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Boards, commissions and appointed
positions — See Ch. 6.
Claims procedure — See Ch. 13.
Code of Ethics — See Ch. 21.
Finances — See Ch. 23.
Personnel classification and compensation
system — See Ch. 38.
Property acquisition and disposal — See Ch.
41.
Regional planning agency — See Ch. 43.
STATUTORY REFERENCES
Legal holidays — See C.C.G. § 1-4.
§ 1-8 MERIDEN CODE § 1-8
1:8
ARTICLE I
Administrative Code Established
§ 3-1. Establishment of Code.
There is established by this chapter and any amendments thereto a code for
the government of the City of Meriden, a political subdivision of the State
of Connecticut, pursuant to its Charter, drawn and approved as provided
by the Court of Common Council July 5, 1977, and approved by the voters
November 8, 1977, which code shall be known and referred to as the
"Administrative Code" and which shall be the rules, the regulations
prescribing duties of officials and employees, the system of office and the
management of the offices, departments and institutions of the City of
Meriden.
§ 3-2. Effective date. [Amended 9-15-1980]
This Administrative Code shall take effect immediately, unless a later date
is indicated by said Charter.
§ 3-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-2
1:9

ARTICLE II
City Manager
§ 3-3. Powers and duties.
In accordance with the Charter, the Manager shall be the chief
administrative officer of the City. The City Manager shall be directly
responsible to the Council for the administration of all departments,
agencies and offices under his jurisdiction and shall be in charge of persons
or boards appointed by him and shall supervise and direct the same. He
shall see that all laws and ordinances governing the City are faithfully
executed, shall make periodic reports to the Council and shall attend its
meetings. In addition to such powers and duties as he may be assigned by
statute, the Charter, this chapter or other legislation of the City, the City
Manager shall be responsible for the following:
A. Where not inconsistent with the Charter, he shall appoint all department
and division heads. For the purpose of this subsection, all division heads
shall be deemed to be department heads, and their appointment and
removal shall be subject to and in accordance with Chapter V, §§ C5-2
and C5-3 of the Charter.
B. He shall have custody and possession of the bond given to the City by
any City official or employee for the faithful performance of his duty as
such.
C. He may intervene in any dispute between any organization of City
employees and the City and shall have the general responsibility for
any collective bargaining agreements entered into by the City; provided,
however, that his signing of any collective bargaining agreement shall
be subject to approval of the City Council.
D. He may dispose of any obsolete equipment for such sums as he deems
advisable, subject to the approval of the City Council.
E. With the approval of City Council, he may employ any outside attorney to
represent the City in any action where it is deemed that representation
by the Corporation Counsel would not be in the City's best interests and
may terminate such outside attorney's services at any time the Manager
deems proper.
F. He may appoint and hire or authorize department heads to appoint and
hire any personnel to work in any area of City government, subject to
the limitations of the City budget.
G. He shall develop for submission, after approval by the City Council, all
applications for federal and state aid and shall serve as administrator for
all such grants.
H. He shall be the conservator of the peace within the City, and he may,
personally or through any authorized agent, investigate into and take
any proper action concerning any matter involving enforcement of the
laws of the City and state within the limits of the City for the protection
of its citizens. He shall have the authority, with force when necessary,
to suppress all disturbances, riots and unlawful assemblies. He may
at all times, if need be, require the aid of any sheriff, deputy sheriff,
constable or policeman or any or all of them, together with such other
aid as may be necessary. In the event of a civil commotion and when
§ 3-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-3
1:11
there is imminent peril to the public health, safety or welfare, he may, in
his discretion, in addition to the powers hereinbefore granted, declare
by proclamation filed with the Town Clerk of the City that a state of
emergency exists, in which event he shall have full power and is hereby
authorized to order closed all or any public places within the City at such
suitable hour as he shall from time to time fix upon and designate, and
he may restrict the flow of traffic on any street within the limits of the
City, and he may order a curfew within the City or in any area thereof,
and he may take such other steps as are reasonably necessary, including
the invoking of the provisions of §§ 27-17 and 27-18 of the Connecticut
General Statutes, in the light of the emergency to protect the health,
safety and welfare of the people of the City, to prevent or minimize loss
or destruction of property and to minimize the effects of hostile action.
[Added 5-17-1982]
§ 3-3 MERIDEN CODE § 3-3
1:12
ARTICLE III
Law Department
§ 3-4. Department established.
In accordance with the Charter, there shall be a Law Department, the
head of which shall be the Corporation Counsel, who shall be appointed
biennially at the first Council meeting in December, commencing with
December 1979. The Corporation Counsel shall have the power to appoint
such number of assistants as shall be authorized by Council.
§ 3-5. Powers and duties.
In addition to such powers and duties as it may be assigned by statute,
the Charter, this chapter or other legislation, the Law Department shall be
responsible for the following:
A. It may accept a release from a claimant who has given legal notice to
the City of his pending claim for compensation for damage to his person
or his property for a consideration to be paid by the City not to exceed
the sum of $3,000. Whenever the Corporation Counsel recommends to
the appropriate committee of Council the payment of a sum in excess
of $3,000 by the City in consideration for a release to be given by a
claimant who has filed notice of claim for injuries to person or property
against the City, the committee shall prepare a written resolution
recommending or denying such payment for presentation to the Council
in accordance with the usual practice of such committee and the Council.
§ 3-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-5
1:13

ARTICLE IV
City Clerk
§ 3-6. Powers and duties.
The City Clerk shall be elected pursuant to the Charter and shall have all
of the powers and duties vested in the City Clerk and/or Town Clerk by
statute, the Charter and City legislation. In addition, the City Clerk shall be
responsible for the following:
A. The City Clerk shall be the custodian of any bond with surety given to the
City by the City Manager for the faithful performance of the Manager's
duties.
B. The City Clerk shall keep a complete and exact record of all licenses
issued by him/her together with the fee received for each license, its date
and the name of the person to whom it was issued.
C. The City Clerk or such other person as may be designated by the City
Council shall be responsible for keeping the minutes of all City Council
meetings and all public hearings.
§ 3-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-6
1:15

ARTICLE V
Police Department
§ 3-7. Department established.
In accordance with Chapter VII, § C7-4 of the Charter, there shall be a Police
Department, to be headed by the Chief of Police. Within the Department, in
addition to the actual Police Department proper, there shall be the following
divisions:
A. Division of Auxiliary Police, to be headed by the Chief of Police.
B. Division of Animal Control, to be headed by the Dog Warden.
§ 3-8. Appointment and removal of Chief of Police and division
heads.
In accordance with the Charter and this chapter, the City Manager shall
appoint and may remove the Chief of Police and the Dog Warden.
§ 3-9. Powers and duties.
The Police Department and the divisions thereof shall have the powers
and duties assigned to them by statute, the Charter, this chapter, other
legislation or the City Manager.
§ 3-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-9
1:17

ARTICLE VI
Fire Department
§ 3-10. Department established. [Amended 9-15-1980]
In accordance with Chapter VII, § C7-5 of the Charter, there shall be a Fire
Department, to be headed by the Fire Chief. Within the Department, in
addition to the actual Fire Department proper, there shall be the following
divisions:
A. Division of Fire Prevention, to be headed by the Fire Marshal.
§ 3-11. Appointment and removal of Fire Chief and division heads.
In accordance with the Charter and this chapter, the City Manager shall
appoint and may remove the Fire Chief and the Fire Marshal.
§ 3-12. Powers and duties.
The Fire Department and the Division of Fire Prevention shall have the
powers and duties assigned to them by statute, the Charter, this chapter,
other legislation or the City Manager.
§ 3-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-12
1:19

ARTICLE VII
Department of Finance
§ 3-13. Department established. [Amended 9-15-1980; 12-19-1994;
7-1-1996]
In accordance with the City Charter, there shall be a Department of Finance
to be headed by the Director of Finance, who shall have a bachelor's
degree or higher in business administration, with a major in accounting or
a bachelor's degree or higher in an appropriate allied field. The Director of
Finance shall have five years' experience in public finance. Said Department
shall be responsible for all financial matters of the City. Within the
Department of Finance there shall be the following divisions:
A. Division of Purchasing, to be headed by the Purchasing Agent pursuant
to the Charter. In addition to such powers and duties as it may be
assigned by statute, the Charter, this chapter, other legislation, the City
Manager or the Director of Finance, the Division of Purchasing shall be
responsible for the following:
(1) The promulgation of a purchasing procedure to be approved by
City Council. Any purchase or contract for purchasing, including a
continuing order or contract for the purchase of the same commodity
or service over a period of time, in excess of $4,000 shall be awarded
on sealed bids or proposals in conformance with the procedures set
forth in the Charter of the City of Meriden.
B. Division of Property Assessment, to be headed by the City Assessor. This
Division shall have such powers and duties as it may be assigned by
statute, the Charter, this chapter, other legislation, the City Manager or
the Director of Finance.
C. Division of Tax Collection, to be headed by the Tax Collector. This
Division shall have such powers and duties as it may be assigned by
statute, the Charter, this chapter, other legislation, the City Manager or
the Director of Finance.
D. Division of the City Treasury, to be headed by the City Treasurer. In
addition to such powers and duties as it may be assigned by statute, the
Charter, this chapter, other legislation, the City Manager or Director of
Finance, the Division of the City Treasury shall be responsible for the
following:
(1) Annually, no later than January 15, to set the value of bonds for each
City official with the approval of the City Council.
§ 3-14. Local bidder preference. [Added 9-2-19974]
A. For the purposes of this section, "City-based business" shall mean a
business with its principal place of business located within the
boundaries of the City of Meriden. A business shall not be considered a
"City-based business" unless evidence satisfactory to the Department of
Finance has been submitted with each bid by said business to establish
that it has a bona fide principal place of business in the City of Meriden.
4. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 3-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-14
1:21
Such evidence may include evidence of ownership of or a long-term lease
of the real estate from which the principal place of business is operated
or payment of property taxes on the personal property of the business.
B. The Department of Finance shall determine the lowest responsible
bidder in the following order:
(1) Any City-based business responsible bidder which has submitted
a bid not more than 10% higher than the low bid, provided that
such City-based business responsible bidder agrees to accept the
award of the bid at the amount of the lowest bid. The acceptance
shall be submitted in writing to the Department of Finance during
the next business day following the opening of the bid. If more
than one City-based business responsible bidder has submitted bids
not more than 10% higher than the lowest bid and has agreed
to accept the award of the bid at the amount of the lowest bid,
the lowest responsible bidder shall be that one of the City-based
business responsible bidders which has submitted the lowest bid.
This subsection shall not apply in those instances where the bid
requested involves a cooperative purchasing arrangement between
the City of Meriden and other municipalities or the State of
Connecticut.
(2) The low responsible bidder.
§ 3-15. Below minimum bids. [Added 9-15-1997]
A. For the purposes of this section "City-based business" shall have the
same meaning as set forth in § 3-14A.
B. Purchases below the minimum expenditure amount requiring sealed bids
or written proposals shall be made from City-based businesses whenever
the price quoted by a City-based business is not more than 10% higher
than the lowest price otherwise quoted. This subsection shall not apply
to purchases involving a cooperative purchasing arrangement between
the City of Meriden and other municipalities or the State of Connecticut.
§ 3-16. Appointment and removal of Director and division heads.
In accordance with the Charter and this chapter, the City Council shall
appoint and may remove the Director of Finance. The City Manager shall
appoint and may remove all division heads within the Department of
Finance, except as provided in the Charter.
§ 3-14 MERIDEN CODE § 3-16
1:22
ARTICLE VIII
Department of Personnel
§ 3-17. Department established.
In accordance with the City Charter, there shall be a Department of
Personnel, to be headed by the Director of Personnel under the supervision
of the City Manager, which shall be responsible for all personnel matters of
the City.
§ 3-18. Powers and duties. [Added 8-3-1987]
In addition to such powers and duties as it may be assigned by statute, the
Charter, this chapter, other legislation or the City Manager, the Department
of Personnel shall be responsible for the following:
A. The administration of and all hiring under the Comprehensive
Employment Training Act and Work Experience Program.
B. Division of Safety and Risk Management, to be headed by the Safety and
Risk Manager.
§ 3-19. Appointment and removal of Director.
In accordance with the Charter and this chapter, the City Manager shall
appoint and may remove the Director of Personnel.
§ 3-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-19
1:23

ARTICLE IX
Department of Parks and Public Works
[Added 2-6-19895; amended 11-4-1996]
§ 3-20. Department established.
There is hereby established a Department of Parks and Public Works, which
shall be headed by a Director of Parks and Public Works. The Director shall
be appointed and may be removed by the City Manager. The Department
of Parks and Public Works shall have charge of the superintendence,
management, maintenance, repair and control of all the municipal
buildings, streets, sidewalks, crosswalks, gutters, facilities, City parks, open
space areas and recreational programs within said City and of the lamps
and the collection, regulation and disposal of garbage and ashes. The
Department shall also have charge of the superintendence, management,
maintenance, repair and control of all the public utilities within the City and
such other duties as may be established by the City Manager with approval
of the City Council.
§ 3-21. City Engineer.
A. There shall be a City Engineer who shall be a certified professional
engineer licensed by the State of Connecticut. The City Engineer shall
be responsible for all engineering work required by the City and for
the recording and filing of all layouts, surveys and other engineering
drawings used by the City.
B. The City Engineer shall be supervised by and report to the Director of
Parks and Public Works, provided that the City Manager may hereinafter
designate the engineering activities of the City as a separate department
headed by the City Engineer, upon approval of the City Council by
amendment hereof or as part of the annual final approved budget.
§ 3-22. Additional powers and duties.
In addition to the powers and duties set forth in §§ 3-20 and 3-21 of this
article, the Department of Parks and Public Works shall have such duties
as it may be assigned by statute, the City Charter, this chapter, other
legislation or the City Manager.
§ 3-23. Appointment and removal of Director, division heads and
managers.
In accordance with the Charter and this chapter, the City Manager shall
appoint and may remove the Director of Parks and Public Works as well as
all heads of divisions within the Department.
5. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. IX, Department of Physical
Services, as amended 2-17-1981.
§ 3-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-23
1:25

ARTICLE X
Department of Development and Enforcement
§ 3-24. Department established. [Amended 7-16-1984]
There is hereby established a Department of Development and
Enforcement, which shall be headed by the Director of Planning. The
Department of Development and Enforcement shall be responsible for the
enforcement of all legislation, whether federal, state or City, pertaining to
buildings and property maintenance, and it shall have and may exercise
all power and authority which it shall judge necessary and proper in the
interests of public safety for the inspection, regulation and control of
buildings, dwelling houses and other structures or parts thereof; for the
demolition, repair, maintenance, strengthening or numbering of any
building; for the prohibition of the use of such building or part thereof;
for the granting of permits to erect, alter, change, repair or remove any
building within the limits of said City; for the deviation from the original
plans and specifications of the methods to be employed in the construction
of any building or structure for which a permit shall have been issued
by said Department; and for the control of the erection, maintenance and
location of billboards within said City. There shall be the following divisions
within the Department:
A. Division of Planning, to be headed by the Director of Planning. The
Director of Planning shall act and function as Zoning Officer, and the
Division of Planning shall be responsible for providing all planning
services required by the City and, under the direction of the City
Manager, assisting the Planning Commission and Zoning Board of
Appeals in performing their functions.
B. Division of Building and Housing, to be headed by the Building Official,
who shall be responsible for the enforcement of the Housing Code and
for the issuance of all building permits and the enforcement of the State
Basic Building Code and all other duties assigned to him by state statute
and the State Basic Building Code.
§ 3-25. Additional powers and duties.
In addition to the powers and duties set forth in § 3-24 of this article, the
Department of Development and Enforcement shall have such powers and
duties as it may be assigned by statute, the Charter, this chapter, other
legislation or the City Manager.
§ 3-26. Appointment and removal of Director and division heads.
[Amended 7-16-1984]
In accordance with the Charter and this chapter, the City Manager shall
appoint and may remove the Director of Planning and the heads of all
divisions within the Department.
§ 3-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-26
1:27

ARTICLE XI
Department of Human Services
[Amended 2-17-1981; 12-1-1986; 1-21-1997; 2-16-1999;612-5-2016]
§ 3-27. Department established.
A. There is hereby established the Department of Health and Human
Services, which shall be headed by the Director of Health and Human
Services.
B. The Department of Health and Human Services shall be responsible for
the preservation and promotion of the public health and shall perform
such functions and shall have such powers and duties as are imposed
by law. It shall be charged with the enforcement of all laws, ordinances,
rules and regulations in respect to the public health. Services may
include environmental health, clinic services, school health services,
public health emergency preparedness, Women, Infants and Children
(WIC), support services to nonpublic schools, youth services, school
readiness, and senior affairs. Other grant-funded programs may be
offered.
§ 3-28. Additional powers and duties.
In addition to the powers and duties set forth in § 3-27 of this article, the
Department of Health and Human Services shall have such powers and
duties as it may be assigned by statute, the Charter, this chapter, other
legislation or the City Manager.
§ 3-29. (Reserved)
6. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 3-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-29
1:29

ARTICLE XII
Department of Civil Preparedness7
§ 3-30. Department established.
There is hereby established a Department of Civil Preparedness, which shall
be headed by the Director of Civil Preparedness. Said Department shall be
responsible for such duties as may be assigned by statute, the Charter, this
chapter or other legislation approved by the Council.
§ 3-31. Appointment and removal of Director.
In accordance with the Charter and this chapter, the City Manager shall
appoint and may remove the Director of Civil Preparedness.
7. Editor's Note: An ordinance adopted 11-4-1996 repealed former §§ 3-28 and 3-29, which
pertained to the Department of Parks and Recreation, and renumbered Arts. XIII and XIV
as Arts. XII and XIII.
§ 3-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-31
1:31

ARTICLE XIII
Department of Management Information Services
[Added 7-1-1996]
§ 3-32. Department established.
A. There shall be a Department of Management Information Services,
which shall be responsible for the management of all computer
information services and have such other duties as may be assigned by
legislation or by the City Manager.
B. The Department shall be headed by the Director of Management
Information Services, who shall serve under the supervision and at the
pleasure of the City Manager.
§ 3-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-32
1:33

ARTICLE XIV
Constituent Caseworker
[Added 4-15-20028]
§ 3-33. Position established.
A. There shall be a position of Constituent Caseworker. Said position shall
be an unclassified position to assist the City Council in the performance
of its duties, as provided in § C9-3 of the City Charter. Said position
shall be filled by appointment of the Mayor confirmed by approval of a
majority of the City Council.
B. The appointee shall serve at the pleasure of the City Council for a
period terminating, if not sooner, on the first Monday of each December
following each biennial municipal election.
C. The job description and duties of said position shall be as may be
approved by the City Council from time to time.
8. Editor's Note: Former Art. XIV, Department of Engineering and Public Utilities, was
repealed 2-6-1989.
§ 3-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-33
1:35

ARTICLE XV
Department of Emergency Communications
[Added 4-18-20059]
§ 3-34. Department established.
A. There shall be a Department of Emergency Communications, which shall
be responsible for the management of all emergency communication
operations and which shall have such other duties as may be assigned
by statute, the Charter, or the Code or as may be approved by the
City Council from time to time, or as may be assigned to it by the City
Manager.
B. The Department shall be headed by the Director of Emergency
Communications, who shall be appointed by, serve at the pleasure of and
may be removed by the City Manager in accordance with the provisions
of the Charter and this Code.
9. Editor's Note: Former Art. XV, Department of Engineering, of this chapter was repealed
6-16-1986.
§ 3-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-34
1:37
Chapter 6
BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND APPOINTED POSITIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 3.
Code of Ethics — See Ch. 21.
Personnel classification and compensation
system — See Ch. 38.
Transit District — See Ch. 46.
STATUTORY REFERENCES
Municipal boards or commissions for inland
wetlands and watercourses — See C.G.S.
§ 22a-42(c).
Zoning boards of appeals — See C.G.S. § 8-5 et
seq.
Municipal planning commissions — See
C.G.S. § 8-18 et seq.
Personnel appeals boards — See C.G.S.
§ 7-422.
Community development — See C.G.S.
§ 8-169a et seq.
Libraries — See C.G.S. § 11-33.
Constables — See C.G.S. § 7-92.
Traffic Authority — See C.G.S. § 14-297.
Building Code Board of Appeals — See C.G.S.
§ 29-266.
Municipal parking authorities — See C.G.S.
§ 7-203 et seq.
§ 3-34 MERIDEN CODE § 3-34
1:38
ARTICLE I
Board of Ethics10
§ 6-1. Membership; terms of office. [Amended 1-18-199411]
There shall be a Board of Ethics which shall be constituted as provided
in Chapter VII, § C7-8 of the City Charter. All members of the Board shall
be appointed in accordance with § C3-3J of the City Charter and may be
removed by the City Council. Terms of office shall be as provided in § C7-8 of
the Charter. A member appointed to the Board to replace a member whose
term has not expired shall be appointed for the unexpired term only.
§ 6-2. Election of officers.
At its April meeting the Board of Ethics shall elect from among its members
a Chairman, Vice Chairman and Secretary.
§ 6-3. Meetings.
The Board of Ethics shall meet as often as it deems necessary pursuant to
its own rules of procedure.
§ 6-4. Powers and duties.
The Board of Ethics shall have such powers and duties as are assigned to it
by statute, the Charter, this chapter or other legislation of the City Council.
§ 6-5. Quorum; voting; rules of procedure.
Except where otherwise specifically provided by statute, Charter or other
legislation, a majority of the members of the Board of Ethics must be
present to constitute a quorum, and a majority vote of the total membership
of the Board is required for action. The Board may establish such rules of
procedure as it deems necessary, provided that no such rule shall conflict
with any other legislation.
10.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 21, Ethics, Code of.
11.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 6-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-5
1:39

ARTICLE II
Inland Wetlands and Watercourse Commission
§ 6-6. Purpose.
A program to provide an orderly process to balance the need for the
economic growth of Meriden and the use of its land with the need to protect
its environment and ecology is in the best interests of the health, welfare
and safety of its citizens.
§ 6-7. Commission established; title.
By the authority granted under Chapter 439 of the Connecticut General
Statutes, as amended, an inland wetlands and watercourse agency is hereby
established. The name of said agency shall be the "Meriden Inland Wetlands
and Watercourse Commission."
§ 6-8. Membership; terms of office. [Amended 1-18-1994]
The Inland Wetlands and Watercourse Commission shall consist of seven
members, one of whom shall be a member of the Planning Commission. All
members shall be appointed in accordance with § C3-3J of the City Charter
and may be removed by the City Council. The member of the Commission
who is a member of the Planning Commission shall serve at the pleasure of
the City Council as long as he is a member of said Planning Commission.
The remaining members shall serve for terms of three years, except that
of the first members appointed three shall be appointed for terms of three
years, two shall be appointed for terms of two years, and two shall be
appointed for terms of one year. A member appointed to the Commission to
replace a member whose term has not expired shall be appointed for the
unexpired term only.
§ 6-9. Election of officers.
At its April meeting the Inland Wetlands and Watercourse Commission shall
elect from its members a Chairman, Vice Chairman and Secretary.
§ 6-10. Meetings and reports.
The Inland Wetlands and Watercourse Commission shall meet as often as it
deems necessary pursuant to its own rules of procedure, but no less than
once a month. It shall file a monthly report of its activities and financial
statement with the City Council.
§ 6-11. Powers and duties.
A. The Inland Wetlands and Watercourse Commission shall have such
powers and duties as are assigned to it by Chapter 440, Wetlands and
Watercourses, of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended, and/or
any legislation by the City Council. [Amended 3-20-2017]
§ 6-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-11
1:41
B. The Meriden Inland Wetlands and Watercourse Commission shall
compile, interpret and place on file data on the status of Meriden's
environment and ways to improve it.
C. Pursuant to § 25-84 of the General Statutes of the State of Connecticut,
the Inland Wetlands and Watercourse Commission is appointed as the
Flood Control Implementation Agency of the City of Meriden. Said
Commission's primary responsibility shall be in the implementation and
development of a flood control plan pursuant to the PL-566 Study of
1962. Said Commission shall meet every two months and report
semiannually to the City Council. Said Commission is mandated to hold
public hearings in the months of April and October in order that the
public be apprised of its progress. The City Council reserves the right
to approve or disapprove any action taken by the Flood Control
Implementat-++ion Agency of the City of Meriden.12
D. Enforcement; penalties for offenses. [Added 3-20-2017]
(1) In accordance with Connecticut General Statutes § 22a-42g, and in
addition to any other penalties and enforcement powers, the Inland
Wetlands and Watercourse Commission shall have the authority to
establish fines for violations of its regulations adopted pursuant to
Connecticut General Statutes § 22a-42. However, no fine shall be
levied against the State of Connecticut or any State of Connecticut
employee while acting within the scope of his or her employment.
(2) Any police officer or other person authorized by the City Manager
may issue a citation to any person who commits a violation. The
citation process and the citation hearing procedure in Chapter 86 of
the Meriden City Code and Connecticut General Statutes § 7-152c
shall be followed.
(3) Any fine collected shall be deposited into the General Fund or in any
special fund designated by the City Council.
§ 6-12. Quorum; voting; rules of procedure.
Except where otherwise specifically provided by statute, Charter or other
legislation, a majority of the members of the Inland Wetlands and
Watercourse Commission must be present to constitute a quorum, and
a majority vote of the total membership of the Commission is required
for action. The Commission may establish such rules of procedure as it
deems necessary, provided that no such rule shall conflict with any other
legislation.
12.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 6-11 MERIDEN CODE § 6-12
1:42
ARTICLE III
Zoning Board of Appeals
§ 6-13. Board established.
There is hereby established a Zoning Board of Appeals pursuant to the
provisions of § 8-5 of Chapter 124 of the Connecticut General Statutes.
§ 6-14. Membership. [Amended 4-2-1990; 1-18-1994]
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall consist of five members and three
alternates. All members of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be appointed
by the City Council in accordance with § C3-3J of the City Charter, and may
be removed by the City Council. All members of the Board shall serve for
terms of three years. A member appointed to the Board to replace a member
whose term has not expired shall be appointed, for the unexpired term only,
by the City Council of the City of Meriden.
§ 6-15. Transition.
In order to provide continuity on the Zoning Board of Appeals, those
persons serving as members and alternates as of December 3, 1979, shall
serve until such time as the terms to which they were originally appointed
all expire.
§ 6-16. Election of officers.
At its April meeting the Zoning Board of Appeals shall elect from its
members a Chairman, Vice Chairman and Secretary.
§ 6-17. Meetings.
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall meet as often as it deems necessary
pursuant to its own rules of procedure, but no less than once a month.
§ 6-18. Powers and duties.
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall have such powers and duties as are
assigned to it by Chapter 124 of the Connecticut General Statutes and the
Zoning Ordinance of the City of Meriden.13
§ 6-19. Quorum; voting; rules of procedure.
Except where otherwise specifically provided by statute, Charter or other
legislation, a majority of the members of the Zoning Board of Appeals must
be present to constitute a quorum, and a majority vote of those members
of the Board present and voting is required for action. The Board may
establish such rules of procedure as it deems necessary, provided that no
such rule shall conflict with any other legislation.
13.Editor's Note: See Ch. 213, Zoning.
§ 6-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-19
1:43

ARTICLE IV
Planning Commission
§ 6-20. Commission established; membership; terms of office.
[Amended 1-18-1994]
There is hereby established a Planning Commission which shall consist of
five members. All members of the Planning Commission shall be appointed
in accordance with § C3-3J of the City Charter and may be removed by the
City Council. All members shall serve for terms of three years, except that of
the first members appointed two shall be appointed for terms of three years,
two shall be appointed for terms of two years, and one shall be appointed
for a term of one year. Members appointed to the Commission to replace a
member whose term has not expired shall be appointed for the unexpired
term only. In addition, the City Council shall appoint, in accordance with
§ C3-3J of the City Charter, and may remove three alternate members to
serve for terms of three years, except that of the first members appointed
one shall serve for a term of three years, one shall serve for a term of
two years and one shall serve for a term of one year. An alternate member
appointed as such to replace an alternate member whose term has not
expired shall be appointed for the unexpired term only. Said alternate
members shall have such powers and duties, shall possess such
qualifications and shall be subject to such provisions as are set forth in
§ 8-1b of the Connecticut General Statutes.
§ 6-21. Election of officers.
At its April meeting the Planning Commission shall elect from its members
a Chairman, Vice Chairman and Secretary.
§ 6-22. Meetings and reports.
The Planning Commission shall meet as often as it deems necessary
pursuant to its own rules of procedure, but no less than once a month. It
shall file a monthly report of its activities and a financial statement with the
City Council.
§ 6-23. Powers and duties.
The Planning Commission shall have such powers and duties as are
assigned to it by statute (C.G.S. §§ 8-18 to 8-30a), the Charter, this chapter
or other legislation of the City Council. It shall also study public works
and plans for other municipal improvements and make suitable
recommendations with reference thereto to the appropriate City board or
commission, to the City Manager and to the City Council.
§ 6-24. Quorum; voting; rules of procedure.
Except where otherwise specifically provided by statute, Charter or other
legislation, a majority of the members of the Planning Commission must be
present to constitute a quorum, and a majority vote of the total membership
§ 6-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-24
1:45
of the Commission is required for action. The Commission may establish
such rules of procedure as it deems necessary, provided that no such rule
shall conflict with any other legislation.
§ 6-24 MERIDEN CODE § 6-24
1:46
ARTICLE V
Board of Assessment Appeals
[Amended 4-6-1981; 1-18-1994; at time of adoption of Code (see Ch.
1, General Provisions, Art. II)14]
§ 6-25. Membership; terms of office.
There shall be a Board of Assessment Appeals constituted as provided
in Chapter VII, § C7-7 of the City Charter. All members of the Board of
Assessment Appeals shall be appointed in accordance with § C3-3J of the
City Charter and may be removed by the City Council. All members shall
serve for terms of two years, except that of the first members appointed
one shall be appointed for a term of three years, one shall be appointed for
a term of two years, and one shall be appointed for a term of one year. A
member of the Board appointed to the Board to replace a member whose
term has not expired shall be appointed for the unexpired term only.
§ 6-26. Appointment of officers.
At its first February meeting the Board of Assessment Appeals shall elect
from its members a Chairman, Vice Chairman and Secretary.
§ 6-27. Meetings and reports.
The Board of Assessment Appeals shall meet as often as it deems necessary
pursuant to its own rules of procedure. It shall file an annual report of its
activities with the City Council.
§ 6-28. Powers and duties.
The Board of Assessment Appeals shall have such powers and duties as are
assigned to it by statute, the Charter, this chapter or other legislation of the
City Council.
§ 6-29. Quorum; voting; rules of procedure.
Except where otherwise specifically provided by statute, Charter of other
legislation, a majority of the members of the Board of Assessment Appeals
must be present to constitute a quorum, and a majority vote of the total
membership of the Board is required for action. The Board may establish
such rules of procedure as it deems necessary, provided that no such rule
shall conflict with any other legislation.
14.Editor's Note: Former Art. V, relating to the Jury Board, as amended 7-18-1983 and
1-18-1994, was repealed 8-21-2000.
§ 6-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-29
1:47

ARTICLE VI
Library Board15
§ 6-30. Board established; membership; terms of office.
There is hereby established, pursuant to § 11-33 of the Connecticut General
Statutes, a Library Board which shall consist of nine members. All members
of the Library Board shall be appointed and removed by the Mayor with the
approval of the City Council in accordance with the Connecticut General
Statutes, as amended. All members shall serve for terms of three years,
except that of the first members appointed three shall be appointed for
terms of three years, three shall be appointed for terms of two years, and
three shall be appointed for terms of one year. A member appointed to the
Board to replace a member whose term has not expired shall be appointed
for the unexpired term only.
§ 6-31. Election of officers.
At its April meeting the Library Board shall elect from its members a
Chairman, Vice Chairman and Secretary.
§ 6-32. Meetings and reports.
The Library Board shall meet as often as it deems necessary pursuant to its
own rules of procedure. It shall file a monthly report of its activities and a
financial statement with the City Council.
§ 6-33. Powers and duties.
The Library Board shall have such powers and duties as are assigned to it
by statute, the Charter, this chapter or other legislation of the City Council.
§ 6-34. Quorum; voting; rules of procedure.
Except where otherwise specifically provided by statute, Charter or other
legislation, a majority of the members of the Library Board must be present
to constitute a quorum, and a majority vote of those members of the Board
present and voting is required for action. The Board may establish such
rules of procedure as it deems necessary, provided that no such rules shall
conflict with any other legislation.
15.Editor's Note: Former Art. VI, Personnel Review Board, was deleted at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 6-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-34
1:49

ARTICLE VII
Maloney Scholarship Committee
[Amended 1-18-1994; at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II)16]
§ 6-35. Membership; terms of office.
There shall be a Maloney Scholarship Committee constituted as provided
in Chapter 10, § C10-3 of the City Charter. All members of the Maloney
Scholarship Committee shall be appointed in accordance with § C3-3J of the
City Charter and may be removed by the City Council. All members shall
serve for terms of three years, except that of the first members appointed
two shall be appointed for terms of three years, two shall be appointed for
terms of two years, and one shall be appointed for a term of one year. A
member appointed to the Committee to replace a member whose term has
not expired shall be appointed for the unexpired term only.
§ 6-36. Election of officers.
At its April meeting the Maloney Scholarship Committee shall elect from its
members a Chairman, Vice Chairman and Secretary.
§ 6-37. Meetings and reports.
The Maloney Scholarship Committee shall meet as often as it deems
necessary pursuant to its own rules of procedure. It shall file an annual
report of its activities and a financial statement with the City Council.
§ 6-38. Powers and duties.
The Maloney Scholarship Committee shall have such powers and duties as
are assigned to it by statute, the Charter, this chapter or other legislation of
the City Council.
§ 6-39. Quorum; voting; rules of procedure.
Except where otherwise specifically provided by statute, Charter or other
legislation, a majority of the members of the Maloney Scholarship
Committee must be present to constitute a quorum, and a majority vote
of those members of the Committee present and voting is required for
action. The Committee may establish such rules of procedure as it deems
necessary, provided that no such rule shall conflict with any other
legislation.
16.Editor's Note: Former Art. VII, relating to the Meriden Community Action Agency (MCAA),
as amended 3-3-1980 and 1-18-1994, was repealed 7-20-1998.
§ 6-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-39
1:51

ARTICLE VIII
School Building Committee17
§ 6-40. Committee established; membership; terms of office.
[Amended 7-7-1980; 1-18-1994; 3-6-2000]
There is hereby established a School Building Committee to consist of 11
members who shall be appointed in accordance with § C3-3J of the City
Charter and who may be removed by the City Council. One member shall
be a member of the City Council and shall serve as a member of the School
Building Committee at the pleasure of the City Council for a term of two
years as long as he or she is a member of the City Council. One member
shall be a member of the Board of Education and shall serve as a member
of the School Building Committee at the pleasure of the City Council for as
long as he or she is a member of the Board of Education. The remaining
members shall serve for a term of three years, except that of the first
members appointed, two shall serve for a term of three years, two shall
serve for a term of two years, and five shall serve for a term of one year. A
member appointed to the Committee to replace a member whose term has
not expired shall be appointed for the unexpired term only.
§ 6-41. Election of officers.
At its April meeting the School Building Committee shall elect from its
members a Chairman, Vice Chairman and Secretary.
§ 6-42. Meetings and reports.
The School Building Committee shall meet as often as it deems necessary
pursuant to its own rules of procedure. It shall file at least an annual report
of its activities and a financial statement with the City Council.
§ 6-43. Powers and duties.
The School Building Committee shall have such powers and duties as are
assigned to it by statute, the Charter, this chapter or other legislation of the
City Council.
§ 6-44. Quorum; voting; rules of procedure.
Except where otherwise specifically provided by statute, Charter or other
legislation, a majority of the members of the School Building Committee
must be present to constitute a quorum, and a majority vote of those
members of the Committee present and voting is required for action. The
Committee may establish such rules of procedure as it deems necessary,
provided that no such rule shall conflict with any other legislation.
17.Editor's Note: Former Art. VIII, relating to the Heritage and Culture Commission, as
amended 8-5-1991, was deleted 3-16-1992.
§ 6-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-44
1:53

ARTICLE IX
Human Services Advisory Board
§ 6-45. Board established; membership; terms of office. [Amended
7-7-1980; 9-15-198018]
There is hereby established a Human Services Advisory Board which shall
consist of seven members to be appointed and removed by the City Council.
The members shall serve for terms of three years, except that of the first
members appointed, three shall be appointed for terms of three years, three
shall be appointed for terms of two years and one shall be appointed for a
term of one year. A member of the Board appointed to the Board to replace
a member whose term has not expired shall be appointed for the unexpired
term only. One of the appointed members must be between the ages of 18
and 21 years of age.
§ 6-46. Election of officers.
At its April meeting the Human Services Advisory Board shall elect from its
members a Chairman, Vice Chairman and Secretary.
§ 6-47. Meetings and reports.
The Human Services Advisory Board shall meet as often as it deems
necessary pursuant to its own rules of procedure, but no less than once a
month. It shall file a monthly report of its activities and a financial statement
with the City Council.
§ 6-48. Powers and duties.
The Human Services Advisory Board shall have such powers and duties as
are assigned to it by statute, the Charter, this chapter or other legislation of
the City Council.
§ 6-49. Statement of purpose.
The primary responsibility of the Human Services Advisory Board is to
improve the delivery of health and social services to our community and
submit to the City Council any recommendations which might serve to
facilitate that responsibility.
§ 6-50. Quorum; voting; rules of procedure.
Except where otherwise specifically provided by statute, Charter or other
legislation, a majority of the members of the Human Services Advisory
Board must be present to constitute a quorum, and a majority vote of those
members of the Board present and voting is required for action. The Board
18.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 6-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-50
1:55
may establish such rules of procedure as it deems necessary, provided that
no such rule shall conflict with any other legislation.
§ 6-50 MERIDEN CODE § 6-50
1:56
ARTICLE X
Constables19
§ 6-51. Appointment of special constables. [Amended 9-15-1980;
7-2-1984]
The City Manager is authorized to name special constables in such number
and with such qualifications, accreditation or certification as he may
determine necessary, for terms not to exceed two years.
§ 6-52. Appointment of constables by Manager authorized. [Added
2-16-1982]
Pursuant to the Connecticut General Statutes, § 9-185, the City Manager is
authorized to appoint not more than seven constables in lieu of constables
to be elected under the Connecticut General Statutes, § 9-200. Such
constables may be appointed for one-year terms and shall have powers and
duties as prescribed by the Connecticut General Statutes.
19.Editor's Note: Former Art. X, relating to the Board of Apportionment and Taxation, was
deleted at the direction of the City pursuant to the results of the 1987 Charter revision
referendum.
§ 6-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-52
1:57

ARTICLE XI
Traffic Authority
§ 6-53. Designation; powers and duties.
The Chief of Police of the City of Meriden shall be the Traffic Authority of
the City and shall have all the powers and perform all the duties conferred
upon or assigned to such Authority by the provisions of the Connecticut
General Statutes, the City Charter or any legislation of the City.
§ 6-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-53
1:59

ARTICLE XII
Board of Admissions
§ 6-54. Board established; membership.
There is hereby established a Board of Admissions, the membership of
which shall consist of the City Clerk, the Democratic Registrar of Voters
and the Republican Registrar of Voters, all of whom shall continue to be
members of said Board for as long as they hold their respective offices.
§ 6-55. Meetings and reports.
The Board of Admissions shall meet as often as it deems necessary pursuant
to its own rules of procedure. It shall file an annual report of its activities
and a financial statement with the City Council.
§ 6-56. Powers and duties.
The Board of Admissions shall have such powers and duties as are assigned
to it by statute, the Charter, this chapter or other legislation of the City
Council.
§ 6-57. Quorum; voting; rules of procedure.
Except where otherwise specifically provided by statute, Charter or other
legislation, a majority of the members of the Board of Admissions must be
present to constitute a quorum, and a majority vote of the total membership
of the Board is required for action. The Board may establish such rules of
procedure as it deems necessary, provided that no such rule shall conflict
with any other legislation.
§ 6-54 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-57
1:61

ARTICLE XIII
Municipal Pension Board
§ 6-58. Board established; membership; terms of office. [Amended
9-15-1980; 7-16-1984; 3-21-1988; 1-18-1994]
There is hereby established a Municipal Pension Board to consist of seven
members. One member shall be a regular City employee participating in the
plan set forth in Chapter 35 of the Meriden City Code, popularly elected
by the employees who participate in the pension plan and subject to the
approval of the City Council. The remaining six members shall be appointed
by the City Council in accordance with § C3-3J of the City Charter and may
be removed by the City Council and shall consist of two members of the City
Council and four resident electors of the City of Meriden. The members of
the City Council shall serve as members of the Municipal Pension Board,
at the pleasure of the City Council, for a two-year term, as long as they
are members of the City Council. The remaining members shall serve for a
term of three years. Said employee member shall serve for a term of three
years, provided that said employee member remains an active employee of
the City. The members of the Municipal Pension Board shall continue in
office for the term for which they were appointed and until their successors
are duly appointed and have qualified. A member appointed to the Board to
replace a member whose term has not expired shall be appointed for the
unexpired term only. The Director of Finance and the Personnel Director
shall be ex officio members of the Board and shall be required to attend its
meetings. The Personnel Director shall act as Secretary to the Board.
§ 6-59. Election of officers. [Amended 1-7-1991]
At its April meeting the Municipal Pension Board shall elect from its
members a Chairperson and Vice Chairperson.
§ 6-60. Meetings.
The Municipal Pension Board shall meet as often as it deems necessary
pursuant to its own rules of procedure, but no less than once a month. It
shall file a monthly report of its activities and a financial statement with the
City Council.
§ 6-61. Powers and duties.
The Municipal Pension Board shall have such powers and duties as are
assigned to it by statute, the Charter, this chapter or other legislation of the
City Council.
§ 6-62. Quorum; voting; rules of procedure.
Except where otherwise specifically provided by statute, Charter or other
legislation, a majority of the members of the Municipal Pension Board
must be present to constitute a quorum, and a majority vote of the total
membership of the Board is required for action. The Board may establish
§ 6-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-62
1:63
such rules of procedure as it deems necessary, provided that no such rule
shall conflict with any other legislation.
§ 6-62 MERIDEN CODE § 6-62
1:64
ARTICLE XIV
Building Code Board of Appeals
§ 6-63. Board established, membership; terms of office. [Amended
1-18-1994]
There is hereby established a Building Code Board of Appeals which shall
consist of five members. All members of the Building Code Board of Appeals
shall be appointed in accordance with § C3-3J of the City Charter and may
be removed by the City Council. All members shall serve for terms of three
years, except that of the first members appointed two shall be appointed
for terms of three years, two shall be appointed for terms of two years,
and one shall be appointed for a term of one year. A member of the Board
appointed to the Board to replace a member whose term has not expired
shall be appointed for the unexpired term only.
§ 6-64. Election of officers.
At its April meeting the Building Code Board of Appeals shall elect from its
members a Chairman, Vice Chairman and Secretary.
§ 6-65. Meetings and reports.
The Building Code Board of Appeals shall meet as often as it deems
necessary pursuant to its own rules of procedure. It shall file an annual
report of its activities and a financial statement with the City Council.
§ 6-66. Powers and duties.
The Building Code Board of Appeals shall have such powers and duties as
are assigned to it by statute, the Charter, this chapter or other legislation
of the City Council and more specifically as defined in § 29-266 of the
Connecticut General Statutes.
§ 6-67. Quorum; voting; rules of procedure.
Except where otherwise specifically provided by statute, Charter or other
legislation, a majority of the members of the Building Code Board of Appeals
must be present to constitute a quorum, and a majority vote of the total
membership of the Board is required for action. The Board may establish
such rules of procedure as it deems necessary, provided that no such rule
shall conflict with any other legislation.
§ 6-63 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-67
1:65

ARTICLE XV
Public Utilities Commission20
§ 6-68. Membership; terms of office. [Amended 1-18-1994]
There shall be a Public Utilities Commission which shall be constituted
as provided in Chapter VII, § C7-1 of the City Charter. All members of
the Commission shall be appointed in accordance with § C3-3J of the City
Charter and may be removed by the City Council. All members shall serve
for terms of three years, except that of the first members appointed two
shall be appointed for terms of three years, two shall be appointed for terms
of two years, and one shall be appointed for a term of one year. A member
appointed to the Commission to replace a member whose term has not
expired shall be appointed for the unexpired term only.
§ 6-69. Appointment of officers.
At its April meeting the Public Utilities Commission shall elect from its
members a Chairman Pro Tempore, Vice Chairman and Secretary.
§ 6-70. Meetings and reports.
The Public Utilities Commission shall meet as often as it deems necessary
pursuant to its own rules of procedure, but no less than once a month. It
shall file a monthly report of its activities and a financial statement with the
City Council.
§ 6-71. Powers and duties.
The Public Utilities Commission shall have such powers and duties as are
assigned to it by statute, the Charter, this chapter or other legislation of the
City Council.
§ 6-72. Quorum; voting; rules of procedure.
Except where otherwise specifically provided by statute, Charter or other
legislation, a majority of the members of the Public Utilities Commission
must be present to constitute a quorum, and a majority vote of those present
and voting is required for action. The Commission may establish such rules
of procedure as it deems necessary, provided that no such rule shall conflict
with any other legislation.
20.Editor's Note: Former Art. XV, relating to the Board of Trustees of the World War II
Veterans' Memorial Hospital, was deleted 2-18-1992.
§ 6-68 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-72
1:67

ARTICLE XVI
Transit and Parking Commission21
[Amended 1-18-1994; 7-2-2018]
§ 6-73. Commission established; membership; terms of office.
There is hereby established a Transit and Parking Commission which shall
consist of five members. All members of the Transit and Parking
Commission shall be appointed in accordance with § C3-3J of the City
Charter and may be removed by the City Council. All members shall serve
for terms of three years, except that of the first members appointed shall
be appointed for terms of three years, two shall be appointed for terms of
two years, and one shall be appointed for a term of one year. A member
appointed to replace a member whose term has not expired shall be
appointed for the unexpired term only.
§ 6-74. Election of officers.
At its April meeting the Transit and Parking Commission shall elect from its
members a Chairman, Vice Chairman and Treasurer.
§ 6-75. Meetings and reports.
The Transit and Parking Commission shall meet as often as it deems
necessary, but at least monthly. It shall file a monthly activity report and a
financial statement with the City Council.
§ 6-76. Powers and duties.
A. The Transit and Parking Commission shall be responsible for the
operation of the Transit District by authority granted under Chapter
103a of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.22
B. The Transit and Parking Commission shall be responsible for creating,
establishing and operating off-street parking facilities and all such other
duties and responsibilities pursuant to Chapter 100 of the Connecticut
General Statutes, as amended.23
C. The Director of Public Works shall be responsible for the maintenance of
all off-street parking facilities operated by said Commission.
§ 6-77. Quorum; voting; rules of procedure.
Except where otherwise specifically provided by statute, Charter or other
legislation, a majority of the members of the Transit and Parking
Commission must be present to constitute a quorum, and a majority vote
of those present and voting is required for action. The Commission may
21.Editor's Note: Former Art. XVI, relating to the World War II Veterans' Memorial Hospital
Advisory Committee, was deleted 2-18-1992.
22.Editor's Note: See C.G.S. § 7-273a et seq.
23.Editor's Note: See C.G.S. § 7-202 et seq.
§ 6-73 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-77
1:69
establish such rules of procedure as it deems necessary, provided that no
such rule shall conflict with any other legislation.
§ 6-77 MERIDEN CODE § 6-77
1:70
ARTICLE XVII
Transit District
[Amended 1-18-1994; 11-17-1997]
§ 6-78. District established, membership.
There is hereby established a Transit District which shall consist of five
members. All members of the Transit District shall be appointed in
accordance with § C3-3J of the City Charter and may be removed by the City
Council. All members shall serve for terms of three years, except that of the
first members appointed two shall be appointed for terms of three years,
two shall be appointed for terms of two years, and one shall be appointed for
a term of one year. A member appointed to the District to replace a member
whose term has not expired shall be appointed for the unexpired term only.
§ 6-79. Election of officers.
At its April meeting the Transit District shall elect from its members a
Chairman, Vice Chairman and Treasurer.
§ 6-80. Meetings and reports.
The Transit District shall meet as often as it deems necessary, but at least
monthly. It shall file a monthly activity report and a financial statement with
the City Council.
§ 6-81. Powers and duties.
The District shall be responsible for the operation of the Transit District by
authority granted under Chapter 103a of the Connecticut General Statutes,
as amended.
§ 6-82. Quorum; voting; rules of procedure.
Except where otherwise specifically provided by statute, Charter or other
legislation, a majority of the members of the Transit District must be
present to constitute a quorum, and a majority vote of those present and
voting is required for action. The District may establish such rules of
procedure as it deems necessary, provided that no such rule shall conflict
with any other legislation.
§ 6-78 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-82
1:71

ARTICLE XVIII
Aviation Commission
§ 6-83. Commission established, membership; terms of office.
[Amended 1-18-1994]
There is hereby established an Aviation Commission which shall consist of
five members. All members of the Aviation Commission shall be appointed
in accordance with § C3-3J of the City Charter and may be removed by the
City Council. All members shall serve for terms of three years, except that of
the first members appointed two shall be appointed for terms of three years,
two shall be appointed for terms of two years, and one shall be appointed
for a term of one year. A member appointed to the Commission to replace
a member whose term has not expired shall be appointed for the unexpired
term only.
§ 6-84. Election of officers.
At its April meeting the Aviation Commission shall elect from its members a
Chairman, Vice Chairman and Treasurer.
§ 6-85. Meetings and reports.
The Aviation Committee shall meet as often as it deems necessary, but at
least monthly. It shall file a monthly activity report and a financial statement
with the City Council.
§ 6-86. Powers and duties.
The Commission shall be responsible for such duties as provided in statute,
the Charter or other legislation approved by the Council.
§ 6-87. Quorum; voting; rules of procedure.
Except where otherwise specifically provided by statute, Charter or other
legislation, a majority of the members of the Aviation Commission must be
present to constitute a quorum, and a majority vote of those present and
voting is required for action. The Commission may establish such rules of
procedure as it deems necessary, provided that no such rule shall conflict
with any other legislation.
§ 6-83 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-87
1:73

ARTICLE XIX
Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 6-88. Residency requirement. [Amended 10-1-198424]
Any person appointed to any board, commission or authority established
pursuant to this chapter shall be a resident elector of the City of Meriden.
§ 6-89. Classified employees eligible to serve. [Added 12-1-2003]
All municipal employees shall be eligible to serve on the Planning
Commission, the Zoning Board of Appeals, and the Inland Wetlands and
Watercourse Commission.
24.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 6-88 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-89
1:75

ARTICLE XX
Commission for Persons With Disabilities
[Added 11-14-1983; amended 4-6-1987; 4-3-1989; 4-19-1993]
§ 6-90. Established; membership; terms of office. [Amended
1-18-1994]
There is hereby established a Commission for Persons with Disabilities
which shall consist of seven members, without regard to political affiliation,
at least two of whom must be persons with disabilities, as defined in this
article. All members shall be appointed by the City Council in accordance
with § C3-3J of the City Charter and may be removed by the City Council.
All members shall serve for a term of three years, with the expiration
date of those terms being January 31 of each year, except for the initial
appointments which shall be for staggered terms. A member appointed to
replace a member whose term has not expired shall be appointed to the
unexpired term only. There shall be one alternate member, who shall serve
for a term of three years, except that the term of the first alternate member
so appointed shall expire January 31, 1992.
§ 6-91. Election of officers.
At its April meeting, the Commission shall elect from its members a
Chairman, Vice Chairman and Secretary.
§ 6-92. Meetings and reports.
The Commission shall meet at least monthly and shall render such reports
as it deems necessary to the City Council, Manager or other commission.
§ 6-93. Compensation.
No Commissioner shall receive compensation, except for those legitimate
expenses incurred in the discharge of those duties and for which an
appropriation has been authorized prior to the encumbrance.
§ 6-94. Definition.
As used in this article, the term "person with a disability" shall mean a
person who has a physical or mental impairment which substantially limits
one or more of such person's major life activities (such as employability),
has a record of such impairment, or is regarded as having such an
impairment.
§ 6-95. Powers and duties.
The Commission shall:
A. Initiate and/or conduct continuous studies and surveys to determine the
conditions, needs and problems of persons with disabilities in the City
of Meriden in relation to architectural barriers, transportation, public
education and publicity, housing, employment, recreation, health and
§ 6-90 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-95
1:77
other such matters that the Commission may determine to fulfill the
intent of this article.
B. Serve as a clearinghouse for information and advertise, prepare, print,
and distribute publications designed to promote the official purposes of
the Commission.
C. Monitor and ensure compliance, enforcement and implementation of
existing federal and state statutes intended to aid persons with
disabilities.
D. Act as an advocate and coordinator to bring about new and expanded
programs and services for persons with disabilities.
E. Review and make comment to the Planning Commission on all requests
for structures that will be of a public access nature.
F. Deliver an annual report to the City Council no later than January 31
which outlines the Commission's activities for the preceding year and
goals for the coming year.
§ 6-96. Staff.
The Commission shall have staff as the City Manager may from time to time
assign to it or for which the City Council makes appropriation. However,
nothing in this article shall be construed as requiring the City to provide
staff.
§ 6-97. Budget.
The budget shall be submitted as required by the Charter and the City
Manager unless the City Council may otherwise direct.
§ 6-95 MERIDEN CODE § 6-97
1:78
ARTICLE XXI
Public Golf Course Commission
[Added 3-2-198725]
§ 6-98. Commission created.
There is hereby created, pursuant to § C7-2 of the Charter of the City of
Meriden, the Public Golf Course Commission of the City of Meriden.
§ 6-99. Definitions. [Amended 3-4-1998; 3-15-1999]
For the purpose of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS — Any proposed improvements to the golf
course included by the Commission in the capital budget portion of its
annual budget.
CITY — The City of Meriden.
COMMISSION — The Public Golf Course Commission of the City of
Meriden.
CURRENT EXPENSES — The reasonable and necessary current expenses
paid or accrued in operating, maintaining and repairing any public golf
course owned by the City, including, without limitation:
FISCAL YEAR — The fiscal year of the City, beginning on July 1 and ending
on June 30 of every year.
GOLF COURSE — Any Meriden golf course owned by the City, including
without limitation any and all of the following as they relate to any such
golf course: land, rights or interests in land, rights-of-way, approaches and
Costs of collecting gross operating revenues and making any refunds
therefrom lawfully due others;
A.
Overhead expenses directly related to the administration, operation,
maintenance and repair of such golf courses;
B.
Costs of routine maintenance, repairs, replacements, renewals and
alterations occurring in the normal course of business, which may
include expenses not annually recurring and reserves for the
replacement of depreciable equipment;
C.
D. Costs of utility services except as provided by the City; and
Cost of payment of interest and principal on outstanding bonds and
notes of the City issued for public golf course purposes; provided,
however, that for the fiscal year 1997-1998, such cost of interest and
principal shall not be included in the definition of "current expenses" as
hereinbefore set forth.
E.
25.Editor's Note: Former Art. XXI, relating to the Housing Code Compliance Appeals Board,
was repealed 11-21-1994
§ 6-98 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-99
1:79
contract rights; office and other buildings and facilities; paved areas; access
roads; garages, parking lots and other parking structures; furnishings,
equipment and apparatus; all other structures, facilities and improvement
necessary and convenient to the development and maintenance of any such
golf course and for the promotion and accommodation of any such golf
course; and all other property (real, personal, mixed or otherwise), now or
hereafter constructed or acquired, of or belonging or pertaining to any such
golf course.
GROSS OPERATING REVENUES — Includes all income, revenues and
moneys derived in connection with the operation of the golf course for the
purpose of furnishing and supplying the services, facilities and commodities
thereof, and shall include without limitation all income, revenues and
moneys derived from the fees, rates, rentals and charges fixed, imposed and
collected pursuant hereto or otherwise derived from or arising through the
operation and management of any golf course or derived from the rental of
all or part of the golf course, or from the sale or rental of any commodities
or goods in connection with the golf course.
§ 6-100. Membership; terms of office; election of officers. [Amended
1-18-1994]
The Commission shall consist of nine members, two of whom shall be
members of the City Council ex officio, without the power to vote. All
members of the Commission shall be resident electors and shall be
appointed in accordance with § C3-3J of the City Charter and may be
removed by the City Council. The two City Council members of the
Commission shall serve at the pleasure of the City Council for a two-year
term. The remaining seven members shall serve for terms of three years,
except that, of the first members appointed, two shall be appointed for
terms of one year, two for terms of two years, and three for terms of three
years. A member appointed to the Commission to replace a member whose
term has not expired shall be appointed for the unexpired term only. The
Commission shall hold an annual meeting in the month of April at which
time it shall elect one of its members as Chairman, one of its members as
Vice Chairman and one of its members as Secretary.
§ 6-101. Powers and duties; staff. [Amended 2-5-1990; 3-15-1999]
A. The Commission shall have the power to:
(1) Prepare and submit a budget as described in § 6-102 hereof;
(2) Make and enforce the rules and regulations for the orderly play of
golf and the operation of any golf courses and attendant facilities;
(3) Participate directly in the negotiations of all proposed contracts with
any individual, partnership, corporation or any other entity involved
in the operation of the golf course and attendant facilities and make
recommendations thereon to be submitted to the City Manager for
final approval or referral to the City Council, as may be appropriate;
and
(4) Develop and establish all alteration plans, renovations, and capital
improvements and establish a priority list for implementing such
§ 6-99 MERIDEN CODE § 6-101
1:80
alteration plans, renovations and capital improvements, or any other
matters pertaining thereto.
B. Staffing for the operation and maintenance of the golf course shall be
provided for in the budget prepared and submitted by the Commission
pursuant to § 6-102. The Commission shall be responsible for the
operation of the golf course and shall be assisted in the discharge of
its duties hereunder by the Golf Facilities Manager, who shall report
directly to the City Manager.
§ 6-102. Budget; schedule of charges; surplus funds.
A. The Chairman of the Commission shall file with the City Manager of
the City of Meriden the Commission's proposed budget containing an
estimate of projected current expenses and an estimate of projected
gross operating revenues for the next fiscal year, by the same time as
departmental budgets are required to be submitted in accordance with
the Charter or ordinances of the City of Meriden. The budget proposed
by the Commission shall be a balanced budget in which all projected
current expenses are offset by projected gross operating revenues. The
Director of Finance and the City Manager shall have the same duties
with respect to the Commission's proposed budget as set forth in § C8-4
of the Charter of the City. Subsequent to the adoption of a budget by the
City Council, the Commission will adopt a schedule of fees, rates, rentals
and charges for the next ensuing fiscal year to provide gross operating
revenues which, after application of any accumulated annual surplus as
set forth herein, shall be in an amount which is estimated to be sufficient
to meet current expenses as set forth in the budget adopted by the City
Council, which schedule shall be submitted to the City Council for final
approval.
B. All gross operating revenues will be held by the City in a separate fund.
Any annual surplus derived from gross operating revenues shall not
lapse into the City's general fund balance but shall, instead, be retained
in said fund and applied to meet current expenses for the next ensuing
fiscal year or to fund capital improvements; provided, however, that any
funds which may from time to time be derived from the City's general
fund to meet any operating deficit shall first be repaid from such surplus.
§ 6-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-102
1:81

ARTICLE XXII
Redevelopment Agency
[Added 6-20-1988]
§ 6-103. Agency established; powers and duties.
Pursuant to the authority granted by Chapter 130 of the General Statutes of
the State of Connecticut, a Redevelopment Agency is hereby reconstituted
and established for the City of Meriden, with all the powers and duties
specified in said General Statutes.
§ 6-104. Membership; terms of office; compensation.
A. The Agency shall consist of five members who shall be resident electors
and who shall be appointed by the City Manager with the approval of the
City Council.
B. The members first appointed shall be designated to serve one, two,
three, four and five years, respectively, and upon expiration of said terms
thereafter members shall be appointed annually to serve for five years.
Each member shall serve until his successor is appointed and qualified,
and any vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired term.
C. The members of said Agency shall serve without compensation but may
be reimbursed for necessary expenses.
§ 6-105. Action by Agency; selection of officers; staff.
A. Action by said Agency shall be taken only on majority vote of all the
members, and said Agency shall select from among its members a
Chairman and Vice Chairman.
B. Said Agency may employ a secretary and such other officers, agents,
technical consultants, legal counsel and employees as it requires.
§ 6-103 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-105
1:83

ARTICLE XXIII
Housing Site Development Agency
[Added 5-1-1989]
§ 6-106. Designation; purpose.
The Council of Concern Housing Development Corporation is designated as
a Housing Site Development Agency for the specific purpose of filing a grant
application under State Housing and Community Development Program
- Public Act 88-280 to secure funds and to develop and construct a
cooperative housing development which will be affordable to families of
low and moderate income on the property located at and known as the
"Columbia Street/Platt Avenue Extension Property."
§ 6-106 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-106
1:85

ARTICLE XXIV
Human Rights Advisory Board
[Added 4-3-1989]
§ 6-107. Creation.
There is hereby created pursuant to § C7-2 of the Charter of the City of
Meriden the Human Rights Advisory Board.
§ 6-108. Membership. [Amended 1-18-1994]
The Board shall consist of nine members. All members shall be resident
electors and shall be appointed in accordance with § C3-3J of the City
Charter, and may be removed by the City Council, for a term of three years,
except that, of the first members appointed, three shall be appointed for a
term of one year and three shall be appointed for a term of two years. A
member appointed to the Board to replace a member whose term has not
expired shall be appointed for the unexpired term only.
§ 6-109. Election of officers.
At its first meeting, and annually thereafter at its April meeting, the Board
shall elect from its own members a Chairman, Vice Chairman and Secretary.
§ 6-110. Meetings. [Amended 11-17-1997]
The Board shall meet as often as it deems necessary, but no less than every
three months, and not less than twice yearly with the City Manager, and not
less than three times a year with the Human Services Committee of the City
Council.
§ 6-111. Powers and duties.26
The Board shall determine the conditions, needs and problems concerning
human rights in the City of Meriden and review and make recommendations
thereon to the City Manager and/or Human Rights Advocate, as may be
appropriate. The Board shall consult with and be assisted by said Director
as necessary or required. The Board shall have such other powers or duties
as may be assigned to it by the City Council.
§ 6-112. Quorum; rules of procedure.
Except where otherwise provided specifically by statute, Charter or other
legislation, a majority of the membership to the Board must be present to
constitute a quorum, and a majority of those present and voting is required
for action. The Board may establish such other rules of procedure as it
deems necessary, provided that no such rule shall conflict with any other
legislation.
26.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 6-107 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-112
1:87

ARTICLE XXV
Conservation Commission
[Added 11-8-1989]
§ 6-113. Commission created.
There is hereby created a Conservation Commission of the City of Meriden.
§ 6-114. Membership; terms of office. [Amended 3-16-1992;
1-18-1994; 6-3-1996; 8-21-2000]
The Commission shall consist of seven members, one of whom shall be a
member of the City Council and six of whom shall be members of the public.
In addition, there shall be three alternates appointed to said Commission
to act in the place of regular members who are not present at meetings.
All members of the Commission shall be resident electors and shall be
appointed in accordance with § C3-3J of the City Charter and may be
removed by the City Council. The one City Council member shall serve
at the pleasure of the City Council for a two-year term. The remaining
six members shall serve for terms of three years. A member appointed to
the Commission to replace a member whose term has not expired shall
be appointed for the unexpired term only. Two additional members shall
be ex officio, nonvoting high school students. The quorum shall be four
Commissioners.
§ 6-115. Meetings; election of officers.
The Commission shall hold an annual meeting in the month of May at which
time it shall elect one of its members as Chairman, one of its members as
Vice Chairman and one of its members as Secretary.
§ 6-116. Powers and duties.
The Conservation Commission shall have all the powers and duties
enumerated in Connecticut General Statutes §§ 7-131a, 7-131d and 7-131e
as well as all powers and duties conferred upon it by the City Council.
The Conservation Commission shall consult with and be associated by the
Planning Department in the discharge of its duties.
§ 6-113 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-116
1:89

ARTICLE XXVI
Design Review Board
[Added 1-18-1994]
§ 6-117. Function and composition.
The Design Review Board shall consist of five members, who shall be
appointed in accordance with § C3-3J of the City Charter and may be
removed by the City Council.
§ 6-117 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-117
1:91

ARTICLE XXVII
Neighborhood Preservation Board
[Added 8-15-1994]
§ 6-118. Board established.
There is hereby created pursuant to § C7-2 of the Charter of the City of
Meriden the Neighborhood Preservation Board.
§ 6-119. Membership; terms of office.
The Board shall consist of five members. All members shall be resident
electors and shall be appointed and removed by the Mayor in accordance
with City Charter for a term of three years, except that, of the first members
appointed, two shall be appointed for a term of three years, two shall be
appointed for a term of two years, and one shall be appointed for a term
of one year. A member appointed to the Board to replace a member whose
term has not expired shall be appointed for the unexpired term only.
§ 6-120. Election of officers.
At its first meeting, and annually thereafter at its April meeting, the Board
shall elect from its own members a Chairman, Vice Chairman, and
Secretary.
§ 6-121. Meetings.
The Board shall meet as often as it deems necessary, but no less than every
three months, and not less than twice yearly with the City Manager and with
the Economic Development Committee.
§ 6-122. Powers and duties. [Amended 2-6-1996]
A. Neighborhood preservation. The Board shall establish policy per the
Inner Core Task Force Report as adopted by the City Council on August
14, 1994, and exercise policy oversight on neighborhood preservation
and rehabilitation initiatives and activities.
B. Housing Code compliance.
(1) Any person aggrieved by a notice or an order of the Building Official
or of a Housing Code Inspector or of his designated agent issued in
connection with any inspection, examination or survey pursuant to
Chapter 125 of this Code, or any rule or regulation pursuant thereto,
or the denial or suspension of a rooming house license pursuant
to Chapter 125, Article IV of this Code, may request and shall be
granted a hearing on the matter before the Board, provided that such
person shall file in the Building Official's office a written petition
requesting such hearing and setting forth the grounds therefor
within 20 days after the notice or order of the Building Official or
Housing Code Inspector or the denial or suspension of the rooming
house license was served upon such person. Within 10 days of the
receipt of such petition, the Board shall set a time and place for
§ 6-118 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-122
1:93
such hearing and shall give the petitioner written notice thereof.
Such notice shall be by registered or certified mail, return receipt
requested. At the hearing the petitioner shall have the opportunity to
show cause why the notice or the order, or the suspension or denial
of the rooming house license, should be modified or withdrawn. The
hearing shall take place within a reasonable time after the receipt of
the petition by the Board.27
(2) A majority of the Board, after full hearing is had, shall sustain,
modify or withdraw the notice or the order or the suspension or
denial of the rooming house license. Variances from the provisions
of Chapter 125 of this Code may be granted where circumstances
warrant and where, in the judgment of the Board, no harm to the
public health, welfare and safety will result from such variance.28
(3) The Board is hereby authorized to administer oaths and affirmation
to witnesses at such hearings and to subpoena witnesses and
documents employed in such hearings. Subpoenas shall be served in
the method prescribed by the rules of the courts of this state.
(4) All proceedings at such hearings, including the findings of fact and
decision, shall be reduced to writing and shall be a matter of public
record and, as such, shall be recorded and certified in the office of
the Building Official.
(5) Any person aggrieved by the final decision of the Board may seek
review thereof in any court of competent jurisdiction, as provided by
the laws of this state.
(6) Whenever, in the judgment of the Building Official, an emergency
exists which requires immediate action to protect the public welfare
or safety, he may, without notice or hearing, issue an order reciting
the existence of the emergency and requiring such action as he
deems necessary to eliminate it. Anyone receiving such an order
shall comply as soon as possible but shall be given a hearing, if
requested, within 24 hours.
§ 6-123. Quorum; voting; rules of procedure.
Except where otherwise provided specifically, by statute, Charter or other
legislation, a majority of the membership to the Board must be present to
constitute a quorum, and a majority of those present and voting is required
for action. The Board may establish such other rules of procedure as it
deems necessary, provided that no such rule shall conflict with any other
legislation.
§ 6-124. Other duties.
The Board shall have such other duties as shall be assigned to it by the City
Council.
27.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
28.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 6-122 MERIDEN CODE § 6-124
1:94
ARTICLE XXVIII
Freedom of Information Advisory Board
[Added 1-16-2001]
§ 6-125. Board established; purpose.
The City of Meriden hereby establishes a Freedom of Information Advisory
Board. The purpose of the Freedom of Information Advisory Board is to
foster compliance with the State Freedom of Information Act.29
§ 6-126. Membership.
The Freedom of Information Advisory Board shall consist of three members
who shall be appointed by the Mayor.
§ 6-127. Political affiliation of members.
No more than two members of the Freedom of Information Advisory Board
shall be members of the same political party.
§ 6-128. Chairperson.
The members of the Freedom of Information Advisory Board shall designate
one of its members to be the Chairperson.
§ 6-129. Appointment; terms of office.
Within 30 days after the adoption of this article, the Mayor shall appoint the
initial three members of the Freedom of Information Advisory Board for the
following terms: one shall serve for a period of three years from the date
of appointment; one shall serve for a period of two years from the date of
appointment of the person first appointed to serve a three-year term; and
one shall serve from the date of appointment for a period of one year from
the date of appointment of the person first appointed to serve a three-year
term. Successor members of the Freedom of Information Advisory Board
shall be appointed for three-year terms commencing of the day after the
date on which the term of their predecessor expires.
§ 6-130. Vacancies.
Any vacancies on the Freedom of Information Advisory Board by reason
other than the expiration of the term of office shall be filled by appointment
by the Mayor for the remainder of the term within 30 days after such
vacancy occurs. Any vacancy on the Freedom of Information Advisory Board
shall not impair the right of the remaining members to exercise all the
powers of the Board.
§ 6-131. Duties.
29.Editor's Note: See Title 1, Ch. 14 of the Connecticut General Statutes, § 1-200 et seq.
§ 6-125 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-131
1:95
A. The Board, or a member thereof, shall act as liaison to the State Freedom
of Information Commission for educational purposes, and the members
of such Board shall keep current of the requirements of the State
Freedom of Information Act, as interpreted by the State Freedom of
Information Commission and courts, and any other laws, rulings and
materials related to such Act.
B. The Freedom of Information Advisory Board shall have the following
duties:
(1) To provide information and education to municipal officials and
employees, and all other persons seeking information or education,
concerning the State Freedom of Information Act, its interpretation
by the State Freedom of Information Commission and courts, and
any other laws, rulings and materials related to such Act;
(2) To facilitate the dissemination to municipal officials and employees,
and all other persons, of any materials provided to such Board by the
State Freedom of Information Commission;
(3) To make recommendations to municipal officials concerning the
application and implementation of the State Freedom of Information
Act;
(4) To provide interested persons with information concerning the filing
of complaints with the State Freedom of Information Commission;
and
(5) To make recommendations to the State Freedom of Information
Commission concerning proposed changes to state law relating to
freedom of information.
§ 6-132. Facilitation of disputes.
In addition, the Freedom of Information Advisory Board may attempt to
facilitate the resolution of freedom of information disputes with agencies
but shall not impede in any way a person's right to a speedy appeal to the
State Freedom of Information Commission or a speedy determination of
such appeal by such Commission.
§ 6-131 MERIDEN CODE § 6-132
1:96
ARTICLE XXIX
Advisory Board on Aging
[Added 5-1-2006]
§ 6-133. Board created.
There is hereby created pursuant to § C7-2 of the Meriden City Charter the
Advisory Board on Aging.
§ 6-134. Membership; terms of office. [Amended 8-7-2006]
The Board shall consist of no fewer than nine members and no more than 15
members. All members shall be resident electors and shall be appointed in
accordance with § C3-3J of the Meriden City Charter, and may be removed
by the City Council, for a term of two years, except that of the first members
appointed, four shall be appointed for a term of one year and five shall be
appointed for a term of two years. Board members shall have an interest
in the issues that affect Meriden's aging population. A member appointed
to the Board to replace a member whose term has not expired shall be
appointed for the unexpired term only. The Healthy Meriden 2010 Elderly
Task Force, or the Elderly Task Force's successor, shall appoint a nonvoting
liaison to the Board.
§ 6-135. Election of officers.
At its first meeting, and annually thereafter at its April meeting, the Board
shall elect from its members a Chairman, Vice Chairman and Secretary.
§ 6-136. Meetings.
The Board shall meet as often as it deems necessary, but no less than every
three months.
§ 6-137. Powers and duties.
The Advisory Board on Aging will advise and assist the Mayor and the City
Council in the identification of issues that affect Meriden's aging population.
The Board shall have such other powers and duties as may be assigned to it
by the Mayor and/or the City Council.
§ 6-138. Quorum; voting; rules of procedure.
Except as otherwise provided specifically by statute, Charter or other
legislation, a majority of the membership of the Board must be present to
constitute a quorum, and a majority of those present and voting is required
for action. The Board may establish such other rules of procedure as it
deems necessary, provided that no such rule shall conflict with any other
legislation.30
30.Editor's Note: Former Art. XXX, relating to the Advisory Conservation Committee, added
4-4-1988 and amended 8-15-1988, was repealed 6-3-1996.
§ 6-133 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-138
1:97
Chapter 13
CLAIMS PROCEDURE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 3.
Funds — See Ch. 25.
Property acquisition and disposal — See Ch.
41.
Taxation — See Ch. 187.
§ 13-1. Approval of claims prior to submission to Council;
exceptions. [Amended 9-15-1980]
Every claim, demand, bill, charge and account against the City shall first
be presented to the committee of the Council to which such claim, demand,
bill, charge or account is chargeable and, after having been approved in
writing by a majority of such committee, shall be delivered by it to the City
Manager on the Thursday before the first Monday of the month; provided,
however, that such procedure shall not apply to the following:
A. Such claims, demands and charges as properly belong to the
departments managed and controlled by particular City boards.
B. Special appropriations made by the Council.
C. Claims for injuries and damages referred to and reported upon by the
Committee of Claims.
D. Interest upon bonded or temporary loans.
§ 13-2. Submission to Council. [Amended 9-15-1980]
The City Manager shall examine all bills presented to him and, after
approving them, shall make a report and submit such bills so approved
and such report to the appropriate committee of the Council on the Friday
before the first Monday of the month.
§ 13-3. Report by committee; approval by Council. [Amended
9-15-1980]
Except as provided in § 13-1, the appropriate committee of the Council shall
report to the Council on the first Monday of each month all bills presented
to it for its approval, together with the action taken by it thereon, and such
other facts with reference to such bills as it shall deem important. The Town
and City Clerk shall return all bills approved for payment by the Council to
the City Manager.
§ 13-4. Special claims. [Amended 9-15-1980]
If the Council orders the payments of any claim or demand reported upon
by its committees, or makes an appropriation for a special purpose without
a report thereof from a committee, the City Manager shall at once make
return thereof to the appropriate committee and shall also make return of
§ 6-138 MERIDEN CODE § 13-4
1:98
all orders drawn by him on the Treasurer in favor of the appropriate person.
The appropriate committee shall keep a separate and correct account of all
such special items and shall include them in its annual report to the Council.
§ 13-5. Procedure for drawing orders. [Amended 9-15-1980]
The City Manager shall draw his order for any bill payable by the City on
the Treasurer in such manner as to show from what appropriation or fund
such order is payable.
§ 13-6. Order required prior to payment by Treasurer. [Amended
9-15-1980]
No money, except for the payment of bonds and notes payable at banks or
interest upon the City's indebtedness, shall be paid by the Treasurer unless
he first receives therefor an order from the Finance Director which has been
prepared as provided in this chapter.
§ 13-7. Expenses not chargeable to City. [Amended 9-15-1980]
When any City officer or other person duly authorized by the City performs
any work or furnishes any materials the expense or cost of which is
chargeable to a person other than the City, such officer or authorized person
shall render a written account thereof to the Finance Director who shall
report the same to the Council for its action and shall, unless otherwise
ordered by the Council, charge the same on the City's books to the person
properly chargeable.
§ 13-8. Payment of funds to Treasurer.
Every person receiving money for the City from any source shall pay the
same over to the Treasurer on or before the first Monday of the month
following its receipt and shall file with the Treasurer at the same time a
written statement showing the source from which such money was derived.
§ 13-9. Monthly report by Treasurer. [Amended 9-15-1980]
The Treasurer shall, on or before the 10th day of each month, report in
writing to the City Manager all moneys paid to him during the previous
month, stating in detail by whom paid and from what source derived.
§ 13-10. Taxes to be charged to Tax Collector. [Amended 9-15-1980]
Whenever a warrant for the collection of any tax is delivered to the Tax
Collector, the City Manager shall charge to the Collector the amount of
such tax and shall charge him from month to month with the legal additions
thereto and with all charges and expenses for liens whenever the same shall
be placed upon any property on account of such tax and shall credit him
with all payments made to the Treasurer on account of such tax and all
authorized abatements thereof.
§ 13-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-11
1:99
§ 13-11. Procedure for making charges.
Whenever a warrant for the collection of an assessment of benefits is
delivered to the Tax Collector or any bill for work done or materials
furnished by the City is placed in his hands for collection, the amount
thereof shall be charged to such officer as taxes are charged, and also
the interest thereon as it falls due and the charges for liens whenever the
same shall be filed in connection with such assessments or bills, and the
Collector shall likewise be credited with all payments made to the Treasurer
on account of such assessments and bills and with any abatements thereof.
§ 13-12. Accounts to be kept by Tax Collector.
The Tax Collector shall keep books in which a separate account of each
tax and assessment delivered to him for collection shall be entered. Such
accounts shall show the date and amount of all collections thereon and from
whom collected, the date and amount of all payments made to the Treasurer
and the additions to taxes or assessments and interest thereon collected.
Such books shall be balanced each month, and each monthly balance shall
show the amount of such tax or assessment remaining uncollected at the
time of such balance. The Collector shall also, when any tax or assessment
is paid to him, immediately enter upon his rate book or list of assessments
against the name of the person whose tax or assessment is so paid the
date and amount of such payment in such manner as to show any discount
allowed or addition or interest paid thereon.
Chapter 19
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Department of Finance — See Ch. 3, Art. VII
and Charter, Ch. VIII.
Funds — See Ch. 25.
Property acquisition and disposal — See Ch.
41.
Taxation — See Ch. 187.
§ 13-11 MERIDEN CODE § 13-12
1:100
ARTICLE I
Enterprise Zones
[Adopted 6-1-1987]
§ 19-1. Fixed assessment.
A. All real property in the enterprise zone which was improved during the
period when such area is designated as an enterprise zone shall have its
real estate assessments fixed. Such fixed assessment shall be for a period
of seven years from the time of such improvements and shall defer any
increase in assessment attributable to such improvements according to the
following schedule:
Year Percentage of Increase Deferred
First 100%
Second 100%
Third 50%
Fourth 40%
Fifth 30%
Sixth 20%
Seventh 10%
B. Any fixed assessment on any residential property shall cease if:
(1) For any residential rental property, any dwelling unit in such property is
rented to any person whose income exceeds 200% of the median family
income of the municipality; or
(2) For any condominium conversion declared after the designation of the
enterprise zone, any unit is sold to any person whose income exceeds
200% of the median family income of the municipality.
§ 19-2. Revaluation of property.
In the event of a general revaluation by any such municipality in the year
in which such improvement is completed, resulting in any increase in the
assessment on such property, only that portion of the increase resulting
from such improvement shall be deferred. In the event of a general
revaluation in any year after the year in which such improvement is
completed, such deferred assessment shall be increased or decreased in
proportion to the increase or decrease in the total assessment on such
property as a result of such revaluation.
§ 19-3. Manufacturing facilities.
No improvement of any real property which qualifies as a manufacturing
facility under § 32-9p(d) of the Connecticut General Statutes shall be
eligible for any fixed assessment pursuant to this article.
§ 19-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-4
1:101
§ 19-4. Deferral of assessment increases. [Added 9-19-1988;
amended 3-6-1989]
Residential and commercial property in the enterprise zone which is either
newly constructed or rehabilitated subsequent to April 16, 1987, shall
be eligible for deferral of assessment increases resulting from such
construction or rehabilitation for a seven-year period in accordance with
the schedule contained in § 19-1A of this article. In order to qualify for
assessment deferral under this section a project consisting of real property
improvements, rehabilitation or new construction must be undertaken
pursuant to a building permit issued for the project. Furthermore, in order
to qualify for property tax deferral under this article, the property owner
must file an application for enterprise zone tax deferral on forms available
from the City's Enterprise Zone Coordinator, Tax Assessor or the Building
Department. This application must be filed no later than the Grand List date
for which deferral is requested, except for tax deferral applications for the
October 1, 1987, and October 1, 1988, Grand Lists which have until January
31, 1989, to file.
§ 19-5. Personal property tax deferral for certain commercial
businesses. [Added 9-19-1988]
A. Commercial businesses which occupy space which has been improved,
rehabilitated or newly constructed and which have applied for a property
tax deferral under § 19-1A of this article are eligible to apply for a threeyear
personal property tax deferral for personal property new to the
Grand List of the City of Meriden according to the following schedule:
(1) First year: 100%.
(2) Second year: 100%.
(3) Third year: 50%.
B. Commercial businesses that are leasing improved, rehabilitated or newly
constructed space in a building which has applied for a seven-year
property tax deferral under § 19-1A of this article must have a three-year
lease to occupy said space to qualify for the three-year personal property
tax deferral.
§ 19-4 MERIDEN CODE § 19-5
1:102
Chapter 21
ETHICS, CODE OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 3. Board of Ethics — See Ch. 6, Art. I.
§ 21-1. Purpose.
The proper operation of democratic government requires that public
officials and employees be independent and impartial, that public office
not be used for personal gain, and that the public have confidence in
the integrity of its government. In recognition of these goals, a Code of
Ethics for all City officials and employees is hereby adopted. The purpose of
this code is to establish guidelines for ethical standards of conduct for all
such officials and employees by setting forth those acts or actions that are
incompatible with the best interests of the City and by directing disclosure
of private financial or other interests by such officials and employees in
matters affecting the City.
§ 21-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOARD OF ETHICS — The Board of Ethics established in § 21-3.
BUSINESS — Any entity through which business for profit or not for profit
is conducted, including a corporation, partnership, proprietorship, firm,
enterprise, franchise, association, limited liability company, trust
organization, or sole proprietorship or self-employed individual.
BUSINESS WITH WHICH HE IS ASSOCIATED — A business of which a
person or a member of his immediate family is a director, officer, partner,
owner, employee, compensated agent, or holder of stock which constitutes
5% or more of the total outstanding stock of any class.
CHARTER — The Charter of the City of Meriden.
CITY — The City of Meriden and any special district contained therein.
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION — Information, whether transmitted orally
or in writing, which is obtained by reason of the public position or office
held and is of such nature that it is not, at the time of transmission, a matter
of public record or public knowledge.
FINANCIAL INTEREST — Any interest with a monetary value of $1,000 or
more or which generates a financial gain or loss of $1,000 or more in a
calendar year.
§ 19-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 21-2
1:103
GIFT — Anything of value, including entertainment, food, beverage, travel
and lodging, given or paid to a public official or public employee without
consideration of equal or greater value therefor. A gift does not include:
IMMEDIATE FAMILY — An individual's spouse, fiancé or fiancée; the
parent, brother or sister of such individual or spouse; and the child of such
individual or the spouse of such child.
INDIVIDUAL — A natural person.
OFFICIAL RESPONSIBILITY — The direct administrative or operating
authority, whether intermediate or final and whether exercisable personally
or through subordinates, to approve, disapprove, or otherwise direct
government action.
PERSON — An individual, sole proprietorship, trust, corporation, union,
association, firm, partnership, committee, club or other organization or
group of persons.
A political contribution otherwise reported as required by law or a
donation or payment as described in Subdivision (9) or (11) of
Subsection (b) of § 9-601a of the Connecticut General Statutes, as
amended.
A.
A gift received from an individual's spouse, fiancé or fiancée; the
parent, brother or sister of such spouse or such individual; or the child
of such individual or the spouse of such child.
B.
An honorary degree bestowed upon a public official or public employee
by a public or private university or college or a certificate, plaque or
other ceremonial award costing less than $100.
C.
A rebate or discount on the price of anything of value made in the
ordinary course of business without regard to the recipient's status.
D.
Printed or recorded informational material germane to governmental
action or functions, or items of nominal value not to exceed $25,
containing or displaying promotional material, received in the course of
an individual's official duties, or a meal provided at an event and/or the
registration or entrance fee to attend such an event, in which the public
employee or public official participates in his official capacity.
E.
Gifts in-kind of nominal value not to exceed $100 tendered on giftgiving
occasions generally recognized by the public, including
Christmas, Hanukkah, birthdays, the birth or adoption of a child,
weddings, confirmations or bar/bat mitzvahs, provided that the total
value of such gifts in any calendar year does not exceed $200 per donor.
F.
Items of nominal value, provided in social occasions, not to exceed $25
per occasion, or a meal provided in the home by an individual who
resides in Meriden.
G.
§ 21-2 MERIDEN CODE § 21-2
1:104
PERSONAL INTEREST — An interest in any action taken by the City in
which an individual will derive a nonfinancial benefit or detriment as the
result of the expenditure of municipal funds.
PROBABLE CAUSE — Such facts as would reasonably persuade a
reasonable person to believe that the respondent has violated this code.
PUBLIC EMPLOYEE — A person employed, whether part time or full time,
by the City.
PUBLIC OFFICIAL — An elected or appointed official, whether paid or
unpaid or full or part time, of the City.
§ 21-3. Board of Ethics.31
A. There shall be a Board of Ethics as provided in § C7-8 of the Charter and
Chapter 6, Article I of this Code.
B. Although any member or employee of the Board shall have an
unrestricted right to vote, make political contributions, and attend fundraising
or other political events, no member shall publicly support any
candidate for municipal office. Publicly supporting a candidate includes,
but is not limited to, giving a speech at a political event or formally
endorsing a candidate. Limited volunteer activity as a campaign worker
shall not constitute a violation of this section. This provision shall not
apply to a member of the City Council appointed to the Board. A violation
of this subsection shall be a violation of this code.
C. The Board shall elect a Chairperson who shall preside at meetings of
the Board and a Vice Chairperson to preside in the absence of the
Chairperson. Three members shall constitute a quorum. A majority vote
of the members of the Board present and voting shall be required for
action of the Board, except as hereafter set forth. The Chairperson or
any three members may call a meeting.
§ 21-4. Records and reports; advisory opinions; regulations; staff.
A. The Board shall:
(1) Compile and maintain a record of all reports, advisory opinions,
statements, and memoranda filed by and with the Board.
(2) Issue advisory opinions with regard to the requirements of this
code upon the request of any person subject to this code. Advisory
opinions rendered by the Board, until amended or revoked, shall be
binding on the Board and shall be deemed to be final decisions of the
Board. Any advisory opinion concerning the person who requested
the opinion and who acted in reliance thereon, in good faith, shall
be an absolute defense to a claimed violation of this code concerning
any matter encompassed by such advisory opinion.
(3) Report annually on or before February 1 to the City Council
summarizing the activities of the Board.
31.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 21-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 21-4
1:105
B. The Board may adopt, after a public hearing, rules and regulations not
inconsistent with this code for the administration and implementation of
this code.
C. The Board may employ necessary staff or outside counsel within
available appropriations.
§ 21-5. Complaints. [Amended 7-20-1998]
A. Complaints may be filed by any five or more electors, by the City
Manager or City Attorney, by the Mayor, and by any member of the City
Council. Complaints may also be initiated by the Board. Complaints shall
be filed with the City Clerk, who shall immediately seal said complaint
and cause it to be delivered to the Chairman of the Board.
B. Procedure.
(1) Complaints shall be filed on a form prescribed by the Board and
signed under penalty of false statement. The Board shall investigate
any alleged violation of this code.
(2) Not later than 10 days after the receipt or issuance of such
complaint, the Board shall provide notice of such receipt or issuance
and a copy of the complaint by registered or certified mail to any
respondent against whom such complaint is filed and shall provide
notice of the receipt of such complaint to the complainant.
(3) The Board shall review any complaint to determine whether or not
the allegations contained therein, if proven, would constitute a
violation of any provision of this code and whether or not there is
probable cause to believe that there has been a violation of this code.
If the Board determines that the complaint does not allege sufficient
acts to constitute a violation, or that there is not probable cause to
believe a violation of this code has occurred, the Board shall dismiss
the complaint and duly notify the complainant and respondent by
registered or certified mail.
(4) If the Board determines that the complaint alleges sufficient acts to
constitute a violation and that there is probable cause to believe that
there has been a violation of this code, then within 30 days after
so determining the Board shall fix a date for the commencement of
the hearing on the allegation contained therein. The hearing date
regarding any complaint shall be not more than 60 days after the
filing of the complaint or said complaint shall be deemed dismissed.
All hearings shall be concluded within 120 days of such hearing date.
C. In the conduct of its investigation and hearing of an alleged violation of
this code, the Board, to the extent permitted by law, shall have the power
to hold hearings, administer oaths, examine witnesses, receive oral and
documentary evidence, subpoena witnesses, and require the production
for examination by the Board of any books and papers which the Board
deems relevant in any matter under investigation or in question. In
the exercise of such powers, the Board may use the services of the
Department of Law, which shall provide the same upon the Board's
request. The respondent shall have the right to appear and to be
represented by legal counsel and to examine and cross-examine
witnesses.
§ 21-4 MERIDEN CODE § 21-5
1:106
D. The Board shall make no determination of probable cause that there
is a violation of any provision of this code, nor any finding that there
is a violation, except upon the concurring vote of at least four of its
members. No person shall be held to have violated this code except upon
clear and convincing proof.
E. Any hearing conducted by the Board shall be governed by the rules of
evidence standard in administrative hearings.
F. No complaint may be made under this code except within five years next
after the violation alleged in the complaint has been committed.
G. No person shall take or threaten to take official action against an
individual in retaliation for such individual's disclosure of information
to the Board under the provisions of this code. The provisions of this
subsection shall apply in addition to the provisions of § 31-51m of the
Connecticut General Statutes, as amended. A violation of this subsection
shall be a violation of this code.
§ 21-6. Preliminary investigation.
A. The Board may conduct a preliminary investigation to determine
whether the filing of a complaint on its own initiative is warranted.
This preliminary investigation shall be confidential. Any allegations and
any information supplied to or received from the Board shall not be
disclosed during the investigation to any third party by a complainant,
respondent, witness, designated party, the Board, or any staff employed
by or assigned to the Board.
B. Unless the Board upon investigation and review determines that there
is probable cause to believe that there has been a violation of this
code, a complaint alleging a violation and all proceedings prior to such
determination shall be confidential except upon the written request of
the respondent.
C. If the Board makes a finding of no probable cause, the complaint and
the record of its investigation shall remain confidential, except upon
the request of the respondent. No complainant, respondent, witness,
designated party, or Board staff member shall disclose to any third party
any information learned from the investigation, including knowledge
of the existence of a complaint, which the disclosing party would not
otherwise have known. A violation of this subsection shall be deemed a
violation of this code.
D. The Board shall make public a finding of probable cause not later than
five business days after the termination of the hearing. At such time, the
entire record of the investigation shall become public. The Board shall
inform the complainant and the respondent of its finding and provide
them a summary of its reasons for making such a finding by registered
or certified mail not later than three business days after termination of
the hearing.
E. Any respondent aggrieved by a decision of the Board regarding a finding
of a violation may, within 30 days, take an appeal to the Superior
Court for the Judicial District of New Haven or any court of competent
jurisdiction.
§ 21-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 21-6
1:107
F. Nothing herein shall prohibit the Board of Ethics from reporting the
possible commission of a crime to the appropriate prosecutorial
authority.
§ 21-7. Penalties for offenses.
A. Violation of any provision of this code shall constitute grounds for and
may be punished by:
(1) Public censure and reprimand;
(2) In the case of a public employee, a recommendation to the
appropriate authority for such personnel action as appears
appropriate;
(3) A civil penalty of not more than $100 per violation; or
(4) Restitution of any pecuniary benefits received because of the
violation committed.
B. Any contract, transaction or official act or action which was entered into
or taken in violation of this code shall be voidable by resolution of the
City Council.
§ 21-8. Conflicts of interest.
A. No public employee or public official shall engage in or participate
in any business or transaction, including outside employment, or have
an interest, direct or indirect, which is incompatible with the proper
discharge of his official duties or responsibilities or which would tend
to impair his independent judgment or action in the performance of his
official responsibilities, as hereinafter defined in this section.
B. Gifts.
(1) No public employee or public official shall solicit or accept any gift
from any person who to his knowledge is interested in any pending
matter within such individual's official responsibility.
(2) If a prohibited gift worth more than $100 is offered, it must be
refused and reported to the City Manager, the City Attorney, or
Chairman of the Board of Ethics. An unsolicited gift may be donated
to a charitable organization or retained by the City at the discretion
of the City Manager.
C. Voting and participating in certain matters.
(1) A public employee or public official shall refrain from voting upon or
otherwise participating in any matter if he, a business with which he
is associated, or a member of his immediate family has a financial or
personal interest in the matter.
(2) If such participation is within the scope of the public employee's or
public official's official responsibility, he shall be required to provide
written disclosure, which sets forth in detail the nature and extent
of such interest, to the Board.
(3) Notwithstanding the above, a public employee or public official may
vote or otherwise participate in a matter if it involves a
determination of general policy and any benefit or detriment accrues
to him, a member of his immediate family, or a business with which
he or a member of his immediate family is associated as a member
§ 21-6 MERIDEN CODE § 21-8
1:108
of a profession, occupation or group to no greater extent than to any
other member of such profession, occupation or group.
D. Except for a public official who receives no compensation for his service
to the City other than per diem payments and reimbursement of
expenses, no public employee or public official shall:
(1) Appear on behalf of private interests before any board, agency, or
committee of the City.
(2) Represent private interests against the interest of the City in any
litigation to which the City or any of its insurers or indemnities is a
party.
E. Nothing contained in this code shall prohibit or restrict a public
employee or public official from appearing before any board, agency
or commission of the City on his own behalf, or from being a party in
any action, proceeding or litigation brought by or against the public
employee or public official to which the City is a party, or from appearing
before any board, agency or committee of the City in his official capacity
in any matter in which he does not have a personal interest.
F. No public employee or public official shall disclose confidential
information concerning municipal affairs, nor shall he use such
information for the financial interests of himself or others.
G. No public employee or public official shall request or permit the use
of City-owned vehicles, equipment, facilities, materials or property for
personal convenience or profit, except when such is available to the
public generally or is provided as City policy for the use of such public
employee or public official in the conduct of official business.
H. No public employee or public official, or a business with which he
is associated, or member of his immediate family, shall enter into a
contract with the City unless it is awarded in conformity with the
provisions of § C8-1 of the Charter, as amended.
I. No public employee or public official may use his position or office for
the financial benefit of himself, a business with which he is associated,
or a member of his immediate family.
J. No public employee or public official shall accept a fee or honorarium
for an article, appearance or speech, or for participation at an event, in
his official capacity.
K. No public employee or public official, or member of such individual's
immediate family or business with which he is associated, shall solicit
or accept anything of value, including but not limited to a gift, loan,
political contribution, reward or promise of future employment, based
on any understanding that the vote, official action or judgment of the
public employee or public official would be or had been influenced
thereby.
§ 21-9. Paid contractors.
A. No paid contractor of the City shall represent a private interest in any
action or proceeding against the interest of the City which is in conflict
with the performance of his duties pursuant to his contract.
§ 21-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 21-9
1:109
B. No paid contractor may represent anyone other than the City or himself
concerning any matter in which he participated personally and
substantially as a contractor to the City.
C. No paid contractor shall disclose confidential information learned while
performing his duties for the City nor shall he use such information for
any purpose other than in performing under said contract.
§ 21-10. Former public employees or officials.
A. No former public employee or public official, except a public official
who receives no compensation for his service to the City other than
per diem payments and reimbursement of expenses, shall appear for
compensation before any City board or agency by which he was formerly
employed, or which he provided service to, or was a member of, at any
time within a period of one year after termination of his service with the
City.
B. No former public employee or public official shall represent anyone
other than the City concerning any particular matter in which he
participated personally and substantially while in municipal service.
C. No former public employee or public official shall disclose or use
confidential information acquired in the course of and by reason of his
official duties, for financial gain for himself or others.
D. No former public employee or public official who participated
substantially in the negotiation or award of a municipal contract obliging
the City to pay an amount of $100,000 or more, or who supervised the
negotiation or award of such a contract, shall accept employment with
a party to the contract other than the City for a period of one year after
such contract is signed, except for such contracts as may be awarded to
the lowest bidder in conformity with § C8-1 of the Charter.
§ 21-11. Statement of financial interest; filing requirements.
A. A public official or employee shall disclose any financial or personal
interest which he, or a business with which he is associated, or a
member of his immediate family, has in any matter within the scope
of such official's or employee's duties and official responsibilities as
required by § 21-8C of this code.
B. Such person shall disclose such other information as requested by the
Board which is reasonably likely to lead to the discovery of information
relevant to whether or not a violation of this code has occurred.
§ 21-12. Exceptions.
No public official or employee shall be found to have violated any provision
of this code by reason of:
A. Voluntary, uncompensated service to, membership in or affiliation with a
social, fraternal, charitable, service, religious, philanthropic, cultural or
similar nonprofit institution or organization.
B. A commercially reasonable loan made in the ordinary course of business
by an institution or organization authorized by law to engage in the
making of such loans.
§ 21-9 MERIDEN CODE § 21-12
1:110
C. One or more contractual relationships with any specific entity totaling
less than $1,000 within a one-year period.
§ 21-13. Legal representation in Board proceedings.
A. The Department of Law shall provide representation to the Board upon
request and shall not represent any public official or employee in Board
proceedings.
B. Any public officer or employee who is the respondent in any complaint
filed with the Board and who wishes to be represented by an attorney
with regard to said complaint and to have the City pay the fees of such
attorney shall submit the proposed scope of work and hourly or other fee
agreement of such attorney to the City Attorney, who shall approve or
disapprove the same within seven days.
C. Provided that the City Attorney shall have given prior written approval
to such scope of work and hourly or other fee agreement, the City shall
pay the fees of such attorney with respect to any matter alleged in such
complaint upon which the Board does not find the respondent to have
violated this code.
§ 21-14. Delay in proceedings.
The City Council shall inquire into any failure of the Board of Ethics to
complete any action required of it within the time limits fixed by this code.
The City Council may order said Board to so act or refer the complaint to a
committee of the City Council to act thereon in accordance with this code.
§ 21-15. Distribution of code.
The City Clerk shall cause a copy of this Code of Ethics to be distributed
to every public employee and public official within 60 days after enactment
of this code. Each public employee and public official shall be furnished a
copy before entering upon the duties of his office or employment. A signed
receipt for all copies shall be returned to the City Clerk and retained on file.
The City Clerk shall make additional copies available without charge to any
person engaged in any transaction with the City.
Chapter 23
FINANCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Claims procedure — See Ch. 13.
Economic development — See Ch. 19.
Funds — See Ch. 25.
Pensions — See Ch. 35.
Taxation — See Ch. 187.
§ 21-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 23-1
1:111
§ 23-1. Charge for returned checks.32
When a check presented for payment of taxes, water and sewer use fees,
etc., is returned for insufficient funds, or the account upon which the check
was drawn has been closed, a charge to the maker in the amount of $20
shall be added to such fees.
§ 23-2. Limitation of new bonded indebtedness. [Added 4-4-1994;
amended 6-20-1994; 12-13-2000]
The amount of new bonded indebtedness authorized in each fiscal year,
except for bonded indebtedness incurred to fund school building projects,
expenditures which are mandated or reimbursed by the State of
Connecticut, or bonded indebtedness to be paid from enterprise funds,
shall be limited in amount to no more than 1/2 the amount of such bonded
indebtedness retired in the preceding fiscal year, unless approved by 2/3 of
the entire membership of the City Council.
Chapter 25
FUNDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 3. Finances — See Ch. 23.
STATUTORY REFERENCES
Municipal reserve funds — See C.G.S. § 7-359
et seq.
32.Editor's Note: This section appeared in the 1980 Code as § 1-5.1.
§ 23-1 MERIDEN CODE § 23-2
1:112
ARTICLE I
Capital and Nonrecurring Expenditures Reserve Fund
[Adopted 12-5-1966]
§ 25-1. Purpose.
A. The purpose of this article is to provide for the financing of a longrange
capital improvement program involving future expenditures for
the purchase and construction of parklands and recreational facilities,
the building of schools and community services buildings, the
construction of new roads and the improvement of the existing highway
system, the acquisition and improvement of public water supply
facilities, the construction of a stormwater drainage system, the
construction of a sanitary sewer system, the construction of new
municipal buildings and other and further capital improvements as may
be found necessary or desirable in the future.
B. In addition, it shall be the purpose of this article to provide for the
financing of a capital equipment program involving expenditures for
the purchase of automotive equipment and machinery of every kind
whatsoever to be utilized in the construction, maintenance and repair of
any or all municipal facilities and for the purchase of office equipment
and apparatus of every type and description to be utilized for facilitating
the operations of government in correspondence, communications,
billings, purchasing, recording, duplicating and all other operations
necessary or desirable in carrying out the operations of municipal
government generally.
§ 25-2. Fund created.
Upon the authority of Chapter 108 of the General Statutes of the State
of Connecticut, as amended, there is hereby created a Capital and
Nonrecurring Expenditures Reserve Fund for the purpose of financing
capital improvement programs.
§ 25-3. Use of fund.
Such fund may be used for the financing of all or part of the planning,
construction, reconstruction or acquisition of any specific capital
improvement or the acquisition of any specific item of equipment. No part of
the fund shall be used for ordinary repairs or for maintenance of a recurring
nature.
§ 25-4. Method of making appropriations. [Amended 9-15-1980]
Appropriation of moneys from such fund shall be approved by the City
Council, provided that after necessary recommendation and approval an
appropriation shall be set up, plainly designated for the project or
acquisition for which it had been authorized, and such unexpended
appropriation may be continued until such project or acquisition is
completed. Any unexpended portion of such appropriation remaining after
§ 25-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-4
1:113
such completion shall revert to said Capital and Nonrecurring Expenditures
Reserve Fund.
§ 25-5. Termination of appropriation.
If any appropriation is duly authorized in accordance with the provisions
of the preceding section and through unforeseen circumstances the
completion of the project or acquisition for which such appropriation has
been designated is impossible to attain, upon recommendation of the
budget-making authority and approval by the legislative body, such
appropriation shall terminate and no longer be in effect. Any unexpended
portion of such appropriation remaining after such termination shall revert
to said Capital and Nonrecurring Expenditures Reserve Fund.
§ 25-6. Appropriations made while reserve is insufficient. [Amended
9-15-1980]
If, in the opinion of the City Council, such reserve fund is insufficient to
meet the cost of any capital or nonrecurring expenditure which it deems
immediately necessary, it may authorize that an appropriation be made
therefor, provided that the total of such fund and the sum anticipated from
a tax collected for the purposes of implementing this article in the year
following the date when such authorization is made is estimated by said
City Council to be sufficient to meet such expenditures. Nothing herein
shall prohibit the City from supplementing said reserve fund to meet the
cost of capital or nonrecurring expenditures by issuing bonds or notes in
accordance with the applicable provisions of the statute.
§ 25-7. Source of moneys for fund. [Amended 9-15-1980]
A. Upon the approval of the City Council, there shall be paid into such
reserve fund:
(1) Amounts authorized to be transferred thereto from the general fund
cash surplus available.
(2) Amounts raised by the annual levy of a tax not exceeding two mills
for the benefit of such fund, and for no other purpose, such tax to be
levied and collected in the same manner as the regular annual taxes
of the City.
(3) Surplus cash funds already held in reserve and available for such
capital or nonrecurring expenditures as are contemplated by the
terms of § 25-3 herein.
(4) Surplus cash funds received from the state or federal government as
grants in aid for capital expenditures otherwise funded and available
for such capital or nonrecurring expenditures as are contemplated
by the terms of § 25-3 herein.
(5) Surplus cash funds remaining realized from the issuance of bonds
or notes for the completion of a capital improvement after all
obligations in connection therewith have been discharged.
(6) Surplus cash funds realized from the sale or leasing of capital assets,
including land, buildings, automotive equipment, machinery, fixtures
and apparatus of every kind.
§ 25-4 MERIDEN CODE § 25-7
1:114
B. All moneys so accumulated, together with such funds as may be
accumulated in accordance with the provisions of previous sections,
together with all interest that accrues thereon, shall be deposited in a
separate bank account by the Treasurer, which account shall be titled
"Capital and Nonrecurring Expenditures Reserve Fund of the City of
Meriden."
§ 25-8. Investment of moneys in fund. [Amended 9-15-1980]
The City Council may, from time to time, direct the Treasurer to invest, in
securities which are legal investments for savings banks, such portion of the
fund as in its opinion is advisable, provided that not less than 50% of the
total amount invested shall be invested in the stocks or bonds on interestbearing
notes or obligations of the United States, or those for which the
faith of the United States is pledged to provide for the payment of principal
and interest, including the bonds of the District of Columbia.
§ 25-9. Report of Treasurer. [Amended 9-15-1980]
The Treasurer shall annually submit a complete and detailed report of the
condition of such fund to the City Council. Such report shall be made a part
of the annual report of the City.
§ 25-10. Amount of fund not to exceed current tax levy.
No payment shall be made to the reserve fund as provided for in the
foregoing sections which will cause the amount of such funds to exceed
the current tax levy of the municipality except the addition of interest and
dividends earned by such fund.
§ 25-11. Discontinuance of fund. [Amended 9-15-1980]
The Capital and Nonrecurring Expenditures Reserve Fund may be
discontinued upon approval of the City Council, and said fund shall be
converted into or added to a sinking fund to provide for the retirement
of its nonserial bonded indebtedness. If the municipality has no bonded
indebtedness, such fund shall be transferred to the general fund of the
municipality.
§ 25-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-11
1:115

ARTICLE II
Park and Recreation Capital and Nonrecurring Expense Fund
[Adopted 12-4-1967]
§ 25-12. Establishment and title.
In accordance with the provisions of Public Act No. 438 of the January 1967
session of the General Assembly,33 there is hereby established a special fund
which will be known as the "Park and Recreation Capital and Nonrecurring
Expense Fund."
§ 25-13. Sources of revenue. [Amended 9-15-1980]
There shall be deposited in said fund all moneys received by the City, from
whatever source and by whatever means, as gifts for park or recreation
purposes; all moneys received by the City, from whatever source and by
whatever means, as governmental grants or loans for park or recreational
purposes; all moneys received by the City from the sale or voluntary or
involuntary conveyance of land used for park and recreational purposes;
and all moneys duly appropriated to said fund by the direction of the City
Council.
§ 25-14. Custody of fund; investment; withdrawal.
Said fund shall be in the custody of the Treasurer of the City. All or any
part of the moneys in said fund may, from time to time, be invested in
any securities in which public funds may lawfully be invested. All income
derived from such investments shall be paid into the fund and become a part
thereof. The moneys so invested shall at all times be subject to withdrawal
from such investment for use as provided in this article.
§ 25-15. Annual financial report.
Annually, the Treasurer shall submit to the Director of Parks and Recreation
and to the City Council a complete and detailed report of the condition of
said fund, which report shall be made part of the annual report of the City.
§ 25-16. Authorized uses. [Amended 9-15-1980]
Upon authorization of the City Council, the moneys in said fund may be used
for capital and nonrecurring expenditures incurred in any of the following:
acquisition, development, improvement, maintenance and expansion of
park and recreational lands; acquisition, erection, installation,
maintenance, improvement, repair and replacement of park or recreational
facilities and equipment; development, establishment and improvement of
park or recreation programs; and any other capital or nonrecurring
expenditure incurred for park or recreational purposes.
33.Editor's Note: C.G.S. § 7-129a.
§ 25-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-17
1:117
§ 25-17. Effect on budgets or appropriations.
No budget proposed or approved or appropriation made for park or
recreational purposes shall hereafter be reduced, ratably or otherwise, in
consideration of any moneys in said fund.
§ 25-17 MERIDEN CODE § 25-17
1:118
ARTICLE III
Castle Craig Restoration, Preservation, Improvement and
Maintenance Fund
[Adopted 8-4-1986]
§ 25-18. Establishment and title.
There is hereby established a special fund which shall be known as the
"Castle Craig Restoration, Preservation, Improvement and Maintenance
Fund."
§ 25-19. Sources of revenue.
There shall be deposited in said fund all moneys received by the City,
from whatever source and by whatever means, as gifts for the purpose
of restoring, preserving, improving and/or maintaining Castle Craig; all
moneys received by the City, from whatever source and by whatever means,
as government grants or loans for the purpose of restoring, preserving,
improving and/or maintaining Castle Craig; and all moneys duly
appropriated to said fund by the direction of the City Council.
§ 25-20. Custody of fund; investment.
Said fund shall be in the custody of the Treasurer of the City. All or any
part of the moneys in said fund may, from time to time, be invested in
any securities in which public funds may lawfully be invested. All income
derived from such investments shall be paid into the fund and become a part
thereof. The moneys so invested shall at all times be subject to withdrawal
from such investment for use as provided in this article.
§ 25-21. Annual financial report.
Annually, the Treasurer shall submit to the Director of Parks and Recreation
and to the City Council a complete and detailed report of the condition of
said fund, which report shall be made part of the annual report of the City.
§ 25-22. Authorized uses of moneys.
Upon authorization of the City Council, the money in said fund may be
used for capital and nonrecurring expenses incurred in the restoration,
preservation, improvement and/or maintenance of Castle Craig and its
environs.
§ 25-23. Effect on budgets or appropriations.
No budget proposed or approved or appropriation made for park or
recreational purposes shall hereafter be reduced, ratably or otherwise, in
consideration of any moneys in said fund.
§ 25-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-23
1:119

ARTICLE IV
Tree Replacement and Preservation Fund
[Adopted 1-18-2000]
§ 25-24. Establishment and title.
There is hereby established a special fund which shall be known as the
"Tree Replacement and Preservation Fund."
§ 25-25. Sources of revenue. [Amended 4-16-2018]
There shall be deposited in said fund all moneys received on account of fines
levied by the Tree Warden; all moneys received from whatever source and
by whatever means as gifts for the purpose of planting, replacing, trimming,
removing, nourishing, and maintaining trees and shrubs on property or of
on rights-of-way of the City of Meriden; all moneys received from whatever
source and by whatever means as government grants or loans for the
purpose of planting, replacing, trimming, removing, nourishing, and
maintaining trees and shrubs on property of or on rights-of-way of the City
of Meriden; and all moneys duly appropriated to said fund at the direction
of the City Council.
§ 25-26. Custody and investment of fund.
Said fund shall be in the custody of the Treasurer of the City. All or any
part of the balance of said fund may, from time to time, be invested in any
manner in which public funds may lawfully be invested. All income from
such investments shall be paid into the fund and become a part thereof. The
moneys so invested shall at all times be subject to withdrawal from such
investment for use as provided in this article.
§ 25-27. Annual financial report.
The Treasurer shall submit to the City Council and the Director of Public
Works, Parks and Recreation a complete and detailed report of the condition
of said fund, which report shall be made part of the annual report of the
City.
§ 25-28. Authorized use.
Upon authorization by the City Council, the moneys in said fund may
be expended in expenses incurred for the purpose of planting, replacing,
trimming, removing, nourishing and maintaining trees and shrubs.
§ 25-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-28
1:121

ARTICLE V
Brookside and City Parks Restoration and Improvement Fund
[Adopted 10-4-2010]
§ 25-29. Establishment; title.
There is hereby established a special fund to be known as the "Brookside
and City Parks Restoration and Improvement Fund."
§ 25-30. Sources of revenue.
There shall be deposited into said fund all moneys received by the City,
from whatever source and by whatever means, as gifts or as government
grants for the purpose of restoring, preserving, improving and maintaining
Brookside Park and City Park, and all funds duly appropriated to said fund
by the direction of the City Council.
§ 25-31. Custody of fund; investment.
Said fund shall be in the custody of the Finance Director of the City.
All or any part of the fund may, from time to time, be invested in any
securities in which public funds may be invested. All income derived from
such investments shall be paid into said fund and become a part thereof.
The money so invested shall at all times be subject to withdrawal from such
investment for use as provided in this article.
§ 25-32. Annual financial report.
The Finance Director annually shall submit to the City Council Parks and
Recreation Committee or its successor, and to the Director of Parks,
Recreation and Public Buildings, a complete and detailed report of the
condition of said fund.
§ 25-33. Authorized use of funds.
Upon authorization by the City Council, sums from said fund may be used
for capital and nonrecurring expenses incurred in the restoration,
preservation, improvement or maintenance of Brookside Park and City Park.
§ 25-34. Effect on budget or appropriations.
No budget proposed or approved, or appropriations made, for park or
recreational purposes shall hereafter be reduced, ratably or otherwise, in
consideration of any sums in said fund.
§ 25-35. through § 25-39. (Reserved)
§ 25-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-35
1:123

ARTICLE VI
Falcon Field Improvement and Maintenance Fund
[Adopted 11-13-2014]
§ 25-40. Establishment; title.
There is hereby established a special fund to be known as the "Falcon Field
Improvement and Maintenance Fund."
§ 25-41. Sources of revenue.
There shall be deposited into said fund all moneys received by the Friends
of Falcon Field as facility rental income, gifts or contributions from other
sources and supporters for the purpose of restoring, preserving, improving
and maintaining Falcon Field and all funds duly appropriated to said fund at
the direction of the City Council.
§ 25-42. Custody of fund; investment.
Said fund shall be in the custody of the Treasurer of the City. All or any
part of the moneys in the fund may, from time to time, be invested in
any securities in which public funds may lawfully be invested. All income
derived from such investments shall be paid into the fund and become a part
thereof. The moneys so invested shall, at all times, be subject to withdrawal
from such investment for use as provided in this article.
§ 25-43. Annual financial report.
The Treasurer shall annually submit to the City Council, Director of Parks
and Recreation and the Friends of Falcon Field a complete and detailed
report of the condition of said fund, which report shall be made part of the
annual financial report of the City.
§ 25-44. Authorized uses of funds.
Upon authorization of the City Council, the money in said fund may be used
for the capital and maintenance needs of Falcon Field.
§ 25-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-44
1:125
Chapter 35
PENSIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 3.
Municipal Pension Board — See Ch. 6, Art.
XIII.
Personnel classification and compensation
system — See Ch. 38.
STATUTORY REFERENCES
Establishment of system — See C.G.S. § 7-450
et seq.
Actuarial evaluation — See C.G.S. § 7-450a.
§ 35-1. Definitions.
The following terms as used in this chapter, unless a different meaning is
plainly required by the context, shall have the meanings indicated:
PAY — The salary or wages of an employee for his services with the City,
including all grants and allowances for maintenance at such figures as
may be determined by the Pension Board,34 but regardless of any general
temporary increase or reduction thereof.
PENSION — A payment made to an employee according to the provisions of
this chapter, other than a return of contributions.
PENSION BOARD or THE BOARD — The Board created for the
administration of the retirement system.35
REGULAR INTEREST — Interest at the rate determined from time to time
by the Pension Board.
RETIREMENT FUND — The fund derived from contributions made as
herein provided for the payment of pensions to City employees retired
under this chapter.
RETIREMENT SYSTEM — The plan for retirement of City employees as
established by this chapter.
§ 35-2. Establishment of retirement system; duties of Pension
Board.
A. There shall be a retirement system for the City of Meriden, the
management of which shall be vested in a Pension Board as established
in Chapter 6, Boards, Commissions and Appointed Positions, Article XIII.
34.Editor's Note: Throughout this chapter, references to the "Retirement Board" were
amended to "Pension Board" at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Art. II).
35.Editor's Note: See Ch. 6, Art. XIII, Municipal Pension Board.
§ 25-44 MERIDEN CODE § 35-2
1:126
B. Said Pension Board shall be trustee of the retirement fund and shall
have full control and management of all its securities and assets, with
power to invest and reinvest the same in accordance with the provisions
of the General Statutes governing the investment of trust funds; or
the Pension Board may provide, by trust agency, custodian or other
agreement with a corporate fiduciary or any insurance company, for
the custody, safekeeping, handling, investment and reinvestment of the
fund's assets. The Pension Board shall submit annually, to the City
Council of the City of Meriden, a schedule of estimated appropriations
of money necessary for the administration of this chapter, and it shall
receive, control, manage and expend all of said funds according to
the provisions of this chapter, including any moneys contributed by
employees, with the same powers of investment and reinvestment as
herein provided. Said Pension Board shall determine the eligibility of an
employee and his rights, and the rights of the City under this chapter;
shall make bylaws and regulations not inconsistent with the law for
administration of this chapter; and shall do all things necessary and
proper toward carrying out the purposes for which the retirement
system is created. It shall hire and dismiss any employees of the Pension
Board necessary for the proper administration of this chapter and fix
their compensation and shall engage expert actuarial auditing and
medical service when, in the judgment of the Pension Board, it is
advisable.
§ 35-3. Eligible employees.
The terms of this chapter shall apply to all regular full-time employees,
including elected or appointed officials, of the City of Meriden and all
employees of the school, provided that said terms shall not apply to
members of the State Teachers' Retirement Association nor to teachers who
were at any time eligible for membership therein, nor shall the terms of this
chapter apply to regular firemen or policemen. Regular full-time employees
shall be deemed to be those whose principal employment is by the City of
Meriden and whose employment required continuous service to the City of
Meriden for at least 30 hours per week for at least nine months of a year
or for at least 20 hours per week for 12 months of a year during the City's
usual business hours. Completed months' service shall be considered as
fractional parts of a year.
A. Each eligible employee in the service of the City on July 1, 1972, shall be
required to participate in the retirement system, unless within the three
months next following he shall notify the Pension Board in writing of his
intention not to participate in the system. If such employee gives notice
of his intention not to participate, he shall not thereafter be admitted to
the retirement system unless he makes a new application to participate
within two years after July 1, 1972, and he shall then be admitted only
with the unanimous consent of the Pension Board after having passed a
prescribed physical examination and upon payment of an amount equal
to the contributions he would have been required to make, with regular
interest compounded annually.
§ 35-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 35-3
1:127
B. Each eligible employee not over 55 years of age who shall enter the
service of the City at any time after July 1, 1972, shall, at the beginning
of his employment, be required to participate in the retirement system,
and such participation shall be a condition of his continued employment,
provided that an elected or appointed official shall not be required to
participate in the retirement system if, within three months following
the effective date of his election or appointment, he notifies the Pension
Board in writing of his intention not to participate.
C. Participation in the retirement system shall not be a condition of the
continued employment of an employee over 55 years of age entering the
service of the City at any time after July 1, 1972, but such employee
may elect, upon the beginning of his employment, to participate in
the retirement system, and, failing to elect at that time, he shall not
thereafter be admitted to the retirement system unless he makes a new
application to participate within the two years next following, and then
only with the unanimous consent of the Pension Board after having
passed a prescribed physical examination and upon payment of the
amount he would have been required to contribute to the retirement
system during the interim, with regular interest thereon compounded
annually.
D. All pensions payable to former employees who have been retired shall be
assumed by the retirement system and paid thereafter from its funds.
E. Eligible employees not now participating in the retirement system in
accordance with the aforementioned or previous conditions shall be
given the opportunity as of July 1, 1989, to become members of the plan
and buy back up to 50% of their past service or 10 years, whichever
is greater. The Board shall have the authority to establish a reasonable
period of time during which such buyback payments may be made. It
shall establish a schedule of payments based on the amounts involved
and the pay schedule of the employee, as it may deem appropriate.
§ 35-4. Liability of City.
The City of Meriden shall be liable to the Pension Board for such an amount
on account of future pensions representing service of employees covered
by this chapter rendered prior to the inception of the retirement system
as shall be determined by the Board on sound actuarial principles. In lieu
of full payment initially of such an amount, the City shall pay periodically
such amounts as the Pension Board determines are necessary to discharge
such liability over a definite period not exceeding 40 years. The City shall
also pay annually to the Pension Board such amounts as are determined by
the Pension Board on sound actuarial principles to be necessary, in addition
to contributions of the employees, to provide future pensions on account
of service rendered by employees subsequent to the date upon which each
shall begin participation in the retirement system.
§ 35-5. Employee contributions. [Amended 3-4-2002]
A. Contributions to be made by all employees participating in the
retirement system shall be at the uniform rate of 6%. Two percent of
each employee contribution shall be contributed to the Retiree Health
§ 35-3 MERIDEN CODE § 35-5
1:128
Insurance Fund administered by the City. Such contributions shall be
collectible from employees as deductions from pay and transmitted
immediately to the Pension Board and the Retiree Health Insurance
Fund. In the event of the discontinuance of a member's employment by
the City or in the event of his death prior to the date of his eligibility
for retirement, the Pension Board shall pay to him or to his legal
representatives or to a beneficiary to be named by him or to his legal
representatives or to a beneficiary to be named by him an amount equal
to his contributions under this section, plus regular interest thereon
compounded annually. In the event of the death of any employee after
retirement, the payment shall be the amount of any excess of his
accumulated contributions at his date of retirement over pension
benefits made to him.
B. Where an employee is eligible for normal or early retirement benefit but
has chosen to remain in active employment and dies during this period,
his spouse may elect either to receive an amount equal to the employee's
contributions under this section, plus regular interest thereon
compounded annually, in a lump sum, or a benefit equal to 50% of the
benefit the employee would have received had he retired the day before
his death and elected the fifty-five-percent optional form of payment
under § 35-7A(5)(b).
§ 35-6. Qualifications for eligibility.
Any member of the retirement system who has completed 10 years of
service as an employee of the City of Meriden and who has attained the
age of 65 years or who has any combination of years of service and age
equaling 80 (Rule of 80) with a minimum of 10 years of service shall be
eligible for normal retirement under the provisions of this chapter. Any
such member may retire from service by filing with the Pension Board a
written statement, duly attested, setting forth at what time subsequent to
the date of filing thereof, but not less than 60 days subsequent to such
date, he desires to be retired, or the Pension Board may, at its option,
upon a showing of just cause, retire any such eligible member, other than
an elected official or employee in the employ of the City of Meriden on
September 1, 1957, by furnishing him written notice thereof at least 60 days
in advance of the specified date of retirement. Any member not retiring
when he is first eligible shall continue to be a participant, shall continue
to make contributions and shall accrue additional benefits subject to the
maximum pension determined in accordance with § 35-7 hereof.
A. Any member of the retirement system who, after 10 years of continuous
service as an employee of the City of Meriden, shall be totally and
permanently disabled, except as a result of his own willful misconduct,
from earning compensation at any substantially gainful employment, as
such employment shall be determined by the Board in its discretion,
may be retired for disability in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter, whether or not such disability resulted from injuries arising out
of and in the course of his employment with said City, provided that proof
of total disability is submitted to the Pension Board, which shall cause
examinations to be made by at least two impartial medical examiners,
§ 35-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 35-6
1:129
and provided that such total disability, if shown to the satisfaction of
the Pension Board to have been sustained during the performance of
essential duties pertaining to his employment by the City of Meriden,
shall entitle such member to retirement for disability irrespective of the
duration of his employment, and, in computing his pension, credit for 10
years' service shall be used if employed less than that number of years.
B. "Continuous service," for the purpose of this section, shall mean
uninterrupted employment, but absence from employment for any
reason followed by reinstatement within one year thereafter shall not
be considered as breaking the continuity of the employee's service.
In the case of absence from employment for more than one year, the
Pension Board shall determine the period within which the employee
may return without breaking the continuity of his service. Reinstatement
of an employee in the retirement system shall be conditioned upon
such medical examination as the Pension Board may prescribe and upon
payment to the retirement fund of contributions previously withdrawn,
together with such an amount as will establish the proper actuarial
reserve for that portion of the annuity reinstated which was represented
by the contributions previously withdrawn.
C. In computing years of service to determine eligibility for retirement, no
year shall be included in which the employee has not been in actual
service. Time spent as a member of any of the various boards or in
any capacity rendering incidental service to the City of Meriden shall
not be included. Time spent under leave of absence in the military or
naval forces of the United States in time of war or for compulsory
service in the military or naval forces of the United States in time of
peace shall be included, provided that the employee has received an
honorable discharge or certificate of satisfactory completion of service
and has been reemployed by the City of Meriden within 90 days after
such discharge or completion of service.
D. No employee who has been eligible for benefits under, but has made
no contributions to, any other retirement system of the City of Meriden
shall receive credit hereunder for the period of service represented by
employment during the time such other system was in effect, unless he
pays to the Pension Board an amount equal to the contributions required
by such other retirement system, subject to such rules and regulations
as the Board shall prescribe.
§ 35-7. Benefits and method of payment.
A. The Pension Board shall pay, on a monthly basis, to each member who
has been retired under this chapter, a pension for life according to the
following schedule:
(1) Effective January 1, 1984, and only for those employees retiring after
January 1, 1984, the annual amount of the normal-age retirement
benefit shall equal 1 1/2% of the average annual pay of the highest
three consecutive years in the last 10 years prior to retirement
multiplied by years of continuous service in the plan. This rate of
1 1/2% shall be effective until January 1, 1985, at which time it
shall increase to 1.60% of said computation. This rate of 1.60%
§ 35-6 MERIDEN CODE § 35-7
1:130
shall be effective until July 1, 1986, at which time it shall increase
and shall thereafter remain at 1.75% of said computation. All those
employees retiring after January 1, 1984, but before July 1, 1989,
shall be entitled to each of the above rate percentage increases as
they become effective. Effective July 1, 1991, and only for those
employees retiring after July 1, 1989, the annual amount of the
normal-age retirement benefit shall be equal to 2% of the average
annual pay of the highest three consecutive years in the last 10 years
prior to retirement multiplied by years of continuous service in the
plan.
(2) Early retirement. Employees may retire when they have attained age
55 with a minimum of 10 years of service and receive a retirement
benefit as determined in Subsection A(1) above based on their
continuous service to date of retirement, actuarially reduced to
reflect such earlier retirement.
(3) At termination of employment before the completion of 10 years
of service, an employee shall receive a refund of his/her own
contributions plus regular interest.
(4) At termination of employment after the completion of 10 years of
service, if an employee does not withdraw his/her own contributions
plus regular interest, he/she shall be entitled to a retirement benefit
as determined in Subsection A(1) and (2) above commencing at
normal retirement date based on his/her continuous service.
(5) Form of retirement benefit. Normal form is a life benefit payable for
the lifetime of the participant only. (See § 35-5 for death benefit, if
any.) Optional forms can be elected by the participant in lieu of the
normal form:
(a) Ten years certain and continuous option provides a member with
an actuarially reduced pension during his lifetime dependent
upon his age; but upon his death, provided that it occurs before
the expiration of the period certain, the same payment shall be
made for the remainder of the selected period to a recognized
beneficiary.
(b) One hundred percent joint and survivor option provides a
member with an actuarially reduced pension during his lifetime
dependent upon his age and the age of his designated joint and
survivor; but upon his death, provided that it occurs before his
designated joint and survivor, the same payment shall be made to
the designated joint and survivor for such survivor's remaining
lifetime. The member may name as his designated joint and
survivor his spouse, dependent parent, brother, sister or friend.
(6) Cost of living adjustment (COLA). Effective July 1, 1993, and only for
those employees retiring after July 1, 1989, such retiring members
shall receive a cost of living adjustment (COLA) at retirement. The
cost of living adjustment (COLA) shall be equal to 2% compounded
every year beginning the later of age 62 or two years from the date
of retirement with a lifetime cap. In no event shall a COLA over a
lifetime amount to more than 50% of the original pension amount.
[Amended 3-4-2002]
§ 35-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 35-7
1:131
B. Notwithstanding any provision of this plan to the contrary, any option
will not be effective unless the beneficiary or joint annuitant is the
spouse of the participant or unless the actuarial value of the income
expected to be paid to the participant during his lifetime is at least 50%
of the full value of the benefits.
C. The Pension Board shall pay to each member who has been retired for
disability according to the provisions of this chapter a pension during
the continuance of such disability as follows: prior to the completion
of 10 years of service, for a disability arising out of and in the course
of his employment, an amount determined in the same manner as for
a member completing 10 or more years of service, provided that no
pension payable to an employee on account of total and permanent
disability sustained during the performance of essential duties
pertaining to employment by the City of Meriden, as provided herein,
shall be less than 1/2 (50%) the annual rate of regular pay received
by the employee at the time of disability. After 10 years of service, for
a disability arising from whatever cause, a monthly amount shall be
determined at 1 1/2% of the average annual pay of the highest three
consecutive years in the last 10 years prior to retirement multiplied by
years of continuous service in the plan.
(1) The above rate established for disability pension for injuries incurred
after 10 years of service shall be effective until January 1, 1985, at
which time it shall increase to 1.60% of said computation. This rate
of 1.60% shall be effective until January 1, 1986, at which time it
shall increase to and thereafter remain at 1.75% of said computation.
All those employees retired for disability after January 1, 1984,
shall be entitled to each of the above rate percentage increases,
as they become effective. Effective July 1, 1991, and only for those
employees retiring after July 1, 1989, the annual amount of the
disability pension shall be equal to 2% of the average annual pay
of the highest three consecutive years in the last 10 years prior to
retirement multiplied by years of continuous service in the plan.
(2) The Pension Board may, from time to time, call for medical evidence
that the employee continues to be totally disabled. If the Pension
Board, upon medical evidence, concludes that the disability for
which the employee is receiving a pension no longer exists or if the
Board, in its discretion, determines that such employee is engaged
in gainful employment, the Pension Board shall thereupon order a
discontinuance of the pension payable to such employee.
D. All pension payments shall represent completed months of retirement
and shall become due and payable to the persons entitled thereto on
the last day of each calendar month, provided that the initial pension
payment to a retired member shall be computed as the pro rata amount
of his regular monthly pension corresponding to the fraction of the
month elapsed since the effective date of his retirement.
E. No pension payable under this section shall exceed 60% of the average
annual pay of the highest three consecutive years in the last 10 years
prior to retirement.
§ 35-7 MERIDEN CODE § 35-8
1:132
§ 35-8. Effect of payments under Workers' Compensation Act.
All moneys received by any member as an award under the Workers'
Compensation Act, except as provided in Section 8 of Number 532 of the
Special Acts of 1957, as amended in § 35-3, shall be deducted from any
concurrent payments provided under this chapter.
§ 35-9. Time limitation on actions.
No action for amounts due under the provisions of this chapter shall be
brought except within three years after the right of action accrues. Persons
legally incapable of bringing an action when the right accrues may sue
at any time within the three years next after becoming legally capable of
instituting suit. All amounts not claimed within said period shall remain
absolutely a part of the retirement fund.
§ 35-10. Payments exempt from taxation.
The right of any person to a pension or to the return of contributions, any
benefit or right accruing to any person under the provisions of this chapter,
and the cash and securities held under this chapter shall be exempt from
any state or municipal tax and exempt from levy and sale, garnishment,
attachment or any other process and shall be unassignable.
§ 35-11. Annual report.
The Pension Board shall, on or before April 1 of each year, file with the City
Council an annual report showing the financial condition of the retirement
system as of the end of the last completed fiscal year, including an actuarial
valuation of assets and liabilities and setting forth such other facts,
recommendations and data as may be of value to the members of the
Pension Board and the City of Meriden.
§ 35-12. Effective date.
This chapter shall take effect July 1, 1972. Benefits paid under this plan
shall be effective as to all employees who have retired from the City of
Meriden during and after the calendar year of 1972 and who were members
of the pension plan in effect at the time of their retirement.
§ 35-13. Election of former plan.
Any person employed by the City of Meriden on the effective date of this
chapter and covered by the retirement system established under Number
532 of the Special Acts of 1957, as revised by the State Legislature June
1961, may, within six months of said effective date, elect to accept the
benefits of said Act as it existed prior to said date or as amended by the
provisions of this chapter.
§ 35-14. Amendments to and discontinuance of plan.
§ 35-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 35-14
1:133
A. Amendment right. The provisions of this plan may be amended at any time
and from time to time by the City Council; provided, however, that no
amendment shall cause or permit, prior to the satisfaction of all liabilities
of the plan, any part of the fund to revert to or become the property of
the City or to be diverted to purposes other than for exclusive benefit of
members, retired members, terminated members with a vested interest,
coparticipants or beneficiaries of deceased retired members hereunder,
nor shall any amendment effect adversely in any way any vested rights
theretofore acquired by such members, coparticipants or beneficiaries,
except as may otherwise be necessary to meet the requirements of the
Internal Revenue Service or other governmental authority.
B. Termination right. Although the City hopes to continue the retirement
system and the contributions to the Board indefinitely, the City may, by
action of the City Council, terminate the retirement system and all further
contributions thereunder for any reason and at any time. If the City
temporarily discontinues its contributions or suspends them in whole or
in part, and if such temporary discontinuance becomes a permanent
discontinuance, such permanent discontinuance shall be deemed to
constitute termination of the retirement system as of the date the
contributions were first discontinued.
C. Allocation of assets upon termination. In the event of termination of the
retirement system, the Board shall first allocate an amount of the
retirement fund to each member, retired member, terminated member with
a vested interest, coparticipant, beneficiary of a deceased member or
beneficiary of a deceased retired member equal to the amount of the
contributions, accumulated at regular interest, standing to the credit of
each member as of the retirement system's termination date, each
terminated member with a vested interest as of his termination date, each
retired member as of his retirement date, the beneficiary of a deceased
member as of the date of such member's decease and the beneficiary or
coparticipant of a deceased retired member as of such member's retirement
date, less all amounts received from the retirement fund by such member,
terminated member, retired member, deceased retired member, beneficiary
and/or coparticipant. Such amounts so allocated shall be paid to the
respective members, retired members, terminated members with a vested
interest, coparticipants or beneficiaries unless a written election is made
by such person to have the amount to which he is so entitled held in the
retirement fund and added to the amount, if any, which shall be set aside
for his benefit under their terms of the following sentence. The remaining
net assets in the retirement fund after deduction of all termination expenses
shall then be allocated by the Board in an equitable manner among the
members, retired members, terminated members with vested interest,
coparticipants and beneficiaries in the following order of precedence to
provide for accrued benefits, which shall be 100% vested as of the date of
discontinuance, and such allocation shall be final:
§ 35-14 MERIDEN CODE § 35-14
1:134
Order of Precedence Classification at Date of Termination
Class I Retired members; coparticipants; beneficiaries of
deceased members or retired members;
members eligible for normal retirement under
§ 35-6
Class II Members eligible for early retirement under
§ 35-7; terminated members with a vested
interest
Class III All other members
D. Disposition of assets after allocation. Such allocation shall be accomplished
through either continuance of the retirement fund or a new retirement fund
or purchase of insurance or annuity contracts (either group or individual)
as the Board shall determine.
E. Exclusive benefits. This plan has been adopted for the exclusive benefit of
certain employees of the City and their beneficiaries. The City shall have no
beneficial interest in the retirement fund or any part thereof, and no part of
the retirement fund shall ever revert or be repaid to the City, either directly
or indirectly, except for such part of the retirement fund, if any, which
remains in the fund after satisfaction of all liabilities to persons entitled to
benefits under the plan.
§ 35-15. Limitations on benefits.
A. For the purpose of this section the term "plan date" means the effective
date of the retirement system and each later date as of which the
retirement system is amended so as to increase the benefits to be
provided for highly compensated employees by the City's contributions.
B. With respect to each plan date of the City, the term "restricted
employee" means any of the 25 highest paid employees of the City on
such date whose anticipated yearly amount of pension provided by City
contributions exceeds $1,500.
C. If at any time during the ten-year period beginning on a plan date
the retirement system is terminated, the City contributions which may
be used for the benefit of a restricted employee shall not exceed the
greatest of the following amounts:
(1) Twenty thousand dollars.
(2) An amount computed by multiplying 20% of the first $50,000 of
the employee's average regular annual compensation during his last
five years of service by the number of years for which the full
current costs of the retirement system have been met since the
plan date, plus, if the plan date is after the effective date, the City
contributions, or funds attributable thereto, which would have been
applied to provide benefits for the employee if the retirement system
had terminated on the day before the plan date.
(3) If the plan date is after the effective date, the contributions, or funds
attributable thereto, which would have been applied to provide
benefits for the employee if the retirement system as in effect on the
day before the plan date and have been continued without charge.
§ 35-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 35-15
1:135
D. If at any time during the ten-year period beginning on a plan date the
full current costs of the retirement system have not been met, then,
until the full current costs are funded for the first time thereafter, the
benefits payable on the coverage of a restricted employee shall not
exceed the benefits that would have been payable on his coverage had
the retirement system been terminated when such costs were not met.
E. When the limitation on contributions is being terminated for more than
one plan date, the applicable limitation will be the smallest of the
amounts determined for each plan date.
F. The foregoing conditions shall not restrict the current payment of the
full benefits called for by the retirement system for an employee while
the retirement system remains in effect and the full current costs have
been met.
G. The foregoing conditions shall not restrict the full payment of any
benefits called for by the retirement system for the coparticipant of an
employee who dies while the plan remains in effect and the full current
costs have been met.
H. The terms of this section shall prevail over any other terms of the
retirement system that may be inconsistent herewith.
I. Notwithstanding anything in the retirement system to the contrary, in
the event that the Internal Revenue Service shall issue an adverse
determination letter as to the initial qualifications of the retirement
system under Section 401(a) of the Internal Revenue Code, then the City
shall direct the Board to return to the City all contributions made to the
fund prior to the date of receipt of such determination letter, whereupon
such contributions shall be so returned.
Chapter 38
PERSONNEL CLASSIFICATION AND COMPENSATION
SYSTEM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 3. Pensions — See Ch. 35.
§ 38-1. System established. [Amended 9-15-1980]
There is hereby created a classification and compensation system in
accordance with Chapter IX, §§ C9-3 and C9-4 of the City Charter.
§ 38-2. Officers, employees and positions not covered. [Amended
9-15-1980]
The officers, employees or positions in the municipal service of the City of
Meriden set forth in Chapter IX, § C9-3 of the City Charter shall not be
included in the classified service or the compensation plan created under
the provisions of this chapter.
§ 35-15 MERIDEN CODE § 38-3
1:136
§ 38-3. Administration of system.
The Director of Personnel shall be responsible for the administration of the
classification and compensation system.
§ 38-4. Formulation and adoption of classification plan. [Amended
10-5-1976; 9-15-1980]
The Director of Personnel shall prepare for adoption by the City Council a
classification plan which shall consist of:
A. A grouping into classes of positions which are of approximately equal
difficulty and responsibility, which require the same general
qualifications and which can be equitably compensated within the same
range of pay under comparable working conditions.
B. A class title, descriptive of the work of the class, which shall identify
each class.
C. Written class descriptions for each class of positions, containing a
description of the nature of the work and responsibility of the position in
the class; examples of work which are illustrative of duties of positions
allocated to the class; requirements of work in terms of knowledge,
abilities and skills necessary for its performance; a statement of
experience and training desirable for recruitment into the class; and,
in certain cases, necessary special qualifications such as a license or
certification.
D. An allocation list showing the class title of each position in the municipal
service, as identified by the name of the employee presently holding that
position. Allocation lists are not made permanent due to their constantly
changing nature.
§ 38-5. Formulation and adoption of compensation plan. [Amended
8-4-1969; 9-15-1980]
The Director of Personnel shall prepare for adoption by the City Council a
compensation plan which shall consist of:
A. Schedule I: the schedule of salary ranges which consists of minimum and
maximum rates of pay and intermediate steps for all classes of positions
included in the classification plan as adopted for the fiscal year by the
City Council and for succeeding fiscal years, unless amended.
B. Schedule II: the assignment of classes to salary ranges within the City of
Meriden, as adopted by the City Council.
§ 38-6. Personnel policies and procedures. [Amended 9-15-1980]
The Director of Personnel shall prepare for adoption by the City Council a
manual of regulations to be titled "Policies and Procedures for Personnel
of the City of Meriden," which regulations shall govern the administration
of the classification and compensation system of the City of Meriden and
which regulations shall also apply to the unclassified officers and employees
of the City, unless otherwise provided by law.
§ 38-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-7
1:137
§ 38-7. Scope and duration of system. [Amended 9-15-1980]
After adoption by the City Council, the classification and compensation plan
and the regulations pertaining thereto shall remain in full force and effect
until modified by amendments duly adopted by the City Council; provided,
however, that no such amendments shall have the effect of eliminating
or diminishing any right of an officer or employee accorded under the
provisions of a previous enactment.
§ 38-8. Certification. [Amended 9-15-1980]
The original classification and compensation system together with pertinent
regulations and any amendments to said system or regulations having been
duly adopted and approved shall be certified by the Clerk of the City
Council as official records of the proceedings. The Director of Personnel
shall compile such certified enactments and shall publish the same in
sufficient numbers so that copies shall be available to all department heads
and employee groups.
Chapter 41
PROPERTY ACQUISITION AND DISPOSAL
§ 41-1. Procedure to be followed.
Except as otherwise provided by law, whenever the City wishes to acquire
or dispose of real property, it shall do so as set forth in this chapter.
§ 41-2. Administrative review.
A. Prior to submission to the City Council for approval, each proposal
to acquire or dispose of real property first shall be reviewed by an
administrative group to be known as the "Economic Development Task
Force."
B. The Economic Development Task Force shall be composed of the
following members: the Chairperson of the Economic Development,
Housing and Zoning Committee of the City Council, or such other
comparable committee of the City Council as may from time to time
be created by the City Council, and the City Manager, the Director of
Planning, the Director of Health and Human Services, the City Engineer,
the Economic Development Director, the Community Development
Director, and such other City administrative officials as may be assigned
from time to time by the City Manager. The City Manager may designate
another City employee to act on his behalf, from time to time.
C. Each property acquired by the City, other than for a specific purpose or
project approved by the City Council, shall be reviewed by the Economic
Development Task Force. The Task Force shall recommend to the City
Council that the City maintain ownership of such property or that each
such property be sold or transferred and, if so, by what method and
on what terms and conditions. The Task Force may recommend that
such property be disposed of by transfer to a contiguous property owner
§ 38-7 MERIDEN CODE § 41-2
1:138
or owners, by listing the property for sale with a licensed real estate
agent, or by a request for proposals. The City Council may accept such
recommendation or may approve the disposition of such property by
a method or means other than that recommended by the Task Force,
provided that in such instance the City Council shall set forth its reasons
for not accepting the recommendation of the Task Force.
D. The City Manager, or his designee, shall negotiate the sale or transfer
of each property approved for disposition by the City Council and shall
negotiate the acquisition of any property that the City wishes to acquire
by purchase. For each such property valued by the Assessor on the
last Grand List at more than $50,000 but less than $100,000, the City
Manager or his designee shall obtain at least one opinion of value of such
property from a licensed Connecticut real estate broker or appraiser. For
each such property so valued at more than $100,000, the City Manager
or his designee shall obtain two appraisals from licensed Connecticut
appraisers.
E. The City Manager shall submit each proposed agreement for the sale,
transfer or acquisition of such property to the Economic Development,
Housing and Zoning Committee, or such other comparable committee
as may be created by the City Council from time to time, for approval,
together with a statement of reasons why the proposed agreement
should be approved, which statement shall set forth the value of the
property as determined by the opinion of value or appraisals, as the case
may be. The submission by the City Manager shall remain confidential
until such time as acted upon by the Committee. Upon approval by the
Committee, such proposed agreement shall be submitted to the City
Council for approval.
F. The requirements of this chapter shall be in addition to any other
requirements imposed by state or local law or regulation.
§ 41-3. Sale or transfer of certain properties excepted.
With regard to any property which has a value less than $5,000 as
determined by the Assessor on the last Grand List or to property which
consists of a vacant lot which may not be used or developed for building
purposes, the City Manager is authorized to maintain ownership of or
dispose of such property as approved by the City Council, without further
approval.
Chapter 43
REGIONAL PLANNING AGENCY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Commission — See Ch. 6, Art. IV.
§ 41-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 43-1
1:139
§ 43-1. Adoption of statute; election to join.
Pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 127 of the Connecticut General
Statutes, the City of Meriden hereby adopts the provisions of said chapter
and joins the Regional Planning Agency for the South Central Region,
as defined by the Connecticut Development Commission, pursuant to the
provisions of said chapter.
§ 43-2. Delegates; appointment; terms.
A. The City of Meriden, having a population of 55,558 according to the
Federal Census of 1980, shall have three representatives to the Agency.
B. The City Council is hereby authorized to appoint two electors of the City
of Meriden as delegates to the Regional Planning Agency. One delegate
is to serve initially for a term of one year from the effective date of this
chapter. One delegate is to serve a term of two years from the effective
date of this chapter.
C. The Planning Commission, duly constituted, shall elect one member of
said Planning Commission or the Director of Planning to serve a term of
two years as a delegate to the Regional Planning Agency. Said term shall
commence with the effective date of this chapter.
D. Thereafter the terms of appointment for all delegates shall be for two
years.
§ 43-3. Vacancies; repeated absence from meetings.
Vacancies created by resignation or inability to serve shall be filled by the
appointing body until the term expires. Any representative who is absent
from three consecutive regular meetings of the Regional Planning Agency
and any intervening duly called special meetings thereof shall be considered
to have resigned from said body, except that the requirements of this
section may be waived by the Council for good cause.
Chapter 46
TRANSIT DISTRICT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Transit District — See Ch. 6, Art. XVII.
STATUTORY REFERENCES
Transit districts generally — See C.G.S.
§ 7-273b et seq.
§ 43-1 MERIDEN CODE § 46-1
1:140
§ 46-1. Authority; district established.
By the authority granted under Chapter 103A of the Connecticut General
Statutes, State of Connecticut, as amended, a transit district is hereby
established.
§ 46-2. Authorization to form district.
The City of Meriden may, by itself or in cooperation with one or more other
municipalities, form a transit district in the manner and for the purposes
provided, in accordance with the authority herein granted.
§ 46-3. Approval at referendum required.
The adoption of a transit district shall be presented to the electors of the
City of Meriden at its next regular election to be held on November 5, 1968,
and shall require approval by a majority of the electors so voting on said
adoption.
§ 46-4. Management. [Amended 9-15-1980]
The affairs of the transit district shall be managed in accordance with the
statutory authority made and provided in this instance.
§ 46-5. Compliance with statute.
All requirements necessary for the establishment of a transit district shall
be complied with in accordance with the statutory authority as herein
provided.
§ 46-6. Transit Authority. [Added 7-6-1970; amended 9-15-1980]
The operation of the transit district shall be the responsibility of the Transit
Authority as established by Chapter 6, Boards, Commissions and Appointed
Positions, Article XVII, Transit District.
Chapter 52
VOTING DISTRICTS
STATUTORY REFERENCES
Voting districts — See C.G.S. § 9-169.
§ 52-1. Voting districts established; Council areas. [Amended
3-2-1964; 3-4-1968; 7-2-1973; 2-16-1982; 1-6-1992; 2-4-2002;
4-16-2012]
In accordance with the authority granted in the Meriden City Charter
and the Connecticut General Statutes there shall be 13 voting districts as
§ 46-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 52-1
1:141
designated and described as attached, and the City Council areas shall be
composed as follows:
A. Council Area I: Precincts 2, 3 and 4.
B. Council Area II: Precincts 5, 6, 7 and 8.
C. Council Area III: Precincts 9, 10 and 11.
D. Council Area IV: Precincts 1, 12 and 13.
PRECINCT 84-1:
Beginning at a point, said point being the intersection of the centerline
of Hanover Street with the easterly Right of Way line of the Amtrak
Railroad. Thence running southerly along said easterly Right of Way line
of the Amtrak Railroad to its intersection with the centerline of Cooper
Street. Thence running westerly, along said centerline of Cooper Street
to its intersection with the centerline of Cook Avenue. Thence running
southerly, southwesterly, and westerly along the centerlines of Cook
Avenue, New Hanover Avenue, and Main Street to its intersection with
the centerline of River Road. Thence running northerly and westerly
along the centerline of River Road to its intersection with the centerline
of Oregon Road. Thence running northerly along the centerline of
Oregon Road to its intersection with the centerline of Coe Avenue.
Thence running southeasterly along the centerline of Coe Avenue to
the intersection of the centerlines of Coe Avenue, Hanover Street, and
Highland Avenue. Thence running southeasterly along the centerline of
Highland Avenue to its intersection with the centerline of Columbus
Avenue. Thence running northerly along the centerline of said Columbus
Avenue to its intersection with the centerline of Hanover Street. Thence
running northeasterly, and easterly along said centerline of Hanover
Street, to the point or place of beginning.
PRECINCT 84-2:
Beginning at a point, said point being the intersection of the easterly
Right of Way line of the Amtrak Railroad with the centerline of East
Main Street. Thence running easterly along the centerline of East Main
Street to its intersection with the centerline of Elm Street. Thence
running southerly along the centerline of Elm Street to its intersection
with the centerline of Silver Street. Thence running westerly along the
centerline of Silver Street to its intersection with the centerline of Oak
Street. Thence running southerly along the centerline of Oak Street to
its intersection with the centerline of Harrison Street. Thence running
northwesterly along the centerline of Harrison Street to its intersection
with the centerline of Crown Street. Thence running southerly along
the centerline of Crown Street to its intersection with the centerline of
Hall Avenue. Thence running northwesterly along the centerline of Hall
Avenue and the centerline of the unimproved section of Prospect Avenue,
and continuing along the centerline of the accepted section of Prospect
Avenue to its intersection with the centerline of New Hanover Avenue.
Thence running northeasterly along the centerline of New Hanover
Avenue to its intersection with the centerline of Cook Avenue. Thence
running northerly along the centerline of Cook Avenue to its intersection
§ 52-1 MERIDEN CODE § 52-1
1:142
with the centerline of Cooper Street. Thence running easterly along the
centerline of Cooper Street to its intersection with the easterly Right
of Way line of the Amtrak Railroad. Thence running northerly along the
easterly Right of Way line of the Amtrak Railroad to the point or place of
beginning.
PRECINCT 84-3:
Beginning at a point, said point being the intersection of the centerline
of Colony Street and Hanover Street. Thence running southwesterly
along the centerline of Hanover Street to its intersection with Columbus
Avenue. Thence running southerly along the centerline of Columbus
Avenue to its intersection with the centerline of Highland Avenue.
Thence running northwesterly along the centerline of Highland Avenue
to its intersection with the centerlines of Hanover Street and Coe
Avenue. Thence running northwesterly along the centerline of Coe
Avenue to its intersection with the centerline of Centennial Avenue.
Thence running northeasterly along the centerline of Centennial Avenue
to its intersection with the centerline of West Main Street. Thence
running easterly along the centerline of West Main Street to its
intersection with the centerline of Fowler Avenue. Thence running
northeasterly along the centerline of Fowler Avenue and the centerline
of Fowler Avenue Ext. to its intersection with the centerline of Lockwood
Street Ext. Thence running easterly along the centerline of Lockwood
Street Ext. to its intersection with the centerline of Chamberlain
Highway. Thence running northerly along the centerline of Chamberlain
Highway to its intersection with the centerline of Interstate 691. Thence
running easterly along the centerline of interstate 691 to its intersection
with the centerline of Colony Street. Thence running southerly along the
centerline of Colony Street to the point or place of beginning.
PRECINCT 84-4:
Beginning at a point, said point being the intersection of the centerline
of Colony Street and the centerline of Hanover Street. Thence running
northerly along the centerline of Colony Street to its intersection with
the centerline of Interstate 691. Thence running easterly along the
centerline of Interstate 691 to its intersection with the centerline of
Broad Street. Thence running southerly along the centerline of Broad
Street to its intersection with the centerline of Yale Acres Road. Thence
running southeasterly along the centerline of Yale Acres Road to its
intersection with the centerline of Wall Street. Thence running
southwesterly along the centerline of Wall Street to its intersection with
the centerline of Newton Street. Thence running southerly along the
centerline of Newton Street to its intersection with the centerline of
Liberty Street. Thence running westerly along the centerline of Liberty
Street to its intersection with the centerline of Parker Avenue North.
Thence running southerly along the centerline of Parker Avenue North
and the centerline of Parker Avenue to its intersection with the
centerline of Charles Street. Thence running westerly along the
§ 52-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 52-1
1:143
centerline of Charles Street to its intersection with the centerline of Elm
Street. Thence running northerly along the centerline of Elm Street to
its intersection with the centerline of East Main Street. Thence running
westerly along the centerline of East Main Street to its intersection with
the easterly Right of Way line of the Amtrak Railroad. Thence running
southerly along the easterly Right of Way line of the Amtrak Railroad to
its intersection with the centerline of Hanover Street. Thence running
northwesterly along the centerline of Hanover Street to the point or
place of beginning.
PRECINCT 84-5:
Beginning at a point, said point being the intersection of the centerline
of Colony Street and the centerline of Interstate 691. Thence running
northerly along the centerline of Colony Street to its intersection with
the centerline of Britannia Street. Thence running easterly along the
centerline of Britannia Street to its intersection with Broad Street.
Thence running southerly along the centerline of Broad Street to its
intersection with the centerline of an old railroad spur located just north
of Orchard Street. Thence running easterly along the centerline of said
old railroad spur to its intersection with the centerline of North Wall
Street. Thence running southerly along the centerline of North Wall
Street, and continuing southwesterly along the centerline of Wall Street
to its intersection with the centerline of Yale Acres Road. Thence running
northwesterly along the centerline of Yale Acres Road to its intersection
with the centerline of Broad Street. Thence running northerly along the
centerline of Broad Street to its intersection with Interstate 691. Thence
running westerly along the centerline of Interstate 691 to the point or
place of beginning.
PRECINCT 82-6:
Beginning at a point, said point being the intersection of the centerline
of Britannia Street and the easterly right of way line of the Amtrak
Railroad. Thence running northerly along the centerline of the Amtrak
Railroad to its intersection with the Berlin town line. Thence running
easterly along the Berlin town line to its intersection with the
Middletown city line. Thence running southerly along the Middletown
city line to its intersection with the centerline of Westfield Road. Thence
running in a general westerly direction along the centerline of Westfield
Road to its intersection with the centerline of North Wall Street. Thence
running southerly along the centerline of North Wall Street to its
intersection with the centerline of an old railroad spur. Thence running
westerly along the centerline of the old railroad spur to its intersection
with the centerline of Broad Street. Thence running northerly along
the centerline of Broad Street to its intersection with the centerline
of Britannia Street. Thence running westerly along the centerline of
Britannia Street to the point or place of beginning.
PRECINCT 82-7:
§ 52-1 MERIDEN CODE § 52-1
1:144
Beginning at a point, said point being the intersection of Interstate
691 and Colony Street. Thence running westerly along the centerline
of Interstate 691 to its intersection with the centerline of Chamberlain
Highway. Thence running southerly along the centerline of Chamberlain
Highway to its intersection with the centerline of Lockwood Street Ext.
Thence running westerly along the centerline of Lockwood Street Ext.
to its intersection with the centerline of Fowler Avenue Ext. Thence
running westerly along the centerline of Fowler Avenue Ext. and Fowler
Avenue to its intersection with the centerline of West Main Street.
Thence running westerly along the centerline of West Main Street to
its intersection with the centerline of Graveline Avenue. Thence running
northerly along the centerline of Graveline Avenue to its intersection
with the centerline of Reservoir Avenue. Thence running northwesterly
along the centerline of Reservoir Avenue to its intersection with
Hubbard Park Drive. Thence running northerly along the centerline of
Reservoir Avenue to its intersection with the Berlin town line. Thence
running easterly, northeasterly, easterly, northeasterly, and easterly
again along the Berlin town line to its intersection with the centerline of
the Amtrak Railroad. Thence running southerly along the centerline of
the Amtrak Railroad to its intersection with the centerline of Britannia
Street. Thence running westerly along the centerline of Britannia Street
to its intersection with the centerline of Colony Street. Thence running
southerly along the centerline of Colony Street to the point or place of
Beginning.
PRECINCT 82-8:
Beginning at a point, said point being the intersection of the centerline
of Interstate 691 and the centerline of North Wall Street. Thence running
northerly along the centerline of North Wall Street to its intersection
with the centerline of Westfield Road. Thence running northeasterly
along the centerline of North Wall Street to its intersection with the
Middletown city line. Thence running southerly along the Middletown
city line to its intersection with the centerline of East Main Street.
Thence running westerly along the centerline of East Main Street to its
intersection with the centerline of Bee Street. Thence running northerly
along the centerline of Bee Street to its intersection with the centerline
of Baldwin Avenue. Thence running westerly along the centerline of
Baldwin Avenue to its intersection with the centerline of Gravel Street.
Thence running southerly along the centerline of Gravel Street to its
intersection with the centerline of Interstate 691. Thence running
westerly along the centerline of Interstate 691 to the point or place of
beginning.
PRECINCT 82-9:
Beginning at a point, said point being the intersection of the centerline
of East Main Street and the centerline of Bee Street. Thence running
westerly along the centerline of East Main Street to its intersection
with the centerline of Parker Avenue North. Thence running northerly
§ 52-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 52-1
1:145
along the centerline of Parker Avenue North to its intersection with
the centerline of Liberty Street. Thence running easterly along the
centerline of Liberty Street to its intersection with the centerline of
Newton Street. Thence running northerly along the centerline of Newton
Street to its intersection with the centerline of Wall Street. Thence
running northeasterly along the centerline of Wall Street to its
intersection with the centerline of North Wall Street. Thence running
northerly along the centerline of North Wall Street to its intersection
with the centerline of Interstate 691. Thence running easterly along the
centerline of Interstate 691 to its intersection with the centerline of
Gravel Street. Thence running northerly along the centerline of Gravel
Street to its intersection with the centerline of Baldwin Avenue. Thence
running northeasterly along the centerline of Baldwin Avenue to its
intersection of Bee Street. Thence running southerly along the
centerline of Bee Street to the point or place of beginning.
PRECINCT 82-10:
Beginning at a point, said point being the intersection of the centerline
of Route 15 and the centerline of East Main Street. Thence running
easterly along the centerline of East Main Street to its intersection
with the Middletown city line. Thence running southerly along the
Middletown city line to its intersection with the Wallingford town line.
Thence running westerly along the Wallingford town line to its
intersection with the centerline of Route 15. Thence running northerly
along the centerline of Route 15 to the point or place of beginning.
PRECINCT 83-11:
Beginning at a point, said point being the intersection of the centerline
of East Main Street and the centerline of Parker Avenue. Thence running
easterly along the centerline of East Main Street to its intersection
with the centerline of Route 15. Thence running southerly along the
centerline of Route 15 to its intersection with the Wallingford town
line. Thence running westerly along the Wallingford town line to its
intersection with the centerline of South Curtis Street. Thence running
northerly along the centerline of South Curtis Street to its intersection
with the centerline of Curtis Street. Thence running northerly along
the centerline of Curtis Street to its intersection with the centerline of
Ann Street. Thence running westerly along the centerline of Ann Street
to its intersection with the centerline of Broad Street. Thence running
southerly along the centerline of Broad Street to its intersection with the
centerline of Gale Avenue. Thence running westerly along the centerline
of Gale Avenue to its intersection with the centerline of Harrison Street.
Thence running westerly along the centerline of Harrison Street to its
intersection with the centerline of Oak Street. Thence running northerly
along the centerline of Oak Street to its intersection with the centerline
of Silver Street. Thence running easterly along the centerline of Silver
Street to its intersection with the centerline of Elm Street. Thence
running northerly along the centerline of Elm Street to its intersection
§ 52-1 MERIDEN CODE § 52-1
1:146
with the centerline of Charles Street. Thence running easterly along the
centerline of Charles Street to its intersection with the centerline of
Parker Avenue. Thence running northerly along the centerline of Parker
Avenue to the point or place of beginning.
PRECINCT 83-12:
Beginning at a point, said point being the intersection of the centerline
of Ann Street with the centerline of Curtis Street. Thence running
southerly along the centerline of Curtis Street and the centerline of
South Curtis Street to its intersection with the Wallingford town line.
Thence running westerly along the Wallingford town line to its
intersection with the Cheshire town line. Thence running northerly along
the Cheshire town line to its intersection with the centerline of Main
Street. Thence running northwesterly along the centerline of North Main
Street to its intersection with the Cheshire town line. Thence running
northwesterly along the Cheshire town line to its intersection of the
centerline of the Quinnipiac River. Thence running north and easterly
along the centerline of the Quinnipiac River to its intersection with
the centerline of Oregon Road. Thence running southwesterly along the
centerline of Oregon Road to its intersection with the centerline of River
Road. Thence running southeasterly along the centerline of River Road
to its intersection with the centerline of Main Street. Thence running
easterly along the centerline of Main Street to its intersection with the
centerline of Hanover Road. Thence running easterly and northeasterly
along the centerline of New Hanover Avenue to its intersection with the
centerline of Prospect Avenue. Thence running southeasterly along the
centerline of Prospect Avenue, the centerline of the unimproved section
of Prospect Avenue, and the centerline of Hall Avenue to its intersection
with the centerline of Crown Street. Thence running northerly along
the centerline of Crown Street to its intersection with the centerline
of Harrison Street. Thence running easterly along the centerline of
Harrison Street to the centerline of Gale Avenue. Thence running
northeasterly along the centerline of Gale Avenue to its intersection
with the centerline of Broad Street. Thence running northerly along the
centerline of Broad Street to its intersection with the centerline of Ann
Street. Thence running easterly along the centerline of Ann Street to the
point or place of beginning.
PRECINCT 83-13:
Beginning at a point, said point being the intersection of the centerline
of West Main Street with the centerline of Centennial Avenue. Thence
running southwesterly along the centerline of Centennial Avenue and
continuing along the centerline of Oregon Road to its intersection with
the centerline of the Quinnipiac River. Thence running northwesterly
along the centerline of the Quinnipiac River to its intersection with the
Cheshire town line. Thence running in a general northeasterly direction
along the Cheshire town line to its intersection with the Southington
town line. Thence running easterly, northerly, and easterly again to its
§ 52-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 52-1
1:147
intersection with the Berlin town line. Thence running easterly and
southerly along the Berlin town line to its intersection with the
centerline of Reservoir Avenue. Thence running southerly along the
centerline of Reservoir Avenue to its intersection with the centerline
of Hubbard Park Road. Thence running easterly along the centerline
of Reservoir Avenue to its intersection of the centerline of Graveline
Avenue. Thence running southerly along the centerline of Graveline
Avenue to its intersection with the centerline of West Main Street.
Thence running easterly along the centerline of West Main Street to the
point or place of beginning.
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 58
AIR POLLUTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Health nuisances — See Ch. 144.
§ 58-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Meriden Air Pollution Control
Ordinance" and is adopted in accordance with the authority embodied in
Section 12 of Public Act 758 of the 1969 General Assembly.36
§ 58-2. Declaration of policy.
Recognizing the direct relationship between polluted air and an unhealthy
environment and recognizing further that air pollution is presently affecting
the lives and health of the citizens of Meriden and damaging or destroying
their property, it is hereby declared to be the public policy of the City of
Meriden to preserve, protect and improve the air resources of the City
of Meriden so as to promote the health, safety and welfare of the City's
inhabitants and, to the greatest degree practical, facilitate the enjoyment of
the natural attractions of the City of Meriden.
§ 58-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AIR POLLUTION — The presence in the outdoor atmosphere of one or more
air contaminants or any combination thereof in such quantities and of such
characteristics and duration as are or are likely to be injurious to human
36.Editor's Note: See C.G.S. § 22a-185.
§ 52-1 MERIDEN CODE § 58-3
1:148
health or welfare, animal or plant life or property, or would unreasonably
interfere with the enjoyment of life or property.
EMISSION — A release into the outdoor atmosphere of air contaminants.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, firm, association, public or private
corporation, trust, estate or any other legal entity.
§ 58-4. Powers of Director of Health and Human Services.
[Amended 9-15-1980]
The Director of Health and Human Services of the City of Meriden, in
addition to any other powers vested in him by law, shall have and may
exercise the following powers and duties in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter and pursuant to rules and regulations adopted hereunder:
A. To develop a comprehensive program for the prevention and control of
air pollution in the City of Meriden.
B. Pursuant to rules and regulations adopted by the City Council, to
require any person to submit to him for approval and/or a permit any
plans, specifications and other data related to construction, modification
or use of any article, machine, equipment, facility or installation which
has caused, may cause or is intended primarily to prevent or control
the emission of air pollutants. Should such approval and/or permit be
denied, the Director may prohibit the installation, alteration or use of
such article, machine, equipment, facility or installation.
C. To issue, modify, revoke or enforce orders requiring compliance with
this chapter or rules or regulations promulgated hereunder by the City
Council.
D. To enforce compliance with the laws of the State of Connecticut and
rules or regulations promulgated thereunder related to air pollution.
E. To advise, consult and cooperate with other agencies of the City,
political subdivisions of the state, industries, agencies of the State of
Connecticut, the federal government and affected groups and persons
in furtherance of the purposes of this chapter.
F. To encourage and conduct studies and research relating to air pollution
and conservation of the air resource.
G. To investigate complaints about air pollution and secure abatement of
the cause thereof.
H. To collect and disseminate information relating to air pollution and
conservation of the air resource.
I. To encourage voluntary cooperation by people, industries, other
agencies of the City and others in preventing and controlling air
pollution in the City.
J. In the event of any written complaints or upon his own initiative, to
enter upon any private or public property for the purpose of
investigating conditions relating to air pollution and ascertain
compliance with the provisions of the laws of the State of Connecticut
and rules and regulations promulgated thereunder related to air
pollution and to investigate compliance with this chapter and rules
and regulations adopted hereunder. He may also apply to any court
having criminal jurisdiction for a warrant to inspect such premises to
§ 58-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 58-4
1:149
determine compliance with the provisions of the laws of the State of
Connecticut and rules and regulations promulgated thereunder related
to air pollution and compliance with the provisions of this chapter and
rules and regulations adopted hereunder by the City Council, provided
that the Director shall have authority to enter any property at any time
when in his judgment an emergency tending to create an immediate
danger to the public welfare or safety exists. All information gained by
such inspection shall be kept confidential except as it relates directly to
air pollution.
K. To accept, receive and administer funds, grants or gifts from public or
private agencies, including the federal government, for the purpose of
carrying out any of the functions provided in this chapter. Such funds
received by the Director shall be deposited with the Director of Finance
of the City of Meriden and held in a special account established for air
pollution control activities of the Division of Health.
L. To represent the City of Meriden in any and all matters relating to air
pollution.
M. To appoint, convene and dissolve special advisory groups to consider
and report on any matters relating to air pollution.
N. To employ personnel, purchase equipment, supplies and materials and
enter into contracts to carry out the purposes of this chapter in
conformance with any practices of the City of Meriden applicable to the
Division of Health.
O. To carry out all other activities as may be necessary to enforce this
chapter and the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder by the
City Council.
P. To designate a member or members of his staff to inspect, investigate,
prepare reports and perform any other duties required to carry out the
purposes of this chapter or to enforce the rules and regulations of the
City Council adopted pursuant to the authority herein granted.
§ 58-5. Powers of City Council. [Amended 9-15-1980]
A. In addition to any other powers vested in it by law, the City Council shall
have the following powers:
(1) To adopt, promulgate, amend and repeal all rules and regulations
for the prevention, control and abatement of air pollution and the
conservation of air resources, in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter and in accordance with powers granted to it under
the Charter of the City of Meriden. Such rules, regulations and air
standards shall not be inconsistent with the rules, regulations and
air standards promulgated by any authorized agency of the State
of Connecticut having jurisdiction over the prevention, control and
abatement of air pollution and conservation of air resources.
(2) To promulgate a system of alerts to prevent and reduce the risk of
situations in which there may be imminent and serious danger to the
public health and welfare of the community from air pollution.
(3) To adopt rules and regulations whereby the Director of Health and
Human Services shall be empowered to provide for the issuance,
suspension and revocation and renewal of any permits that it may
§ 58-4 MERIDEN CODE § 58-5
1:150
require pursuant to this chapter and rules and regulations adopted
hereunder.
B. The City Council shall hold a public hearing with respect to the adoption,
repeal or amendment of any rule or regulation relating to the control of
air pollution, notice of which hearing shall be published in at least two
daily newspapers having a general circulation in Meriden at least five
days before such hearing. A copy of the proposed rules and regulations
shall be filed with the City Clerk not less than five days prior to the date
of said public hearing. Such rules and regulations shall become effective
on such day as the City Council shall prescribe, provided that a notice
setting forth the fact of their adoption and their effective date shall
have been published twice consecutively in each of the two newspapers
having a general circulation in the City of Meriden at least one week
prior to the effective date, and provided further that a copy of such rules
and regulations as adopted shall have been filed with the City Clerk prior
to their effective date and that such filing shall have been noted in said
notice.
§ 58-6. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 9-15-1980]
Any person who willfully violates an order of the Director of Health and
Human Services legally issued in accordance with this chapter or rules and
regulations issued pursuant thereto shall be subject to a fine not in excess of
$1,000 or imprisonment for not more than six months, or both. Intentional
violation of a legally issued order of the Director of Health and Human
Services that has been confirmed by the City Council shall be deemed a
misdemeanor, and each and every day or portion thereof during which any
violation of a legally issued order is committed shall be deemed a separate
and individual offense.
Chapter 60
ALARMS
§ 60-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide uniform minimum standards and
regulations applicable to the users of burglar, fire, holdup, and automatic
telephone dialer alarms and any other alarm or emergency signaling device
within the City of Meriden which results in the dispatch and/or response
of municipal emergency vehicles and/or personnel and to promote the
responsible use of alarm systems in the City of Meriden.
§ 60-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALARM DEVICE — Any component incorporated into an alarm system.
§ 58-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 60-2
1:151
ALARM SYSTEM — An assembly of equipment and devices, or a single
device, arranged to signal the presence of a hazard requiring urgent
attention and to which the Police Department and/or the Fire Department
personnel are expected to respond. Specifically excluded from this
definition are smoke or other battery-operated detectors which do not
signal outside the alarmed premises and alarm systems installed in motor
vehicles.
ALARM USER — Any person, firm or corporation on whose premises an
alarm system is maintained.
AUTOMATIC TELEPHONE DIALING ALARM — An alarm system which
automatically sends a prerecorded voice message or coded signal over the
telephone line which indicates the existence of the emergency situation the
alarm system is designed to detect.
FALSE ALARM — The activation of an alarm system to which the Police
Department and/or the Fire Department responds and which is not caused
by a criminal act, fire or other emergency, but does not mean the activation
of an alarm caused by circumstances which are attributed to acts of God.
§ 60-3. Registration required.
A. All existing alarm systems shall be registered with the Meriden Police
Department within 60 days of the effective date of this chapter.
B. Any person, firm or corporation installing an alarm system shall register
it with the Meriden Police Department at least 10 days prior to its
anticipated activation.
§ 60-4. Automatic telephone dialing alarms; audible signals; holdup
alarms; false alarms.
A. Automatic telephone dialing alarms.
(1) No person, firm or corporation shall install an automatic telephone
dialing alarm which terminates at the Meriden Police Department
and/or Meriden Fire Department, except as hereafter provided.
(2) Automatic telephone dialing alarms which exist on the effective date
of this chapter which terminate at the Meriden Police Department
and/or the Meriden Fire Department shall be disconnected within
60 days from the effective date of this chapter, except as hereafter
provided.
(3) The Meriden Police Department and/or the Meriden Fire Department
may, at its discretion, provide a telephone number to which an
automatic telephone dialing alarm may be programmed. The cost of
providing the telephone number shall be paid by the users of the
automatic telephone dialing alarm.
B. No alarm system shall be installed which produces an audible signal
which operates for a period greater than 30 minutes.
C. Any person, firm or corporation using the type of alarm system known as
a "holdup alarm" shall comply with any special procedures set forth by
the Police Chief or his designee.
D. False alarms.
§ 60-2 MERIDEN CODE § 60-4
1:152
(1) No fines, penalties or other charges shall be imposed on any alarm
user for the first four false alarms within any one calendar year, but
for each false alarm thereafter a fine, penalty or other charge shall
be imposed in accordance with this chapter.
(2) Each separate premises of an alarm user, determined by a different
street address and a different deed and/or title, shall be entitled to
the same exemption of four false alarms within any one calendar
year.
(3) An alarm user may be notified via first-class mail after three false
alarms during any one calendar year so that corrective steps may be
taken to eliminate the false alarm signals.
§ 60-5. Penalties for offenses.
A. An alarm user shall be fined by the City of Meriden, the Police Chief
or the Fire Chief $25 for a single-family home or two-family home after
four false alarms in one calendar year, for the fifth false alarm and
subsequent false alarms. Each false alarm after four shall constitute a
separate violation of the provisions of this chapter and shall be fined
separately.37
B. An alarm user shall be fined by the City of Meriden, the Police Chief
or the Fire Chief $100 for three-family homes, commercial users or
industrial users after four false alarms in one calendar year. Each false
alarm after four shall constitute a separate violation of the provisions of
this chapter and shall be fined separately.
C. An alarm user shall be fined $75 for any of the following:
(1) A failure to register an alarm system in violation of § 60-3.
(2) The use of an automatic telephone dialing alarm in violation of
§ 60-4A.
(3) The use of an exterior audible alarm system which is in violation of
§ 60-4B.
(4) The use of a holdup alarm system as set forth in § 60-4C which does
not comply with any special procedures set forth by the Police Chief.
D. The fines and penalties payable under this chapter shall be payable
within 10 days after receipt of the invoice from the City of Meriden,
Meriden Police Department or Meriden Fire Department.
E. Any penalty imposed by the provisions of this chapter may be waived or
suspended at the discretion of the issuing authority if:
(1) The cause of the false alarms is beyond the control of the alarm user.
(2) The alarm user has demonstrated a good faith cooperative effort to
resolve a recurring problem of indeterminate cause.
F. The appeal of any decision made by the issuing authority shall be made
to the City Manager within 30 days of such decision. The decision of the
City Manager or his designee shall be final.
37.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 60-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 60-6
1:153
§ 60-6. Exceptions.
This chapter shall not apply to alarm systems owned or controlled by the
City of Meriden, the Meriden Board of Education, the State of Connecticut,
or the United States of America.
Chapter 61
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
STATUTORY REFERENCES
Motor vehicles — See C.G.S. § 14-1 et seq. Intoxicating liquors — See C.G.S. § 30-1 et
seq.
§ 61-1. Definitions.
Terms used in this chapter shall be construed as follows:
ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR — As it is defined in § 30-1(3) of the Connecticut
General Statutes.
PARKED VEHICLE — As it is defined in § 14-1(65) of the Connecticut
General Statutes.
PARKING AREA — Lots, areas or other accommodations for the parking of
motor vehicles off the street or highway and open to public use with or
without charge.
POSSESSION WITH INTENT TO CONSUME — Having in one's possession
or control alcoholic liquor in a glass, open bottle, open can or other open
container so as to permit consumption.
PUBLIC HIGHWAY — A highway, road, street, avenue, boulevard or other
way within and under the control of the City of Meriden and open to public
use, including the sidewalks of any such highway.
§ 61-2. Public highways, sidewalks and parking areas.
Except as permitted in § 61-3 hereof, no person shall consume any alcoholic
liquor or possess with intent to consume any alcoholic liquor upon or within
the limits of any public highway or sidewalk or parking area within the City
of Meriden. For purposes of this section, without limiting the generality of
the foregoing, the consumption of alcoholic liquor or the possession with
intent to consume alcoholic liquor in parked vehicles within or upon a public
highway, sidewalk or parking area is a violation hereof.
§ 61-3. Exception for public functions under permit; possession or
consumption in parked vehicles prohibited.
A. Consumption of alcoholic liquor and possession with the intent to
consume alcoholic liquor are permitted during any public function,
§ 60-6 MERIDEN CODE § 61-3
1:154
festival or celebration being conducted within a public highway, sidewalk
or parking area pursuant to a written permit issued by the Chief of Police
or person designated by the Chief to issue such permits authorizing the
sale, service or distribution of alcoholic liquor at or in connection with
such function, festival or celebration.
B. An application for a permit shall be in writing, directed to the Chief of
Police. The application shall state the name and address of responsible
officials of the organization sponsoring the function, festival or
celebration (event), specify the parts of the public highway, sidewalk or
parking area to be used during the event, specify the beginning and
ending time of the event and, if it continues for more than one day, the
hours in each day it is to be conducted, the number of people to be in
attendance at the event and whether the event is open to the public. The
application shall be filed at least 10 calendar days before the first day
of the event, and the permit shall be issued or denied in writing at least
four calendar days before the first day of the event. The permit shall be
issued if all of the required information is provided, the application is
made at least 10 days before the event, and the Chief of Police or his
designee determines that the event will be open to the public and that
all necessary permits, licenses and approvals have been obtained from
all government authorities having jurisdiction, including but not limited
to the State Liquor Control Commission.38
C. Consumption of alcoholic liquor or possession with intent to consume
alcoholic liquor shall not be permitted in parked vehicles within or upon
public highways, streets or parking areas under any circumstances.
§ 61-4. Possession and consumption by minors. [Added 2-18-2003]
A. No person under the age of 21 years shall be in possession of, or have
in his area of control, containers of alcoholic liquors, whether open or
closed, within the City of Meriden, except when accompanied by or in
the presence of his or her parent, guardian, or spouse who has attained
the age of 21 years.
B. No person shall use or allow the use of premises under his or her control
to permit the possession, consumption or dispensing of alcoholic liquor
to or by any person under the age of 21 years unless said person is
accompanied by or in the presence of his or her parent, guardian, or
spouse who has attained the age of 21 years.
C. The provisions of this section may be enforced by citation, in addition
to other remedies. The following persons have the authority to issue
citations for violations of this section: any City of Meriden police officer.
§ 61-5. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 9-16-1996]
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be fined $50 to $90
for each violation.
Chapter 62
38.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 61-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 61-5
1:155
AMBULANCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 200.
STATUTORY REFERENCES
Emergency medical services generally — See
C.G.S. § 19a-175 et seq.
§ 62-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AMBULANCE — A motor vehicle specifically designed to carry patients.39
§ 62-2. Required licenses.
A. No person shall operate an ambulance service or act as an ambulance
technician, driver or instructor without a license properly issued for said
purpose by the State Commissioner of Public Health in accordance with
Chapter 368D of the Connecticut General Statutes.40
B. No person shall operate any ambulance principally garaged, housed or
used in the City of Meriden, upon the streets of the City of Meriden,
without first obtaining a license as hereinafter provided from the
Director of Health and Human Services of the City of Meriden. Such
license shall be in effect for a period of one year from date of issue unless
sooner revoked. Said license may be renewed and continued in effect
for further periods of one year on application to the Director of Health
and Human Services and upon payment of the required license fee. The
fee for an ambulance license shall be $10. Separate licenses shall be
required for each ambulance. [Amended 9-15-1980]
§ 62-3. License application procedure. [Amended 9-15-1980]
A. The Director of Health and Human Services of the City of Meriden
shall prepare forms for application for license. The forms shall include
such information as said Director shall find reasonably necessary for the
administration of this chapter.
B. No ambulance which is to be licensed under the provisions of this
chapter shall be operated unless and until the application is approved
and the license issued.
C. Regardless of the date of original application and license, all ambulances
licensed by the City of Meriden shall be relicensed annually on April 1,
39.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
40.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 61-5 MERIDEN CODE § 62-3
1:156
such date to coincide with the issuance of a certificate of registration by
the State of Connecticut.
§ 62-4. Inspection and certification. [Amended 9-15-1980]
A. The Director of Health and Human Services shall inspect the vehicles
and premises designated in an application hereunder and shall certify
his approval when he finds that such vehicles and premises are suitable
from a standpoint of health and sanitation for the conduct of an
ambulance business, that such vehicles are properly equipped and that
all state laws and local ordinances relating to health, safety and
sanitation have been complied with.
B. Each and every ambulance used or operated within the limits of the City
of Meriden shall at all times be subject to inspection by the Director
of Health and Human Services of the City of Meriden or his authorized
representative.
§ 62-5. Qualified personnel required.
A. Each ambulance shall be operated with at least two emergency medical
technicians, both of whom shall have completed successfully an eightyone-
hour emergency medical technician course and shall have
conformed to all pertinent requirements of this chapter to the
satisfaction of the Director of Health and Human Services. [Amended
9-15-1980]
B. At all times when the ambulance is in motion, one emergency medical
technician is to function as the operator of the vehicle while the second
emergency medical technician shall provide necessary emergency
services, within the scope of his or her training, to the transportee.
§ 62-6. Rules and regulations. [Amended 9-15-1980]
The City Council of the City of Meriden shall establish rules and regulations
for the proper operation of ambulances in the City of Meriden, which
rules and regulations shall set forth the equipment to be carried by each
ambulance.
§ 62-7. Certificates of competency. [Amended 9-15-1980]
A. No person shall drive or serve as an emergency medical technician of
an ambulance licensed hereunder without first procuring a certificate
of competency from the Director of Health and Human Services of
the City of Meriden. Any person desiring a certificate of competency
as an ambulance driver or emergency medical technician shall make
application in writing therefor to said Director of Health and Human
Services. Before the issuance of any such certificate, the applicant
therefor shall present evidence of his qualifications to the satisfaction of
the Director of Health and Human Services and submit to such physical
examination as the Director of Health and Human Services may
prescribe.
B. Certificates of competency shall be renewed annually by persons holding
said certificates. Renewal certificates shall be issued by the Director
§ 62-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 62-7
1:157
of Health and Human Services as provided herein for the issuance of
original certificates. Upon failure of any person to renew said certificates
as herein provided, such certificates shall be revoked by the Director of
Health and Human Services.
§ 62-8. Regulation of operation.
Every person operating or driving any such ambulance in the City of
Meriden shall at all times in the operation of such ambulance comply
with all state statutes and regulations governing the operation of motor
vehicles and with traffic ordinances and regulations established by the
Traffic Authority of the City of Meriden; provided, however, that in cases
of extreme emergency the driver may be exempt from such statutes,
ordinances and regulations to the extent permitted by § 14-283 of the
Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
§ 62-9. Use of bells and sirens.
No bell or siren on such ambulance shall be rung, sounded or blown except
in case of extreme emergency when responding to a call or transporting a
patient to a hospital, clinic or doctor's office.
§ 62-10. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be fined not exceeding $200 or be imprisoned for not
exceeding 30 days, or both. Each day such violation is committed or
permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be
punishable as such hereunder.
Chapter 65
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 141.
Health nuisances — See Ch. 144.
Parks and recreation — See Ch. 150.
STATUTORY REFERENCES
Dogs running at large — See C.G.S. § 22-364.
§ 65-1. Purpose and intent.
The purposes of this chapter are to promote the public health, safety
and general welfare of the citizens of the City of Meriden by addressing
the public nuisance caused by roaming and/or dangerous dogs and to
§ 62-7 MERIDEN CODE § 65-1
1:158
ensure that all animals receive adequate care. This chapter is intended
to supplement and not replace the provisions contained in Connecticut
General Statutes § 22-327 et seq., regarding domestic animals. The Animal
Control Officer or designee shall have the discretion as to whether to
proceed pursuant to state law or under the provisions of this chapter.
§ 65-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter:
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER — The officer or designee hired to administer
and enforce the licensing, inspection and enforcement requirements
contained in this chapter and the Connecticut General Statutes.
ANIMAL NUISANCE — Any nuisance arising out of the keeping,
maintaining or owning of, or the failure to exercise sufficient control of, a
dog or other animal.
AT-LARGE — Off the premises of the owner or custodian, and not on a leash
or otherwise under the immediate control of the owner or custodian capable
of restraining the animal.
DOG — Any member of the canine species, male or female.
KEEP — Possessing, controlling, exercising or allowing a dog or domestic
animal to run at-large.
NUISANCE or PUBLIC NUISANCE — Any dog that endangers the life or
health of persons or other animals, or substantially interferes with the right
to enjoyment of life or property. The term "nuisance" or "public nuisance"
shall include, but not be limited to, any dog that:
A. Is repeatedly found at-large;
B. Is found on public property where dogs are specifically prohibited;
C. Damages, soils or defiles any property other than that of its owner;
Makes disturbing noises, including, but not limited to, continued and
repeated howling, barking or whining which causes annoyance or
disturbance to neighbors or others in close proximity to the premises
which the dog is kept or harbored;
D.
Is in heat and is not confined so as to prevent the attraction or contact
with other animals;
E.
Whether or not on the property of its owner, without provocation,
molests, attacks or otherwise unreasonably interferes with the freedom
of movement of persons and/or animals in a public right of way or on
property other than that of the dog's owner;
F.
G. Chases motor vehicles;
§ 65-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 65-2
1:159
OWNER — Any person possessing, keeping, harboring or having custody of
a dog.
§ 65-3. Nuisances prohibited.
A. No person shall keep any animal in any place or in any manner when the
keeping of such animal constitutes a public nuisance or menace to public
health or safety.
B. In addition to other penalties as set out in this chapter and/or the
Connecticut General Statutes, a violation of this section may be subject
to a citation in the amount of $75.
§ 65-4. Adequate facilities and care required.
A. No person shall keep dogs, cats or other animals in any manner which
fails to maintain adequate facilities and humane care.
B. In addition to other penalties as set out in this chapter and/or the
Connecticut General Statutes, a violation of this section may be subject
to a citation in the amount of $50.
§ 65-5. Control of dogs in public places.
A. Leashing of dogs in public places. Except in a dog run established by the
town or any private entity, no owner or keeper shall bring any dog onto
any public street, sidewalk or any other public property unless the dog is
on a leash or lead that is no more than 10 feet long and under the control
of its owner or keeper at all times.
B. Conduct of dogs in public places. The owner or keeper of the dog shall
exercise proper care and control of the dog and prevent the same from
becoming a public nuisance. No owner or keeper shall allow any dog
under their supervision to dig, dig up, mutilate, deface or destroy any
public property.
C. Exceptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to:
(1) Dogs used by a governmental agency.
(2) A service animal as defined by 28 CFR 36.104.
D. In addition to other penalties as set out in this chapter and/or the
Connecticut General Statutes, a violation of this section may be subject
to a citation in the amount of $50.
§ 65-6. Removal of animal waste and litter required.
A. Any person owning, keeping, walking or in control of any dog or other
animal shall promptly remove all solid waste and litter left by the dog
or other animal on a public street, sidewalk, public property or private
property owned by another person before leaving the immediate
premises and dispose of the solid waste and/or litter in a sanitary
manner.
B. In addition to other penalties as set out in this chapter and/or the
Connecticut General Statutes, a violation of this section may be subject
to a citation in the amount of $50.
Is dangerous to the public health, safety or welfare by virtue of the
number of animals maintained at a property and/or the inadequacy of
the facilities and care of the animal(s).
H.
§ 65-2 MERIDEN CODE § 65-7
1:160
§ 65-7. Parvovirus vaccination required for all dogs.
A. Effective July 1, 2016, all dogs who are to be licensed within the City
of Meriden, pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes § 22-338, shall
be vaccinated against the parvovirus in addition to the state-mandated
rabies vaccination pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes § 22-339b.
The owner or keeper of such dog shall submit to the City Clerk a
vaccination record by a licensed veterinarian, or a copy thereof, stating
that such dog has been vaccinated against parvovirus and rabies, the
date of the vaccination, and the duration of the immunity provided by the
vaccine.
B. In addition to other penalties as set out in this chapter and/or the
Connecticut General Statutes, a violation of this section may be subject
to a citation in the amount of $75.
§ 65-8. Breeders permit required.
A. Effective July 1, 2016, anyone who wants to breed their dog(s) within the
City of Meriden shall obtain a breeding permit from the Animal Control
Office prior to breeding their dogs. No person, as principal, agent,
employee or otherwise, shall breed any dog or other domestic animal
at any place within the City without a breeding permit. Breeding shall
be deemed to have occurred upon the production of offspring, whether
the offspring result from sexual activity or artificial insemination, and
whether such breeding was intentional or unintentional.
B. Each completed application for a breeding permit shall be submitted to
the Animal Control Office, and shall be accompanied by a fee of $25.
No breeding permit shall be issued until the application fee is paid. The
breeding permit application shall contain a warning that a citation and
fine may issue for failure to comply with the provisions of the breeding
permit.
C. Each breeding permit is issued to the person, not the dog. A breeding
permit cannot be sold, purchased, traded or otherwise conveyed from
the person to whom the breeding permit was initially granted.
D. The following conditions must be met for a breeding permit to be issued:
(1) The applicant must submit the completed breeding permit
application and the fee to the Animal Control Office.
(2) The applicant has an adequate indoor space and outdoor space in
which to breed the dog(s) and raise the offspring that will contain
the dogs, as well as provide them with safe, sanitary, and humane
conditions appropriate for breeding the specific dog(s), and meets
all applicable provisions of the Meriden City Code and state animal
welfare laws, and is inspected by the Animal Control Officer.
(3) The Animal Control Officer has evaluated the physical and behavioral
characteristics regarding the suitability of the particular dogs to be
bred.
E. The Animal Control office may deny an application for a breeding permit
if it finds that one or more of the following has occurred:
(1) The applicant has failed to meet the criteria set forth above;
(2) The applicant has failed to appropriately license the dog to be bred;
§ 65-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 65-8
1:161
(3) The applicant has a history of allowing dogs to run loose or escape or
has otherwise been found to be neglectful; has had a dog identified
by the Animal Control Office to be a nuisance; or has had a dog or
other domestic animal removed from their care; or has previously
been determined to be in violation of this chapter; or
(4) The applicant has applied for a breeding permit within the previous
10 months.
F. In addition to other penalties as set out in this chapter and/or the
Connecticut General Statutes, a violation of this section may result in
the denial of future breeding permits and/or a citation in the amount of
$250.
§ 65-9. Inspection of premises to be used for breeding purposes.
A. The Animal Control Officer may inspect the premises to be used for
breeding purposes and to conduct the evaluation as set forth above. The
Animal Control Officer shall give the applicant 24 hours' notice of the
inspection and shall conduct the inspection at a reasonable time when
the applicant or their representative is present.
B. Up to one year after issuing the breeding permit, the Animal Control
Officer shall have the option to inspect the premises being used for
breeding purposes to ensure that the conditions required to receive
a permit are continuing to be met. The Animal Control Officer shall
give the applicant 24 hours' notice of the inspection and shall conduct
the inspection at a reasonable time when the applicant or their
representative is present.
C. The breeding permit application shall be denied or the breeding permit
may be revoked if:
(1) The applicant refuses to allow the Animal Control Officer to conduct
such inspection or reinspection.
(2) The applicant cannot be contacted by the Animal Control Officer to
give notice of the inspection within two weeks of the initial attempt.
D. In addition to other penalties as set out in this chapter and/or the
Connecticut General Statutes, a violation of this section may result in
the denial of future breeding permits and/or a citation in the amount of
$250.
§ 65-10. Litter permits.
A. Breeding permit holders shall apply for and obtain a litter permit for
every litter produced by the breeding permit dog(s). Breeding permit
holders must apply to the Animal Control Office for a litter permit before
the dog is bred. A litter permit application shall be accompanied by a
litter permit fee in the amount of $25. A litter permit should be applied
for and granted for every litter to be produced by any dog or domestic
animal owned, held or maintained by the permit holder. The litter permit
application shall contain a warning that a citation and fine may issue for
failure to comply with the provisions of the breeding permit.
B. In the event that a permit holder or someone having an active breeding
permit fails to apply for a permit before the female dog enters its
gestation period, the Animal Control Officer may issue the litter permit
§ 65-8 MERIDEN CODE § 65-10
1:162
without penalty if the Animal Control Officer determines that the failure
to acquire the permit was not in bad faith.
C. No more than two litter permits will be issued to breeding permit holders
within one year's time, unless the breeding permit holder also holds a
kennel license under Connecticut General Statutes § 22-342.
D. In addition to other penalties as set out in this chapter and/or the
Connecticut General Statutes, a violation of this section may result in the
denial of future litter permits and/or a citation in the amount of $250 per
litter.
§ 65-11. Impoundment.
In addition to other remedies provided in this chapter and in the
Connecticut General Statutes, an Animal Control Officer may seize and
impound any of the following:
A. Any dog without a valid license tag;
B. Any roaming or at-large dog;
C. Any dog constituting a public nuisance or considered a danger to the
public;
D. Any dog that is in violation of a quarantine or confinement order issued
by the Animal Control Officer;
E. Any unattended animal that is ill, injured or in need of care;
F. Any animal that is believed to be abused or neglected;
G. Any animal that is suspected of having rabies;
H. Any animal which the Animal Control Officer or police have established
is a threat to public health and safety;
I. Any dog that the Animal Control Officer, a state agency or a court of
competent jurisdiction has ordered impounded or destroyed;
J. Any dog that is believed to be unattended or abandoned, such as in
situations where the owner has vacated the property or is deceased.
§ 65-12. (Reserved)
§ 65-13. Interference with Animal Control Officer.
A. It is a violation of this chapter to interfere with the Animal Control
Officer or designee while in the performance of their duties.
B. In addition to other penalties as set out in this chapter and/or the
Connecticut General Statutes, a violation of this section may result in the
denial of future breeding permits, litter permits, and/or a citation in the
amount of $250.
§ 65-14. Penalties; appeals; enforcement.
A. As part of any order, and in addition to any enforcement authority as
set out in the Connecticut General Statutes or this chapter, the Animal
Control Officer shall have the authority to order measures to eliminate
or prevent a violation and/or to protect the health and safety of animals
and the public, including:
(1) Obedience training for the dog(s);
(2) Muzzling of the dog while off the owner's property;
§ 65-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 65-14
1:163
(3) Confinement of an animal indoors;
(4) Confinement of a dog in a secure enclosure;
(5) Reduction of the number of animals kept at any one location;
(6) In cases of neglect or cruelty, removal of an animal from the custody
of its owner or keeper;
(7) The spaying or neutering of an animal;
(8) A ban on owning or keeping other animals within the City of
Meriden;
B. Any person aggrieved by an order or citation of the Animal Control
Officer issued pursuant to this chapter may appeal pursuant to the
citation process as set forth in Chapter 86 of the Meriden City Code.
C. In addition to the other remedies as set out in this chapter and in
the Connecticut General Statutes, the provisions of this chapter may
be enforced by citation. The following persons have the authority to
issue citations pursuant to this chapter: Animal Control Officer, Assistant
Animal Control Officers, Meriden Police Officer.
Chapter 70
BARBERSHOPS, HAIRDRESSING AND COSMETOLOGY
SHOPS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Massage establishments — See Ch. 133. Health nuisances — See Ch. 144.
§ 70-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BARBERING — Includes the following described practices when performed
by a barber licensed in the State of Connecticut upon the head, face, scalp,
or neck for cosmetic purposes only:
BARBERSHOP — Any establishment engaged in the practice of barbering
for the public.
DIRECTOR OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES — The Director of Health
and Human Services for the City of Meriden or his/her duly authorized
representative.
A. The cutting, trimming, or shaving of the hair.
B. Singeing, shampooing, dyeing, coloring, or styling of the hair.
The application of cosmetic preparations, hair tonics, antiseptics,
powders, oils, clays, creams, or lotions.
C.
Giving facial and scalp massage or the application of oils, creams,
lotions, or other preparations, either by hand or mechanical appliances.
D.
§ 65-14 MERIDEN CODE § 70-1
1:164
HAIRDRESSING and COSMETOLOGY — Include the following described
practices performed by a licensed hairdresser/cosmetician in the State of
Connecticut upon the head, face, scalp, arms, hands, body, legs, and feet for
cosmetic purposes only:
HAIRDRESSING OR COSMETOLOGY SHOP — Any establishment engaged
in the practice of hairdressing, cosmetology, or barbering for the public.
MOBILE WORK STATION — A modular space which can be used for
multiple purposes through the use of mobile equipment.
NAIL TECHNICIAN — A person who, for compensation, cuts, shapes,
polishes, or enhances the appearance of the nails of the hands, including
but not limited to the application and removal of sculptured or artificial
nails.
OPERATOR — A person, including but not limited to a license hairdresser/
cosmetician or barber or unlicensed person, who is performing tasks
allowed under the scope of this chapter and the Public Health Code of the
State of Connecticut.
OTHER SERVICES — The following described practices can be performed
by an unlicensed individual under the supervision of a licensed hairdresser/
cosmetician in the State of Connecticut:
SHAMPOO STATION — Consists of a shampoo bowl (sink) and a shampoo
chair.
WORK AREA — A separate room with more than one work station or private
room set aside to serve one customer at a time.
Dressing, arranging, curling, waving, weaving, cutting, singeing,
relaxing/straightening, bleaching, and coloring hair.
A.
Treating the scalp, face, neck, and arms by massaging, cleansing,
exercising, stimulating, or manipulating, with the hands, mechanical
appliances, or water.
B.
Application of cosmetics, preparations, antiseptics, tonics, lotions,
creams, powders, oils, clays, sprays, or any product pertaining to the
skin.
C.
Manicuring fingernails of the hand and, for cosmetic purposes only,
trimming, filing, and painting the healthy toenails of the feet, excluding
cutting nail beds, corns, calluses, or other medical treatment involving
the foot or ankle.
D.
A. Manicuring nails of the hands.
B. Performing facials.
C. Shampooing of the hair.
D. Eyebrow arching.
E. Braiding hair.
§ 70-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-1
1:165
WORK STATION — A chair, countertop, and floor space set aside for the
purpose of serving a customer, including floor space for the operator to
stand while serving the customer.
§ 70-2. Plans and specifications; inspection prior to opening.
A. It is prohibited for any barbershop, hairdressing and/or cosmetology
shop having a permanent location to be relocated, constructed,
remodeled, or extensively altered, or for a structure to be converted
to use as a barbershop, hairdressing and/or cosmetology shop, except
in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the Meriden
Health Department.
B. Required forms; approval by Director.
(1) Prior to the relocation, construction, remodeling, alteration or
conversion of any establishment subject to the provisions of this
chapter, plans and specifications shall be submitted with forms
furnished by the Director of Health and Human Services, which must
include:
(a) Properly prepared plans drawn to a scale of not less than 1/4 inch
to one foot and specifications for such construction, remodeling,
or alteration shall be submitted to the Director of Health and
Human Services or his/her authorized agent for review and
approval; and
(b) The proposed layout, arrangement, and construction materials
of the work area and the type and model of proposed fixed
equipment and facilities.
(2) The Director of Health and Human Services shall approve the plans
and specifications if they meet the requirements of this chapter and
the Public Health Code of the State of Connecticut.
C. Prior to the barbershop's, hairdressing and/or cosmetology shop's
opening or re-opening after a relocation, construction, remodeling,
alteration or conversion, the Director of Health and Human Services or
his/her authorized agent shall conduct a pre-operational inspection to
determine compliance with the approved plans and specifications and
with the requirements of this chapter and the Public Health Code of the
State of Connecticut.
§ 70-3. License required.
A. It is prohibited for any person, firm, or corporation to maintain or
operate any barbershop, hairdressing and/or cosmetology shop without
having a valid license issued by the Director of Health and Human
Services. Only a person who complies with the requirements of this
chapter shall be entitled to receive or retain such a license.
B. Application for a license shall be made on forms furnished by the
Director of Health and Human Services, wherein the applicant shall
state his/her name, address, and the address of the place of business,
give such other pertinent information as the Director of Health and
Human Services may require, and affix her/her signature to the
application. The chief corporate officers shall be designated as agents
for service when the license is issued to a corporation.
§ 70-1 MERIDEN CODE § 70-3
1:166
C. The license fee shall be $100, and the license fee shall not be prorated.
All licenses are valid for one year, or a portion thereof, and are
renewable each year on or before June 30 of each year. A license renewal
application received after July 1 will result in a late fee of $25, in
addition to the license fee.
D. No license shall be issued or renewed until a completed application
has been submitted, the license fee has been paid and the applicant's
barbershop, hairdressing and/or cosmetology shop meets the
requirements set forth in the chapter and all other applicable state and
local regulations.
E. Licenses shall be valid until the expiration date indicated on the license
unless suspended or revoked by the Director of Health and Human
Services or until such time as the facility changes owners, closes, or
goes out of business.
F. Licenses shall not be transferable from person to person or from location
to location.
G. The Director of Health and Human Services or his/her agent, after
proper identification, shall be permitted to enter, during normal
operating hours, any portion of any barbershop, hairdressing and/or
cosmetology shop for the purpose of making inspections to determine
compliance with this chapter and the Public Health Code of the State of
Connecticut.
H. A temporary license to operate a barbershop, hairdressing and/or
cosmetology shop may be granted for a period not to exceed 14 calendar
days. A temporary license shall be required for conducting a public
demonstration, a fund-raising event or public convention.
§ 70-4. Annual inspections.
A. At least once a year, the Director of Health and Human Services, or
authorized agent, shall inspect each barbershop or hairdressing and/
or cosmetology shop and shall make as many additional inspections as
are necessary for the enforcement of this chapter and the Public Health
Code of the State of Connecticut.
B. A fee of $25 will be charged to the license holder for each additional
inspection required as a result of noncompliance or failure to pass a
prior inspection.
§ 70-5. License suspension.
A. Failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter and applicable state
regulations shall be grounds for suspension of a license issued under the
provision of this chapter.
B. In the event that the Director of Health and Human Services or his/
her agent finds unsanitary conditions in the operation of a barbershop,
hairdressing and/or cosmetology shop, or if a violation or set of
violations appears on more than one consecutive inspection report, the
Director of Health and Human Services may immediately issue a written
notice to the license holder, or person in charge, citing such conditions
and specifying the corrective action to be taken and time frame within
which action shall be taken. If correction is not made in the allotted
§ 70-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-5
1:167
time, the license may be suspended or revoked at the discretion of the
Director of Health and Human Services.
C. The Director of Health and Human Services may suspend, without
warning, prior notice or hearing, any license to operate a barbershop,
hairdressing and/or cosmetology shop if:
(1) The operation constitutes an imminent hazard to public health; or
(2) The owner, operator, or person in charge has interfered with the
performance of the Director of Health or Human Services' or his/her
agent's duties.
D. An imminent health hazard shall include, but is not limited to, any one
of the following occurs:
(1) An ongoing breakout of an infectious, pathogenic, or toxic agent
capable of being transmitted to consumers;
(2) The absence of potable water, supplied under pressure, in a quantity
which, in the opinion of the Director of Health and Human Services,
is capable of meeting the needs of the facility;
(3) A sewage backup into the facility; or
(4) An unlicensed individual is performing procedures requiring
licensure by the Public Health Code of the State of Connecticut.
E. Suspension shall be effective immediately upon delivery of the written
order to the license holder or person in charge of the facility by the
Director of Health and Human Services or designee. When a license is
suspended, all barbershop, hairdressing and/or cosmetology operations
shall cease immediately at the facility and shall not resume until written
approval to resume has been issued by the Director of Health and
Human Services. The Director Health and Human Services or designee
shall remove a suspended license from the premises.
F. When a license is suspended, the holder of a license, or the person
in charge, shall be notified in, writing, of the suspension, and an
opportunity for a hearing will be provided if a written request for
hearing is filed with the Director of Health and Human Services by the
holder of the license within 48 hours. The Director of Health and Human
Services may end the suspension at any time by giving written notice to
the license holder if reasons for suspension no longer exist.
G. Upon receiving a request for a hearing, the Director of Health and
Human Services shall schedule a hearing to examine the merits of such
suspension and after the hearing, issue a decision to vacate, modify, or
affirm such suspension.
H. The license holder who is aggrieved by a decision of the Director of
Health and Human Services may appeal to the State Department of
Public Health in accordance with the applicable state statutes.
§ 70-6. License revocation or nonrenewal.
A. In addition to license suspension, the failure to comply with the
provisions of this chapter and applicable state regulations shall be
grounds for revocation or nonrenewal of any license issued under the
provision of this chapter.
B. The Director of Health and Human Services may revoke or refuse to
renew the license of any person for a serious violation and/or repeated
§ 70-5 MERIDEN CODE § 70-6
1:168
violations of any of the provisions of this chapter or for interference
with the Director of Health and Human Services in the performance
of official duties, or for cases where the license has been obtained
through nondisclosure, misrepresentation, or intentional misstatement
of a material fact.
C. Prior to revocation or nonrenewal, the Director of Health and Human
Services shall notify the license holder, or the person in charge at the
facility, of the specific reason(s) for such revocation or nonrenewal and
that the license shall be revoked or not renewed at the end of 10
calendar days following service of such notice, unless a written request
for hearing is filed with the Director of Health and Human Services by
the holder of the license within 48 hours of such notice. If no request
for a hearing is filed within 48 hours of such notice, the revocation or
nonrenewal becomes final. The Director of Health and Human Services
shall remove a revoked license from the premises.
D. The license holder who is aggrieved by a decision of the Director of
Health and Human Services may appeal to the State Department of
Public Health in accordance with the applicable state statutes.
§ 70-7. License reinstatement.
A. Suspension. Whenever a license has been suspended, the holder of the
suspended license may make a written request for reinstatement of the
license, which shall include a signed statement that the conditions which
caused the suspension have been corrected to the Director of Health
and Human Services. Within 10 business days following receipt of a
written request, the Director of Health and Human Services shall make
a reinspection. If the Director of Health and Human Services determines
that the applicant has complied with the requirements of this chapter
and the State Public Health Code, the license shall be reinstated and
returned to the license holder.
B. Revocation/nonrenewal. After a period of 60 days from the date of
revocation or non renewal, a written application may be made for the
issuance of a new license. This application will be treated as a new
application. All appropriate procedures and inspections will be required,
including a plan review.
§ 70-8. Equipment and facilities.
Every barbershop, hairdressing and/or cosmetology shop shall comply with
the following minimum requirements:
A. Water supply. An adequate supply of hot and cold running water, at
proper temperatures, from a municipal or approved private source shall
be provided for service for customers, cleanliness of employees, and for
washing floors, walls, ceiling, and equipment. Hot water at any faucet
shall not exceed 110° F.
B. Wastewater disposal. Wastewater from all plumbing fixtures shall be
discharged into municipal sewers or into an approved and properly
functioning subsurface septic system.
C. Plumbing fixtures.
§ 70-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-8
1:169
(1) Plumbing fixtures shall be of impervious material and of a type which
is easily cleanable. They shall be free from cracks and from parts
which are not readily accessible for cleaning. They shall be of a type
which does not constitute a hazard to a public water supply through
backsiphonage or cross-connection.
(2) All plumbing installation and fixtures shall conform to applicable
building and plumbing codes.
(3) Shampoo bowls shall be used for barbering, hairdressing and
cosmetology work only and there shall be a minimum of one
shampoo bowl for every three barbers/hairdressers.
(4) A utility sink shall be provided for proper cleaning of surfaces and
equipment.
(5) At least one handwash facility shall be located in each private
treatment room and in each work area in order to provide for proper
handwashing before each customer.
(6) A mop sink shall be provided for cleaning the facility. Those premises
in operation prior to the passage of this chapter are exempt from
this requirement.
D. Floors. Floors shall be nonporous and of such construction as to be
easily cleaned. Floors where tinting or shampooing is done, or where
chemicals for bleaching hair are used, shall have hard and washable
surfaces. Floors shall be kept clean and in good repair. Carpeting or
similar floor covering is acceptable for patron wait areas only.
E. Lighting. Lighting fixtures shall be of a sufficient number and properly
placed so as to provide adequate illumination.
F. Ventilation. The shop will be properly and adequately ventilated so as to
remove excess heat and odors. Salon ventilation shall comply with state
and local building codes and ordinances.
G. Cabinets. Cabinets shall be provided for storage of clean linen, towels,
blankets, and gowns. They shall have tight-fitting doors that shall be
kept closed to protect the linen, towels, blankets, and gowns from dust
and dirt.
H. Receptacle for used towels and gowns. A covered receptacle, which can
be readily emptied and cleansed, shall be provided and maintained in a
sanitary manner. Chemically soiled towels and linens shall be stored in
fire-retardant containers.
I. Refuse. Covered containers for hair droppings, paper, and other waste
material shall be provided and maintained in a sanitary manner.
J. Toilet facilities.
(1) Adequate toilet facilities and handwash sinks shall be provided for
customers and employees. Such facilities and washbasins shall be
kept clean and in working order.
(2) Adequate and conveniently located handwashing facilities shall be
provided with hot and cold running water through a mixing valve
or a combination faucet, a sanitary soap dispenser, and single-use
towels for customers and employees.
(3) The use of common soap for more than one person is prohibited.
(4) A covered refuse receptacle shall be provided in the ladies' room.
K. Work stations.
§ 70-8 MERIDEN CODE § 70-8
1:170
(1) Chairs in work stations shall be at least 54 inches apart, center
to center. Those premises in operation prior to the passage of this
chapter are exempt from this requirement.
(2) A two-foot-wide work space shall be maintained behind each chair
for the operator. Those premises in operation prior to the passage of
this chapter are exempt from this requirement.
(3) Three-foot-wide aisles that are separate and discreet from work
areas shall be maintained through the shop.
(4) It is prohibited to place hair dryers in any waiting room or encroach
on the required three-foot-wide aisle space.
L. Barbershop, hairdressing and/or cosmetology shop in residence.
(1) A barbershop, hairdressing and/or cosmetology shop located in a
residence shall be confined to a separate room, separated with high
ceiling-high partitions and provided with a door to be closed at all
times.
(2) The area within a home operated as a barbershop, hairdressing
and/or cosmetology shop shall be equipped with the facilities and
instruments required in all such establishments.
§ 70-9. Maintenance and operation.
Every barbershop, hairdressing and/or cosmetology shop shall comply with
the following minimum requirements:
A. General cleanliness.
(1) The license holder of every barbershop, hairdressing and/or
cosmetology shop shall keep it in a clean and sanitary condition at
all times.
(2) It is prohibited to allow for hair droppings to accumulate on floors.
Hair droppings shall be removed frequently and as soon as possible,
in such a manner as not to cause objectionable conditions.
B. Walls, ceilings, and fixtures.
(1) Ceilings shall be kept in good repair, and cracks in walls, especially
around baseboards, shall be filled in so as to prevent the harboring
and breeding of insects. All windows shall be screened to prevent
the entry of flying insects.
(2) Cabinets, shelves, furniture, shampoo bowls, and fixtures shall be
kept clean and free of dust, dirt, and hair droppings. Arms, seats,
and rests of chairs shall be wiped of hair droppings after serving
each customer.
C. Sanitary services.
(1) It is prohibited for any person affected with an infectious disease to
be attended.
(2) It is prohibited for a towel to be used for more than one person
without being properly laundered before each use.
(3) A sanitary paper strip or clean towel shall be placed completely
around the neck of each customer before an apron or any other
protective device is fastened around the neck.
(4) A properly laundered towel or paper shall cover the headrest of the
chair for each customer before the customer is permitted to recline
in such chair.
§ 70-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-9
1:171
(5) Foot baths and spas shall be emptied and cleaned and sanitized
after each use and between serving customers, including the
removal of filter screens for cleaning.
(6) Scraping of calluses from the feet with razor-sharp credo or similar
blades is prohibited.
(7) Steel nail files are prohibited. Single-use emery boards shall be
used and disposed of after each customer.
(8) The cutting of cuticles using cuticle scissors or a similar tool is
prohibited.
(9) All manicure workstations shall be thoroughly cleaned after each
customer.
(10) Clean towels shall be delivered in closed containers and kept in a
clean, closed cabinet or closet. A commercial linen service shall be
used for laundering if not done on the premises.
(11) A sanitizing agent shall be used when washing towels and linens on
the premises.
D. Sanitation of equipment and implements.
(1) Hair brushes, combs, and all other implements used on a customer
shall be kept clean and sanitary at all times and shall undergo
thorough cleansing and sanitizing after serving each customer or
single-service disposable implements shall be used.
(2) Cleaned and sanitized implements shall be stored in sanitary,
covered containers which shall contain a disinfectant or in a clean
drawer.
(3) After handling a customer affected with an eruption or whose skin
is broken out or is inflamed or contains pus, the instruments shall
be effectively cleaned, washed with soap or detergent and water,
then rinsed with water having a temperature of at least 170° F., or
allowed to remain for five minutes in alcohol (70% to 80%) or some
other approved disinfectant or sanitizing process.
(4) Shaker-top containers shall be provided for dispensing lotions and
powders.
(5) Single-service towels, papers, and other material shall be disposed
of in the proper receptacle immediately after use and shall not be
used again.
(6) All disposable materials that come into contact with blood and/or
body fluid shall be disposed of in sealable plastic bags prior to
placing in the waste receptacle.
(7) All articles that come into direct contact with the customer's skin,
nails, or hair that cannot be effectively cleaned and sanitized shall
be disposed of in a covered waste receptacle immediately after use.
E. Shaving brushes, mugs, finger bowls, and credo blades. The use of
shaving brushes, shaving mugs, and credo blades is prohibited. The
use of finger bowls for manicure and/or pedicure purposes is allowed,
but the finger bowl shall be properly cleaned and sanitized after each
customer. Disposable, single-use finger bowls may be used.
F. Alum and other astringents. Alum or other material used to stop the flow
of blood shall be applied in powered or liquid form only.
§ 70-9 MERIDEN CODE § 70-9
1:172
G. Neck dusters, powder puffs, makeup brushes, and sponges. The use
of brush neck dusters, powder puffs, makeup brushes, and sponges is
prohibited unless they are single-use disposable implements.
H. Animals. It is prohibited for any animals, pets, or live birds to be kept in
any barbershop, hairdressing and/or cosmetology shop. This prohibition
does not apply to service animals.
§ 70-10. Hygiene of operators.
A. Cleanliness of operators. The hands of the operators shall be thoroughly
washed with soap and warm water before serving each customer and
immediately after using the toilet or eating.
B. Health of operators. It is prohibited for any person known to be affected
with any communicable disease in an infectious stage to engage in
barbering, hairdressing, or cosmetology, and for any person so affected
to be employed as a barber, hairdresser, or cosmetician.
C. Eating/drinking while providing service. It is prohibited for operators to
eat or drink while providing services to a customer.
§ 70-11. Smoking prohibited.
It is prohibited to smoke while providing services to a customer.
§ 70-12. Proper attire.
While attending any customer in a barbershop or hairdressing and/or
cosmetology shop, operators shall wear clean, washable garments having at
least one-quarter length sleeves.
§ 70-13. Display of license.
Except students under the supervision of a licensed individual, all persons
engaged in the activities of a barber, hairdresser, cosmetician, or nail
technician shall be properly licensed by the Connecticut Department of
Public Health (except students under the supervision of a licensed
individual), and the license shall be displayed in a conspicuous place
adjacent to or near each workstation so that the public may see it.
§ 70-14. Penalties for offenses; citation; authority to issue citation.
A. In addition to other remedies as provided in this chapter, the provisions
of this chapter may be enforced by citation of not more than $250, as
established by the Department of Health and Human Services. Each
day's violation shall be a separate offense and is subject to additional
citation.
B. Any person, firm, or corporation operating a barbershop, hairdressing
and/or cosmetology shop without a license under the provisions of this
chapter shall be subject to a citation of $250 for each such violation.
Each day's violation shall be a separate offense and is subject to an
additional citation of $250.
§ 70-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-14
1:173
C. The following people have authority to issue citations for violations
pursuant to this chapter: Director of Health and Human Services,
Environmental Health Administrator, Sanitarian.
D. A violation of this chapter may also subject any person, firm or
corporation to the provisions of § 19a-206 of the Connecticut General
Statutes.
Chapter 73
BICYCLES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 180. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 200.
STATUTORY REFERENCES
Use of bicycles generally — See C.G.S.
§ 14-286 et seq.
Authority to legislate — See C.G.S. § 14-289.
§ 73-1. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to every bicycle having at least one wheelbase
exceeding 20 inches in diameter which is owned or operated in the City,
except bicycles owned or operated in the City by transients.
§ 73-2. Registration required.
All bicycles shall be registered in the Police Department, and no person
shall own or operate a bicycle within the City unless such vehicle is
registered and a registration plate or seal attached thereto, as provided in
this chapter.
§ 73-3. Registration procedure.
Application forms and forms for certificates of registration shall be
furnished by the Police Department, and such Department shall register all
bicycles for which application is made under the provisions of this chapter.
§ 73-4. Information to be submitted with application.
The application for registration of a bicycle shall contain the name, address
and age of the owner, the make of bicycle and the manufacturer's serial
number, if any.
§ 73-5. Issuance of certificate of registration.
The Police Department shall issue to the owner of a bicycle who makes
application therefor a certificate of registration, which shall remain in effect
§ 70-14 MERIDEN CODE § 73-5
1:174
until surrendered or suspended as hereinafter provided. The certificate of
registration shall contain the name and address of the owner, a description
of the bicycle and the registration number assigned.
§ 73-6. Fee.
A fee of $0.50 shall be collected by the Police Department for each
registration certificate issued under this chapter.
§ 73-7. Registration plate to be attached.
A registration plate furnished by the Police Department shall be attached
to each registered bicycle, which plate shall bear upon it the registration
number assigned such bicycle and the name of the City.
§ 73-8. Surrender of plate upon sale or transfer of bicycle.
Upon the sale or transfer of a registered bicycle the registrant shall remove
the registration plate and surrender such plate to the Police Department.
§ 73-9. Information required of bicycle dealers.
Every person engaged in the business of buying or selling new or
secondhand bicycles shall report all vehicles bought or sold by him to the
Police Department, giving the name and address of the person from whom
he bought the bicycle or to whom he sold the bicycle and the number of the
registration plate, if any, attached thereto.
§ 73-10. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 9-15-1980]
Any violation of the provisions of this chapter by a minor under 16 years
of age shall be punished by suspension of his registration certificate and
the impounding of his bicycle for a period not to exceed seven days, to be
determined by the Chief of Police. Violations by any other persons shall be
punishable as provided in § 1-4.
Chapter 75
BOATING
§ 75-1. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement
of this chapter:
REMOTE-CONTROLLED CRAFT — Any watercraft controlled from a remote
location.
STEERAGE SPEED — The minimum speed necessary to allow a vessel to
be steered while making forward progress, which speed shall not create a
wake.
§ 73-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 75-1
1:175
VESSEL — Shall be construed to have the definition as provided in
Connecticut General Statutes § 15-127, as amended.
§ 75-2. Hanover Pond.
A. It shall be unlawful to operate any remote-controlled craft on Hanover
Pond at any time of day.
B. It shall be unlawful to operate or allow the operation of a vessel on
Hanover Pond at a speed greater than steerage speed.
§ 75-3. Enforcement.
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter may be fined $50 to $90
for each violation. Each instance of operation of a vessel at excessive speed
or operation of a remote-controlled craft after the initial notice of violation
and/or fine shall be a separate offense.
Chapter 77
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building Code Board of Appeals — See Ch. 6,
Art. XIV.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 107.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 110.
Housing standards — See Ch. 125.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 146.
Sewers — See Ch. 170.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 180.
Water — See Ch. 207.
Zoning — See Ch. 213.
STATUTORY REFERENCES
Applicability of State Building Code — See
C.G.S. § 29-253.
§ 77-1. Control and regulation of buildings and sidewalks.
[Amended 9-15-1980]
The control and regulation of any building in the City shall be under the
jurisdiction of the Division of Buildings, headed by the Building Inspector,
within the Department of Development and Enforcement. In addition, the
control and regulation of any sidewalk and other immediate and adjacent
area of any such building shall be in the Building Inspector during such
period of construction or partial or total demolition.
§ 75-1 MERIDEN CODE § 77-2
1:176
§ 77-2. Enforcement authority and procedures. [Amended
9-15-1980]
The Building Inspector shall be vested with and shall follow the procedures
provided in the State of Connecticut Basic Building Code. Furthermore,
the Building Inspector shall have the authority to direct any agency or
commission of the City for cooperation and service, whenever the Building
Inspector is of the opinion that such service and cooperation are necessary
to protect the public safety and public welfare.
§ 77-3. Demolition of buildings. [Amended 9-15-1980]
The practice and the procedure provided in the State of Connecticut Basic
Building Code for the demolition of unsafe buildings shall be followed by the
Building Inspector in the partial or total demolition of any building in the
City, except wherein such code is not in conformity with this chapter.
§ 77-4. Conditions which constitute dangerous buildings.
All buildings or structures which have any or all of the following defects
shall be deemed dangerous buildings:
A. Those whose interior walls or other vertical structural members list, lean
or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line passing through the center
of gravity falls outside of the middle third of its base.
B. Those which, exclusive of the foundation, show 33% or more of damage
or deterioration of the supporting member or members or 50% of
damage or deterioration of the nonsupporting enclosing or outside walls
or covering.
C. Those which have improperly distributed loads upon the floors or roofs
or in which the same are overloaded or which have insufficient strength
to be reasonably safe for the purpose used.
D. Those which have been damaged by fire, wind or other causes so as to
have become dangerous to life, safety, morals or the general health and
welfare of the occupants or the people of the City.
E. Those which have become or are so dilapidated, decayed, unsafe, or
unsanitary or which so utterly fail to provide the amenities essential to
decent living that they are unfit for human habitation or are likely to
cause sickness or disease, so as to work injury to the health, morals,
safety or general welfare of those living therein.
F. Those having light, air and sanitation facilities which are inadequate to
protect the health, morals, safety or general welfare of human beings
who live or may live therein.
G. Those having inadequate facilities for egress in case of fire or panic
or those having insufficient stairways, elevators, fire escapes or other
means of communication.
H. Those which have parts thereof which are so attached that they may fall
and injure members of the public or property.
I. Those which because of their condition are unsafe, unsanitary or
dangerous to the health, morals or general welfare of the people of the
City.
§ 77-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 77-4
1:177
J. Those buildings existing in violation of any provisions of the Building
Code or any provisions of the State Fire Safety Code or other provisions
of this Code or other ordinances of the City.
§ 77-5. Standards for remedying dangerous conditions. [Amended
9-15-1980]
The following standards shall be followed in substance by the Building
Inspector in ordering repair, vacation or demolition:
A. If the dangerous building can reasonably be repaired so that it will no
longer exist in violation of the terms of this chapter, it shall be ordered
repaired.
B. If the dangerous building is in such condition as to make it dangerous to
the health, morals, safety or general welfare of its occupants, it shall be
ordered to be vacated.
C. In any case where a dangerous building is 50% damaged or decayed or
deteriorated from its original value or structure it shall be demolished,
and in all cases where a building cannot be repaired so that it will
no longer exist in violation of the terms of this chapter it shall be
demolished. In all cases where a dangerous building is a fire hazard
existing or erected in violation of the terms of this chapter or any
ordinance of the City or statute of the state it shall be demolished.
§ 77-6. Dangerous buildings declared public nuisance.
All dangerous buildings defined in § 77-4 are hereby declared to be public
nuisances and shall be repaired, vacated or demolished as provided by this
chapter.
§ 77-7. Duties of Building Inspector. [Amended 9-15-1980]
The Building Inspector shall:
A. Inspect or cause to be inspected, semiannually, all public buildings,
schools, halls, churches, theaters, hotels, tenements and commercial,
manufacturing or loft buildings for the purpose of determining whether
any conditions exist which render such places dangerous buildings
within the terms of § 77-4.
B. Inspect any building, wall or structure about which complaints are filed
by any person to the effect that a building, wall or structure is or may be
existing in violation of this chapter.
C. Inspect any building, wall or structure reported by the Fire or Police
Department of the City as probably existing in violation of the terms of
this chapter.
D. Notify, in writing, the owner, occupant, lessee, mortgagee, agent and all
other persons having an interest in such buildings as shown by the land
records in the office of the City Clerk of any building found by him to be
a dangerous building within the standards set forth in § 77-4 that:
(1) The owner must vacate or repair or demolish such building in
accordance with the terms of the notice and of this chapter.
§ 77-4 MERIDEN CODE § 77-7
1:178
(2) The occupant or lessee must vacate such building or may have it
repaired in accordance with the notice and remain in possession.
(3) The mortgagee, agent or other person having an interest in such
building as shown by the land records may at his own risk repair,
vacate or demolish the building or have such work or act done,
provided that any person notified under this subsection to repair,
vacate or demolish any building shall be given such reasonable time,
not exceeding 30 days, as may be necessary to do, or have done, the
work or act required by the notice provided for herein.
E. Set forth, in the notice provided for in Subsection D hereof, a description
of the building or structure deemed unsafe, a statement of the
particulars which make the building or structure a dangerous building
and an order requiring the same to be put in such condition as to comply
with the terms of this chapter within such length of time, not exceeding
30 days, as is reasonable.
F. Place a notice on all dangerous buildings reading as follows: "This
building has been found to be a dangerous building by the Building
Inspector. This notice is to remain on this building until it is repaired,
vacated or demolished in accordance with the notice which has been
given the owner, occupant, lessee, mortgagee or agent of this building
and all other persons having an interest in this building as shown by the
land records in the office of the City Clerk of the City of Meriden. It is
unlawful to remove this notice until such notice is complied with."
§ 77-8. Reactivation of gas or electric service to vacant building.
[Added 8-21-2000]
The following procedure shall be followed in substance in order to
reactivate gas and/or electric service to a building or rental unit which has
been vacant for more than one year:
A. If a building, either residential or commercial or a combination
residential/commercial, or a rental unit has been vacant for more than
a year, a licensed contractor shall obtain a permit from the Meriden
Building Department in order to reactivate the gas and/or electric
service to the building or rental unit.
B. The licensed contractor shall inspect the building's or rental unit's
equipment pertaining to the gas and/or electric service and shall conduct
a gas pressure test for the gas service.
C. The Building Inspector shall conduct an inspection of the building's or
rental unit's equipment pertaining to the gas and/or electric service.
D. If the inspections are satisfactory, the Building Inspector shall contact
the electric and/or gas company to release the service for reactivation.
§ 77-9. Action upon failure to comply. [Amended 9-15-1980]
A. If the owner, occupant, mortgagee or lessee fails to comply with the
order provided for in § 77-7 within 10 days, the Building Inspector shall
cause such building or structure to be repaired, vacated or demolished
as the facts may warrant under the standards hereinbefore provided in
§ 77-5 and shall, with the assistance of the Corporation Counsel, cause
the costs of such repair, vacation or demolition to be charged against the
§ 77-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 77-9
1:179
land on which the building existed as a municipal lien or to be recovered
in a suit at law against the owner, provided that in cases where such
procedure is desirable and delay thereby caused will not be dangerous
to the health, morals, safety or general welfare of the people of the City,
the Building Inspector shall notify the Corporation Counsel to take legal
action to force the owner to make all necessary repairs or demolish the
building.
B. The Building Inspector shall report to the prosecuting attorney the
names of all persons not complying with the order provided for in § 77-7.
§ 77-10. Emergency cases. [Amended 9-15-1980]
In cases where it reasonably appears that there is immediate danger to the
life or safety of any person unless a dangerous building, as defined herein,
is immediately repaired, vacated or demolished, the Building Inspector
shall cause the immediate repair, vacation or demolition of such dangerous
building. The costs of such emergency repair, vacation or demolition of such
dangerous building shall be collected in the same manner as provided in
§ 77-9A.
§ 77-11. Service of notices and orders.
In cases, except emergency cases, where the owner, occupant, lessee or
mortgagee is absent from the City, all notices or orders provided for herein
shall be sent by registered mail to the owner, occupant, mortgagee, lessee
and all other persons having an interest in such building to the last known
address of each, and a copy of such notice shall be posted in a conspicuous
place on the dangerous building to which it relates. Such mailing and
posting shall be deemed adequate service.
§ 77-12. Duties of Fire Department.
The employees of the Fire Department shall make a report, in writing, to
the Building Inspector of all buildings or structures which are or may be or
are suspected to be dangerous buildings within the terms of this chapter.
Such reports must be delivered to the Building Inspector within 24 hours of
the discovery of such buildings by any employee of the Fire Department.
§ 77-13. Duties of Police Department.
All employees of the Police Department shall make a report, in writing, to
the Building Inspector of any buildings or structures which are, may be or
are suspected to be dangerous buildings within the terms of this chapter.
Such reports must be delivered to the Building Inspector within 24 hours of
the discovery of such buildings by any employee of the Police Department.
§ 77-14. Cooperation with other departments. [Amended 9-15-1980]
A. Whenever in the course of any proceedings taken hereunder the Building
Inspector shall have cause to require additional evidence as to whether
or not any building or structure is susceptible to fire to an extent
§ 77-9 MERIDEN CODE § 77-14
1:180
appreciably in excess of that in the case of the average building or
structure in the same locality, or additional evidence as to whether
or not a building or structure is in such condition as to be unusually
detrimental to the health of the persons living therein in violation of the
requirements as set forth in the terms of this chapter or any ordinance
of the City or the Building Code or statute of the state, it may request
reports from other departments.
B. The department to which the request as provided in Subsection A above
is directed shall cause the building or structure to be inspected with
particular reference to the characteristics inquired about, and a report
thereof in writing shall be transmitted to the Building Inspector within
five days of the receipt of the request for such report. The report shall
be considered along with other evidence.
§ 77-15. Conflicts with other legislation.
In any case where a provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict with
a provision of any zoning, building, fire, safety or health ordinance or code
of the City existing on the effective date of this chapter, the provision which
establishes the higher standard for the promotion and protection of the
health and safety of the people shall prevail. In any case where a provision
of this chapter is found to be in conflict with a provision of any other
ordinance or code of the City existing on the effective date of this chapter
which establishes a lower standard for the promotion and protection of
the health and safety of the people, the provisions of this chapter shall be
deemed to prevail, and such other ordinances or codes are hereby declared
to be repealed to the extent that they may be found in conflict with this
chapter.
§ 77-16. Building permit applications. [Added 1-2-1996; amended
4-7-1997; 11-16-1998]
A. All applicants for building permits must obtain from the office of the
Tax Collector a certification signed by either the Tax Collector or the
Collector's designee certifying that there are no delinquent taxes, water
or sewer charges or assessments for the property for which the
application was made or that an accepted payment plan has been
entered into and an amount equal to at least three monthly payments
has been paid.
B. No application for a building permit shall be granted unless such
certification is presented.
C. Notwithstanding the above, a lessee of real property shall be given
a building permit for improvements, although the record owner owes
delinquent property taxes or water and sewer charges or assessments,
provided that the following information is supplied to the Building
Department prior to the issuance of the permit:
(1) A copy of the lease from the property owner to the lessee.
(2) Evidence that the lessee is renting the property for consideration
and has rented it for at least three months.
§ 77-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 77-16
1:181
(3) A certification from the lessee that the improvements being made
are for the benefit of the lessee and at the lessee's expense and that
the lessee has no financial or corporate interest in the lessor.
D. In no case shall the lessee be given a building permit where the lease
reveals that the lessee is responsible for the payment of the property
taxes.
§ 77-17. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 11-4-1996]
A. The owner of any dangerous building who shall fail to comply with
any notice or order to repair, vacate or demolish such building given
by any person authorized by this chapter to give such notice or order
may, in addition to other remedies, including but not limited to criminal
prosecution, be fined $90 for each offense. Each day's failure to comply
with any such notice or order shall constitute a separate violation.
B. The occupant or lessee in possession who fails to comply with any
notice to vacate and who fails to repair such building in accordance
with any notice given as provided for in this chapter may, in addition to
other remedies, be fined $50 to $90 for each offense. Each day's failure
to comply with any such notice or order shall constitute a separate
violation.
C. Any person removing the notice provided for in § 77-7F may, in addition
to other remedies, be fined $50 to $90 for each offense. Each day's
failure to comply with any such notice or order shall constitute a
separate violation.
D. The provisions of this section may be enforced by citation, in addition to
other remedies. The following persons have authority to issue citations
for violations pursuant to this section: Building Official, Electrical
Inspector, Plumbing and Heating Inspector, Director of Development
and Enforcement, Zoning Enforcement Officer, NPP/Housing Manager,
Housing Code Inspector and Rehabilitation Specialist.
Chapter 86
CITATION PROCESS
§ 86-1. Hearing procedure adopted.
The City of Meriden hereby adopts the hearing procedure set forth in
Connecticut General Statutes § 7-152c, as amended.
§ 86-2. Citation Hearing Officer.
The City Manager, as Chief Executive Officer, shall appoint one or more
persons to the position of Citation Hearing Officer.
§ 86-3. Delivery of citations.
A citation shall be served on the appropriate party by hand delivery, by
certified mail, return receipt requested, or by leaving at the party's usual
place of abode. If a party refuses to accept service of the citation by certified
§ 77-16 MERIDEN CODE § 86-3
1:182
mail, record shall be made of the same, and service may thereupon be made
by regular, first-class mail, postage prepaid.
§ 86-4. Payment of citation. [Amended 4-17-1997]
Any person cited with a violation of a provision of the Code of the City of
Meriden shall be allowed a period of 10 days from the date of the citation to
make an uncontested payment of the fine specified in the citation.
§ 86-5. Contest of citation.
When a person cited with a violation contests that citation before the
Citation Hearing Officer, any employee who is authorized by ordinance to
issue the citation at issue may present evidence on behalf of the City of
Meriden, pursuant to § 7-152c(e) of the Connecticut General Statutes.
§ 86-6. Continuing violation.
Unless otherwise specified, each day's continuing violation of the cited
provision of the Code of the City of Meriden is a separate offense and is
subject to additional citation.
Chapter 87
CIVIL PREPAREDNESS AND EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Department of Civil Preparedness — See Ch.
3, Art. XII.
Curfew — See Ch. 91.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 153.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 180.
STATUTORY REFERENCES
Civil preparedness generally — See C.G.S.
§ 28-1 et seq.
§ 87-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited and referred to as the
"Emergency Management Ordinance of the City of Meriden."
§ 87-2. Intent, purpose and scope.
A. It is the intent and purpose of this chapter to establish and this chapter
does hereby establish an Office of Emergency Management which will
ensure the complete and efficient utilization of all the City's facilities
to combat disaster resulting from enemy actions or other disasters as
defined herein.
§ 86-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 87-2
1:183
B. The Meriden Office of Emergency Management will be the coordinating
agency for all activity in connection with civil preparedness; it will be the
instrument through which the City Manager may exercise the authority
and discharge the responsibilities vested in him under Title 28, Chapter
517, of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended, the City Charter,
as amended, and this chapter.
C. This chapter will not relieve any City department of the moral
responsibilities or authority given to it in the City Charter or the
Connecticut General Statutes or by local ordinance, nor will it adversely
affect the work of any volunteer agency organized for relief in disaster
emergencies.
§ 87-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ATTACK — A direct or indirect assault against the City of Meriden, its
government, its environs or the nation by the forces of a hostile nation or
the agents thereof, including assault by bombing; radiological, chemical or
biological warfare; or sabotage.
CIVIL PREPAREDNESS — In its broad meaning, to carry out the basic
government functions of maintaining the public peace, health, safety and
welfare during an emergency. This shall include plans and preparations
for protection from and relief, recovery and rehabilitation from the effects
of an attack on the City by the forces of an enemy nation or the agents
thereof, and it shall also include such activity in connection with disaster as
defined herein. It shall not however, include any activity that is the primary
responsibility of the military forces of the United States.
CIVIL PREPAREDNESS FORCES — The employees, equipment and facilities
of all City departments, boards, institutions and commissions, and, in
addition, it shall include all volunteer personnel, equipment and facilities
contributed by or obtained from volunteer persons or agencies.
CIVIL PREPAREDNESS VOLUNTEER — Any person duly registered,
identified and appointed by the Director of the Office of Emergency
Management and assigned to participate in the civil preparedness activity;
such appointment shall be in accordance with Title 28, Chapter 517, of the
General Statutes of the State of Connecticut, as amended.41
DIRECTOR or CO-DIRECTOR — The administrator of the Meriden Office of
Emergency Management, appointed as prescribed in this chapter.
DISASTER — Includes but is not limited to actual or threatened enemy
attack, sabotage, extraordinary fire, flood, storm, epidemic or other
impending or actual calamity endangering or threatening to endanger
health, life or property or constituted government.
41.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 87-2 MERIDEN CODE § 87-3
1:184
REGULATIONS — Includes plans, programs and other emergency
procedures deemed essential to civil preparedness.
VOLUNTEER — Contributing a service, equipment or facilities to the civil
preparedness organization without remuneration.
§ 87-4. Organization; appointment of Director or Co-Directors.
A. The City Manager is hereby authorized and directed to create an
organization for civil preparedness utilizing to the fullest extent the
existing agencies within this City. The City Manager, as executive head
of the municipal government, shall be responsible for the organization,
administration and operations of the Office of Emergency Management.
B. The organization shall consist of the following:
(1) There shall be an executive head of the Office of Emergency
Management who shall be known as the Director, or Co-Directors, of
the Office of Emergency Management, and such assistants and other
employees as are deemed necessary for the proper functioning of the
organization.42
(2) The employees, equipment and facilities of all City departments,
boards, institutions and commissions will participate in the civil
preparedness activity. Duties assigned to a City department shall be
the same or similar to the normal duties of the department. This shall
also apply to public school facilities and personnel.
(3) Volunteer persons and agencies offering service to and accepted by
the City.
C. The City Manager shall appoint a Director or Co-Directors of the
Meriden Office of Emergency Management who shall be a person well
versed and trained in planning operations involving the activities of
many different agencies which will operate to protect the public health,
safety and welfare in the event of danger from enemy action or disaster
as defined in this chapter.
D. The Director or Co-Director, with approval of the City Manager, shall
appoint Deputy Directors to assume the emergency duties of the
Director or Co-Directors in the event of their absence or inability to act.
§ 87-5. Emergency powers and duties.
A. City Manager.
(1) The City Manager may exercise the emergency power and authority
necessary to fulfill his general powers and duties as defined in the
City Charter. The judgment of the City Manager shall be the sole
criteria necessary to invoke emergency powers provided in the City
Charter, the Code of the City of Meriden and other appropriate
authorities. The City Council may convene to perform its legislative
powers as the situation demands and shall receive reports relative to
civil preparedness activities.
(2) During any period when disaster threatens or when the City has
been struck by disaster, within the definition of this chapter, the City
42.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 87-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 87-5
1:185
Manager may promulgate such regulations as he deems necessary to
protect life and property and preserve critical resources.
(a) Such regulations may include, but shall not be limited to, the
following:
[1] Regulations prohibiting or restricting the movement of
vehicles in order to facilitate the work of civil preparedness
forces or to facilitate the mass movement of persons from
critical areas within or without the City.
[2] Regulations pertaining to the movement of persons from
areas deemed to be hazardous or vulnerable to disaster.
[3] Such other regulations necessary to preserve public peace,
health and safety.
(b) Regulations promulgated in accordance with the authority above
will be given widespread circulation by proclamations published
and uttered by newspapers and radio. These regulations will
have the force of ordinance when duly filed with the City Clerk,
and violations will be subject to the penalties provided in
§ 87-9.43
(3) The City Manager shall order civil preparedness forces to the aid of
other communities when required in accordance with the statutes
of the state, and he may request the state, or a political subdivision
of the state, to send aid to the City of Meriden in case of disaster
when conditions in the City are beyond the control of the local civil
preparedness forces.
(4) The City Manager may obtain vital supplies, equipment and other
properties found lacking and needed for the protection of health,
life and property of the people and bind the City for the fair value
thereof.
(5) The City Manager may require emergency services of any City
officers or employees. If regular City forces are determined
inadequate, the City Manager may require the services of such
other personnel as he can obtain that are available, including citizen
volunteers. All duly authorized persons rendering emergency
services shall be entitled to the privileges and immunities as are
provided by state law, the City Charter and ordinances for regular
City employees and other registered and identified civil
preparedness and disaster workers and, upon demand, may receive
appropriate compensation for their emergency employment.
(6) The City Manager will cause to be prepared the operations plan
herein referred to and exercise his ordinary powers as City Manager,
all of the special powers conferred upon him by the City Charter and
the Code of the City of Meriden and all powers conferred upon him
by any statute or any other lawful authority.
B. Director/Co-Directors of the Office of Emergency Management.
(1) The Director/Co-Directors of the Office of Emergency Management
shall be responsible to the City Manager in regard to all phases of
the civil preparedness and emergency management activities. Under
43.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 87-5 MERIDEN CODE § 87-5
1:186
the supervision of the City Manager, he/they shall be responsible for
the planning, coordination and operation of the civil preparedness
and emergency management activity in the City. Under the
supervision of the City Manager, he/they shall maintain liaison with
the state and federal authorities and the authorities of other nearby
political subdivisions so as to ensure the most effective operation of
the civil preparedness plan.
(2) His/their duties shall include, but shall not be limited to, the
following:
(a) Coordinating the recruitment of volunteer personnel and
agencies to augment the personnel and facilities of the City for
civil preparedness purposes.
(b) Development, testing and coordination of plans for the
immediate use of all of the facilities, equipment, manpower and
other resources of the City for the purpose of minimizing or
preventing damage to persons and property and protecting and
restoring to usefulness governmental services and public utilities
necessary for the public health, safety and welfare.
(c) Negotiating and concluding agreements with owners or persons
in control of buildings or other property for the use of such
buildings or other property for civil preparedness purposes and
designating suitable buildings as public shelters.
(d) Through public information programs, educating the civilian
population as to actions necessary and required for the
protection of their persons and property in case of enemy attack
or disaster, as defined herein, either impending or present.
(e) Conducting public practice alerts to ensure the efficient
operation of the civil preparedness forces and to familiarize
residents with civil preparedness regulations, procedures and
operations.
(f) Coordinating the activity of all other public and private agencies
engaged in any civil preparedness activity.
(g) Assuming such authority and conducting such activity as the
City Council may direct to promote and execute the civil
preparedness plan.
§ 87-6. Civil preparedness and disaster operations plan.
A. A comprehensive civil preparedness and disaster operations plan shall
be adopted and maintained by resolution of the City Council upon the
recommendations of the City Manager. In the preparation of this plan
as it pertains to City organization, it is the intent that the services,
equipment, facilities and personnel of all existing departments and
agencies shall be utilized to the fullest extent. When approved, it shall
be the duty of all municipal departments and agencies to perform the
functions assigned by the plan and to maintain their portion of the plan
in a current state of readiness at all times. The operations plan shall
be considered supplementary to this chapter and have the effect of law
whenever a disaster, as defined in this chapter, has been proclaimed.
§ 87-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 87-6
1:187
B. The City Manager shall prescribe in the operations plan those positions
within the disaster organization, in addition to his own, for which lines of
succession are necessary. In each instance, the responsible person will
designate and keep on file with the City Manager and the Director/Co-
Directors a current list of three persons as successors to his position.
The list will be in order of succession and will as nearly as possible
designate persons best capable of carrying out all assigned duties and
functions.
C. Each service chief and department head assigned responsibility in the
operations plan shall be responsible for carrying out all duties and
functions assigned therein. Duties will include the organization and
training of assigned City employees and volunteers. Each chief shall
formulate the operational plan for his service which, when approved,
shall be an annex to and a part of the operations plans. All other
City employees not specifically assigned a disaster task shall make
themselves available upon request of the City Manager for emergency
assignments and duties.
D. Amendments to the operations plan shall be submitted to the City
Manager by the Director/Co-Directors. If approved, the City Manager
will submit the amendments to the City Council with his
recommendations for its approval. Such amendments shall take effect
immediately unless action is taken by the City Council disapproving
the City Manager's submission. In the event that an amendment is
pending at the time that a disaster is proclaimed under provisions of this
chapter, the amendment will be considered approved immediately and
will remain effective unless specifically revoked by the City Council.
E. When a required competency or skill for a disaster function is not
available within the City government, the City Manager is authorized
to seek assistance from persons outside of government. The assignment
of duties, when of a supervisory nature, shall also grant authority for
the persons so assigned to carry out such duties prior to, during and
after the occurrence of a disaster. Such services from persons outside
of government may be accepted by the City on a volunteer basis. Such
citizens shall be enrolled as civil preparedness volunteers in cooperation
with the heads of City departments affected.
§ 87-7. Liability.
A. This chapter is an exercise by the City of its governmental functions
for the protection of the public peace, health, safety and welfare, and
neither the City nor agents and representatives of said City, or any
individual, receiver, firm, partnership, corporation, association or
trustee, or any of the agents thereof, in good faith carrying out,
complying with or attempting to comply with any order, rule or
regulation promulgated pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, shall
be liable for any damage sustained to persons or property as a result of
said activity.
B. Any person owning or controlling real estate or other premises who
voluntarily and without compensation grants the City the right to
inspect, designate and use the whole or any part or parts of such real
§ 87-6 MERIDEN CODE § 87-7
1:188
estate or premises for the purpose of sheltering persons during an
actual, impending or practice enemy attack, or any type of emergency
situation, shall not be civilly liable for the death of or injury to any
persons on or about such real estate or premises under such license,
privilege or other permission or for loss of or damage to the property of
such person.
§ 87-8. Violations.
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of this
chapter or of the regulations or plans issued pursuant to the authority
contained herein or to willfully obstruct, hinder or delay any member of the
civil preparedness organization, as herein defined, in the enforcement of the
provisions of this chapter or any regulation or plan issued thereunder.
§ 87-9. Penalties for offenses.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter or
any rule or regulation promulgated thereunder shall be subjected to the
penalties of § 1-4 and/or § 28-22, Title 28, Chapter 517, of the General
Statutes of the State of Connecticut.
Chapter 91
CURFEW
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peace and good order — See Ch. 153. Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 180.
§ 91-1. Curfew established.
It shall be unlawful for any child under the age of 15 years to loiter on
the streets or in any other public place in the City after 9:00 p.m. and
before 4:00 a.m. unless such child is accompanied by his parent or guardian
or other adult person into whose care and custody such child has been
committed by his parent or guardian.
§ 91-2. Parental responsibility.
It shall be unlawful for any parent or other person having control of any
minor to compel or permit such minor to violate the provisions of this
chapter.
§ 91-3. Penalties for offenses. [Added 9-16-1996]
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter may be fined $50 to $90
for each violation.
§ 87-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 91-3
1:189
Chapter 99
ENTERTAINMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 107.
Signs and posters — See Ch. 174.
Zoning — See Ch. 213.
STATUTORY REFERENCES
Authority to legislate — See C.G.S. § 21-6.
§ 99-1. License required.
No person shall display or produce publicly, in the City, to be seen, heard or
attended, any sport; public amusement; dance; musical, operatic, dramatic,
theatrical or pictorial performance; circus or other exhibition; or any public
assemblage for any purpose whatsoever which is held or conducted wholly
or partly under a tent or other temporary structure or advertise the same
by any illustrated bill, poster, hanger or display card, without a license so to
do, which license shall be issued by the Chief of Police.
§ 99-2. Inspections authorized.
Every licensee, as a condition of obtaining the license required by this
chapter, shall, when applying therefor, provide facilities for the Chief of
Police to enter and inspect his place of amusement and view the exhibition
or performances conducted therein at any time while such license is in force
and effect.
§ 99-3. Revocation of license.
The Chief of Police may revoke any license issued under the provisions of
this chapter at any time for cause, and the operations conducted thereunder
shall cease immediately upon such revocation and shall not be resumed
until such license is reinstated.
§ 99-4. Fees. [Amended 9-15-1980]
Before any license required under this chapter is issued for any
performance to which admission is obtained by the payment of money or
the delivery of any valuable thing, or by any ticket or voucher obtained
for money or any valuable thing, the applicant shall pay for such license a
fee determined by the City Council which shall be uniform as to activities
falling within the following classifications and not in excess of the amounts
provided herein therefor:
§ 91-3 MERIDEN CODE § 99-4
1:190
A. Tent performances. Circuses, wild west shows and other outdoor and
tent performances of an itinerant or transient character, except
carnivals: $150 per day.
B. Theaters. Theaters, for all performances that may be held in them, as
follows:
(1) Any theater having a seating capacity of 1,000 persons or more
and which regularly gives performances during the year for seven
consecutive days in any week: $200 per year.
(2) Any theater having a seating capacity of fewer than 1,000 persons
and more than 500 persons and which regularly gives performances
during the year for seven consecutive days in any week: $150 per
year.
(3) Any theater having a seating capacity of 500 persons or fewer and
which regularly gives performances during the year for seven
consecutive days in any week: $100 per year.
(4) Any theater which gives performances for less than seven
consecutive days in any week: $100 per year.
(5) Any theater which gives fewer than 40 performances per year: $50
per year.
C. Athletic contests. Athletic contests, baseball games, football games,
hockey games and basketball games, for each game or contest: $1,
provided that no fee shall be paid in any case where such athletic contest
or game is conducted or played by a regularly organized team of an
educational institution incorporated under the laws of the state on the
premises of such institution or of a high school or public school of the
City.
D. Athletic halls. Athletic halls used exclusively for holding athletic games,
contests and exhibitions: $75 per year.
E. Dances.
(1) Public dance halls, whether operated in connection with hotels or
restaurants or otherwise: $100 per year, or $2 per day.
(2) Public dances not held in public dance halls: $2 per day.
F. Other. All other performances, public shows and exhibitions, other than
for charitable or benevolent purposes: $2 per day.
§ 99-5. Required records.
The Chief of Police shall keep a record, in a book provided for that purpose,
of all licenses issued by him under the provisions of this chapter, containing
the names of the persons licensed and the date of revocation of any license
revoked.
§ 99-6. Duties of owners and proprietors.
No person owning or operating any public hall in the City shall permit such
hall to be used for the purpose of giving any performance or exhibition
for which a license is required under this chapter unless he has first
received from the owner, operator or agent of the owner or operator of such
performance or exhibition a copy of the license issued therefor. Every place
in the City in which any performance or exhibition for which a license is
§ 99-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 99-6
1:191
required under this chapter is given or held shall be deemed a public hall
within the meaning of this section.44
§ 99-7. Restrictions on activities on Sunday.
Any public performance, exhibition, sport or other form of amusement or
entertainment which is authorized to be held on Sunday under provisions of
the General Statutes may be held in the City on that day, provided that any
such activity shall be held or conducted in accordance with the provisions
of this Code and any General Statutes relating thereto.
§ 99-8. Carnivals prohibited; exceptions. [Amended 2-20-1990]
It shall be unlawful for any person to exhibit, open, maintain or operate
performances or shows commonly known as "carnivals" anywhere in the
City, provided that this section shall not apply to any amateur show, bazaar,
festival or other similar amusement conducted for the benefit of a church
or religious or educational institution, or by a nonprofit organization which
donates all profits to a charitable cause, whether or not it is carried on in a
hall used occasionally for such affairs and located in an edifice maintained
in connection with or as a part of the religious or educational work of such
organization or upon the grounds thereof.
§ 99-9. Indecent or immoral exhibitions prohibited.
No person in the City shall act in, exhibit, show or perform in, or cause to
be acted in, shown or performed, or be in any manner concerned in the
acting in, exhibition, showing or performance of, any indecent, immoral,
indecorous or improper dance, play, farce, opera, public exhibition, show,
entertainment or performance whatsoever.
Chapter 101
EQUAL OPPORTUNITIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Housing discrimination — See Ch. 122.
STATUTORY REFERENCES
Discrimination in accommodations — See
C.G.S. § 46a-64.
44.Editor's Note: Former § 99-7, Police required to be in attendance, which immediately
followed this section, as amended 9-15-1980, was repealed 11-2-1981.
§ 99-6 MERIDEN CODE § 101-1
1:192
§ 101-1. Title. [Amended 6-2-2003]
This chapter shall be known as the "Equal Opportunities Ordinance."
§ 101-2. Findings; declaration of policy. [Amended 6-2-2003]
A. The population of Meriden is composed of people of diverse familial
status, races, colors, religions, creeds, national origins and physical and
mental abilities. It is essential to the health, safety and welfare of the
City and its inhabitants that those differences serve only as bases of
individual and community strength and integrity and not as causes of
discrimination, segregation and restricted opportunities. Discrimination
and its consequences cost the City and its people dearly. They cause
unsafe and unsanitary housing, unemployment and underemployment
and human waste.
B. Denial of equal opportunities to any person because of familial status,
race, color, sex, sexual orientation, religion, creed, national origin or
physical or mental disability is against the public policy of the State
of Connecticut. Government initiative to repair the consequences of
past denials of equal opportunities, and to prevent such denials in the
future, promotes the state's public policy. Because Meriden's population
is diverse in familial status, race, color, religion, national origin and
physical and mental abilities and the need for inter-group respect and
understanding is therefore great, it is essential that official local action
be taken to promote and ensure equality of opportunity for all residents
of the City.
C. The City of Meriden does hereby reaffirm its policy to ensure equal
opportunity in employment for all persons; to prohibit discrimination in
employment because of race, color, religion, age, sex, sexual orientation,
national origin, ancestry or physical or mental disability except in case
of bona fide occupational qualification or need; and to promote the
full realization of equal employment opportunity through a continuing
intensive affirmative program in each department of the City which will
be an integral part of every aspect of personnel policies and practices
in the employment, development, advancement and treatment of
employees of the City of Meriden to the maximum extent possible.
D. The City of Meriden will endeavor to ensure full participation of all
persons contracting or providing services to the City of Meriden and
through this cooperative effort will ultimately improve community
conditions that affect employability. The equal opportunity clause shall
be incorporated in all purchase orders, leases, contracts, etc., covered
by Executive Order 11246, as amended, and its implementing
regulations.
E. The City of Meriden, as evidence of its intent to comply with basic
policies and procedures necessary for equal employment opportunity
standards, does hereby direct the City Council to adopt an affirmative
action policy statement which will be on file in the Town Clerk's office
and the office of the City Manager.
§ 101-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-3
1:193
§ 101-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PERSON — Includes an individual, partnership, association, corporation,
legal representative, trustee, trustee in bankruptcy and receiver.
§ 101-4. Human Rights Advocacy Program.
A. There shall be established a Human Rights Advocacy Program, to be
administered by the Human Rights Advocate. The Human Rights
Advocate, who shall be an attorney licensed to practice in the State
of Connecticut, shall report directly to, and perform under the direct
supervision of, the City Manager on any issues related to human rights
advocacy. The Human Rights Advocate shall be responsible for
enforcement of the letter and spirit of this chapter. In addition, the
Human Rights Advocate shall serve as a staff liaison to any boards or
commissions as deemed necessary by the City Manager.
B. The Human Rights Advocate shall be responsible for ensuring the
objectivity of any investigations undertaken and recommendations made
in the enforcement of this chapter. To that end, the work product of
the Human Rights Advocate shall remain physically isolated from any
other department or work product and the Human Rights Advocate shall
take any steps necessary to ensure the absence of any appearance of a
conflict of interest.
C. The Human Rights Advocate's function shall be to promote mutual
understanding and respect among, and encourage and ensure equality
of opportunity for, all the people of Meriden without regard for their
familial status, race, color, religion, creed, national origin or physical or
mental abilities; to conduct such programs of education, study, research,
investigation and action as will contribute to carrying out the purposes
and provisions of this chapter; and to cooperate with governmental and
nongovernmental agencies and organizations in the field of inter-group
relations and equal opportunities.
§ 101-5. Powers and duties of Human Rights Advocate.
The Human Rights Advocate shall have the following powers and duties:
A. To work with federal, state and City agencies as well as private, civic,
religious, business, industrial, labor and other organizations, groups,
and persons to achieve harmonious inter-group relations in the
community as well as to develop and establish positive programs which
will help all members of the community enjoy equality of opportunity in
all phases of community life.
B. To study and investigate individual or community problems of limited
opportunities, prejudices, discrimination, segregation and disorder and
tensions occasioned thereby.
C. To assist in expediting complaints by referring complainants to the
appropriate local, state or federal programs, agencies, commissions or
§ 101-3 MERIDEN CODE § 101-5
1:194
courts which can effectively process, evaluate, address and resolve their
complaint.
D. To issue reports and publications on its study, research and
investigations designed to promote greater understanding of the
problems, needs and progress in the field of inter-group relations and
equal opportunities.
E. To counsel and assist in mitigating their damages, including but not
limited to informing the complainant of any applicable time limitations.
F. To recommend to the City Council legislation or policies which will aid in
carrying out the purposes and provisions of this chapter and applicable
state and federal laws and regulations.
§ 101-6. Cooperation with other City personnel.
All departments, boards, commissions, agencies, bureaus, officers, officials
and employees of the City shall cooperate with the Human Rights Advocate
in implementing this chapter, and the heads thereof shall furnish to the
Human Rights Advocate information in their possession when the Human
Rights Advocate, upon the approval of the City Manager, so requests.
Chapter 105
FEES
§ 105-1. Copies of nonconviction criminal history records.
Any person entitled to request and receive a copy or printout of
nonconviction criminal history records pursuant to Connecticut General
Statutes § 54-142k shall be charged a fee of $10 for the processing of that
request and receipt of that information.
Chapter 107
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarms — See Ch. 60.
Building construction — See Ch. 77.
Citation process — See Ch. 86.
Housing standards — See Ch. 125.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 159.
STATUTORY REFERENCES
Fire prevention generally — See C.G.S.
§ 29-291 et seq.
§ 101-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 107-1
1:195
§ 107-1. Power of Fire Department officers at fires.
The officer of the Fire Department in command at any fire in the City shall
have the power and authority necessary to preserve order and enforce his
command at the scene of such fire and may use all necessary force and may
require and have the aid and assistance of any person for such purposes.
§ 107-2. Destruction of property authorized. [Amended 9-15-1980]
The officer of the Fire Department in command at any fire in the City, when
he deems it necessary, may, with the consent of the City Manager, order
any building or structure to be destroyed and torn down to prevent the
spreading of such fire.
§ 107-3. Establishment of fire lines. [Amended 9-15-1980]
The City Manager or Chief of the Fire Department or the officer in charge
at any fire may establish fire lines during any fire when in his judgment any
such action shall be deemed necessary or advisable and may prohibit any
person from going or remaining within such fire lines, unless authorized by
the City Manager or officer of the Fire Department in command at such fire
or an officer of the Police Department. Upon the establishment of such fire
lines, all unauthorized persons shall remain outside such lines.
§ 107-4. Removal of property or barriers prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or assist in removing any
property or obstruction placed by the Fire Department, in the course of its
duties, in, upon or across any street or portion thereof or upon any premises
under the control of such Department during a fire.
§ 107-5. Restrictions on vehicles near fire scenes. [Amended
9-15-1980]
No vehicle shall, except by direction of the City Manager or officer of the
Fire Department in command at the scene, approach or remain standing
or parked within one block of a fire or other location to which any fire
apparatus has been called by an alarm of fire in the City.
§ 107-6. Unauthorized use of Fire Department property.
No unauthorized person shall trespass upon the property of the Fire
Department or carry away, meddle with, use or injure any of the apparatus
of such Department.
§ 107-7. Interference with fire alarm system.
No person shall willfully destroy, deface or injure in any manner the fire
alarm telegraph or any part thereof in the City or any of the appurtenances
of the same or willfully interfere with or do anything to such telegraph to
prevent or delay the proper or timely use thereof.
§ 107-1 MERIDEN CODE § 107-8
1:196
§ 107-8. Placing of printed matter upon fire alarm poles or boxes
prohibited.
No person shall post or in any manner affix any placards, bills or notices,
either written or printed, upon any of the fire alarm telegraph poles or
boxes in the City.
§ 107-9. False alarms.
It shall be unlawful for any person to give a false alarm of fire or knowingly
to proclaim that any fire in the City is extinguished when it is not.
§ 107-10. Key boxes. [Added 7-2-200745]
All new or renovated nonresidential occupancies shall be required to have
a Knox-Box-type key box installed on the building before a certificate of
occupancy is issued. The Knox-Box shall be installed in a location approved
by the Fire Marshal.
§ 107-11. Storage or transportation of flammable liquids. [Amended
7-18-199446]
No person shall store or transport flammable liquids in quantities or with a
flash point which will subject such storage or transportation to regulation
by the Department of State Police, without a permit from the Fire Marshal
so to do. No such permit shall be issued except in conformity with the
General Statutes and rules and regulations promulgated thereunder
relating to the storage or transportation of such flammable liquids. It shall
be unlawful for any person to operate under a permit issued under the
provisions of this section in violation of the terms and conditions of such
permit.
§ 107-12. Storage, transportation or use of explosives.
No person shall store, transport or use any explosives which are of such
content or which are stored, transported or used in such quantity or manner
as will subject such storage, transportation or use to regulation by the
Department of State Police, without a permit from the Fire Marshal so to
do. No such permit shall be issued except in conformity with the General
Statutes and rules and regulations promulgated thereunder relating to the
storage, transportation or use of such explosives. It shall be unlawful for any
person to operate under a permit issued under the provisions of this section
in violation of the terms and conditions of such permit.
45.Editor's Note: This resolution also provided for the repeal of former § 107-10, Securing
and marking of trapdoors and other dangerous openings.
46.Editor's Note: This resolution repealed provisions pertaining to a fee for the storage or
transportation of flammable liquids. Said resolution also set out new and similar fees
which are on file with the City.
§ 107-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 107-13
1:197
§ 107-13. Appeals from denial of license.
If any person is aggrieved by the refusal or neglect of the Fire Marshal to
issue any license or permit which he is authorized to issue, such person
may, except as otherwise provided by the General Statutes or any rule or
regulation promulgated thereunder, appeal from such action to the Council
at its next meeting, provided that such person shall leave with the Town and
City Clerk written notice of such intended appeal prior to such meeting and
not later than one week from the time he has been notified of the action of
the Fire Marshal. Such action of the Fire Marshal shall only become invalid
and inoperative if disapproved by the Council.
§ 107-14. Expiration date of permits.
All annual permits issued by the Fire Marshal under the authority of this
chapter shall expire on the 31st day of January of each year.
§ 107-15. Records and reports of Fire Marshal.
The Fire Marshal shall keep a record book in which he shall enter a record
of all licenses, permits or orders issued by him, all complaints made to him
and all inspections and examinations made by him. He shall make a report
of his actions to the Council once each month.
§ 107-16. Procedure upon failure of owner to abate fire hazards.
Where any person fails to comply with any order to abate a fire hazard
issued by the Fire Marshal pursuant to the provisions of §§ 29-306 to
29-310 of the General Statutes, the Fire Marshal may cause such hazard
to be abated, and the expense thereof shall be chargeable to the person
responsible for the creation or maintenance of such fire hazard and shall
be collectible by the City in the same manner that debts due the City are
collected.
§ 107-17. Open fires.
A. No person shall kindle or maintain any bonfire or authorize any such fire
to be kindled or maintained in the City unless a written permit so to do
has been secured from the Fire Marshal. No such fire shall be kindled or
maintained except in accordance with the terms and conditions of such
permit. No person shall kindle or maintain any fire out of doors in the
City, except in a proper receptacle, unless a person over the age of 14
years is present and in charge of such fire as long as it remains burning.
B. The term and conditions of such permit shall be set by the Fire Marshal.
Only nonprocessed wood shall be burned. Said permit may be revoked
by the Fire Marshal or his representative at any time due to unsafe
operation, burning of prohibited material or creating a smoke nuisance.
All such determinations shall be in the sole discretion of the Fire Marshal
or his representative. Such permits shall be for residential home use
only. Nothing herein shall be construed to affect any state regulation.
[Added 5-17-2010]
§ 107-13 MERIDEN CODE § 107-18
1:198
§ 107-18. Disposal of products of combustion.
No person shall deposit ashes, smoldering coals or embers, greasy or oily
substances or other matters liable to create spontaneous ignition, within
10 feet of any wooden or plastered wall, partition, fence, floor, sidewalk,
lumber, hay, shavings, rubbish or other combustible materials, except in
metallic or other noncombustible receptacles. Such receptacles, unless
resting on a noncombustible floor or on the ground outside the building,
shall be placed on noncombustible stands and in every case shall be kept at
least two feet away from any combustible wall or partition.
§ 107-19. Accumulations of combustible materials.
No person shall permit to remain upon any roof or in any courtyard, vacant
lot or open space any accumulation of wastepaper, hay, grass, straw, weeds,
litter or combustible or flammable waste or rubbish of any kind. All weeds,
grass, vines or other growth, when endangering property or liable to be
fired, shall be cut down and removed by the owner or occupant of the
property it is on.
§ 107-20. Storage of combustible materials.
No person making, using, storing or having charge or control of any
shavings, excelsior, rubbish, sacks, bags, litter, hay, straw or combustible
trash, waste or fragments shall fail, neglect or refuse at the close of each
day to cause all such material which is not compactly baled and stacked in
an orderly manner to be removed from the building or stored in suitable
vaults or in metal or metal-lined covered receptacles or bins. The Fire
Marshal may require suitable baling presses to be installed in stores,
apartment houses, factories and similar places where accumulations of
paper and waste materials are not removed at least every second day and
may require the removal of such accumulations daily if conditions warrant
such action in his opinion.
§ 107-21. Storage of combustible containers.
The storage of empty packing cases, boxes, barrels or other similar
combustible containers is forbidden unless approved by the Fire Marshal.
Such storage shall be orderly and not so located as to endanger exits from
the building in which stored. Storage in the open of packing cases, boxes,
barrels or other similar combustible containers shall not be more than 20
feet in height and shall be so located, with respect to surrounding buildings,
as not to constitute a hazard. All such storage shall be in a compact and
orderly manner.
§ 107-22. Open flames restricted where highly combustible
materials are kept.
No person shall take an open light or flame into any building, barn, boat
or other place where highly flammable, combustible or explosive material
§ 107-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 107-22
1:199
is kept, unless such light or flame is well secured in an explosionproof-type
lamp or similar approved device.
§ 107-23. Restrictions on lighting and heating systems in certain
buildings.
No heating apparatus with an open flame, and no artificial lighting system
other than incandescent electric lights, shall be used in any warehouse
for the storage of rags, excelsior, hair or other flammable or combustible
material or fluids, nor in any shop or factory used for the manufacture,
repair or renovating of mattresses or bedding, nor in any establishment for
the upholstery of furniture.
§ 107-24. Restrictions on smoking.
A. The Fire Marshal may inspect all warehouses, stores, industrial
establishments and any building, structure or open space in which
combustible materials are handled, stored, manufactured or sold, and,
where conditions found justify the prohibition of smoking, he shall order
the owner or occupant, in writing, to post suitable signs or placards in
each room, building, structure or place in which such prohibition shall
be enforced. All such signs or installations shall read "By Order of the
Fire Marshal."
B. The Fire Marshal may designate special rooms or portions of structures
in which smoking, under such restrictions as he may designate, may be
permitted.
C. The term "smoking" as used in this section shall include the carrying of
a lighted pipe, cigar, cigarette or tobacco in any other form.
D. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove any sign or placard posted
under the provisions of this section or to smoke in any properly
placarded place.
§ 107-25. Establishment of fire zones (fire lanes). [Added 7-1-1974;
amended 9-15-1980]
A. Definitions. A "fire zone" (fire lane) is a designated unobstructed
passageway sufficient to permit free passage of fire and other
emergency equipment from a public highway to all areas or portions of
any private or public property as hereinafter set forth.
B. Determination of need for fire zone (fire lane). Whenever the Fire
Marshal shall determine that the reasonable safety of persons occupying
or using any premises, public or private, other than a private residential
dwelling consisting of four or fewer separate apartment units, requires
the establishment of a fire zone (fire lane) for the orderly access to said
premises of fire and other emergency equipment, he shall recommend
to the City Council that said Council establish such fire zone (fire lane).
Prior to making such recommendation, the said Fire Marshal or Deputy
Fire Marshal shall discuss the area of the proposed fire zone (fire lane)
with the owner or owners or agents of said premises. No fire zone shall
be recommended or established by the said City Council for any building
which immediately abuts a public highway unless the owner of said
§ 107-22 MERIDEN CODE § 107-25
1:200
building consents in writing to the establishment of said zone. For the
purposes of this section, a building will be considered to immediately
abut a public highway if it is no more than 15 feet from the City street
line.
C. Issuance of order establishing fire zone (fire lane); filing copies of order.
Whenever the City Council establishes a fire zone (fire lane) as
recommended by the Fire Marshal, said Council shall cause a copy of
said order to be delivered to the owner or owners or agents thereof of
any private land on which such fire zone (fire lane) is established. The
Council shall also file one copy of its order with the Clerk of the Council,
one copy with the City Clerk and one copy with the Traffic Division of
the City of Meriden.
D. Appeal by aggrieved person. Any person aggrieved by said order may
appeal therefrom to the Court of Common Pleas for the County of New
Haven.
E. Erecting signs; collection of cost when a private property. Upon
establishment of a fire zone (fire lane) the Traffic Division shall cause to
be erected or installed adequate signs and/or markings or other devices
to delineate said fire zone (fire lane). Such signs and/or markings or
other devices installed on privately owned premises, as ordered by the
City Council, shall be at the cost of the owner. All such signs or markings
shall read "Fire Zone--No Parking." Should the owner or owners, or
agents thereof, of any private land fail to comply with the order of the
City Council, the Fire Marshal or the Deputy Fire Marshal may have
the Traffic Division erect said signs and establish said markings, and
the cost of said signs and the installation thereof shall be billed to the
owner or owners, or agents thereof, and collected in the same manner
as municipal taxes, provided that the Traffic Division causes a notice of
lien to be filed on the land records within 60 days after the erection or
installation of said signs or markings.
F. Motor vehicles not to be parked in fire zones (fire lanes). No person
shall park or permit to stand a motor vehicle in a fire zone which has
been established in accordance with this section, except when actually
picking up or discharging passengers. Any person violating this section
shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $100. The
registered owner of a motor vehicle shall be presumed to be the
operator of such vehicle.
G. Towing of vehicles parked within fire zone (fire lane). Any motor vehicle
found standing in a fire zone which has been established in accordance
with this section may be towed, upon the direction of a police officer, to
any public or private parking facility, and all expense of such towing and
any subsequent storage shall be borne by the registered owner of such
vehicle.
H. Citation for violation; early payment of fine. Whenever a vehicle is found
standing in violation of Subsection F, a police officer shall serve upon
the owner or operator of such vehicle or place upon such vehicle a
notice directing the owner or operator thereof to appear at the Police
Department prior to a time specified in said notice. If any person
receiving said notice shall appear as directed and shall pay an amount
§ 107-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 107-25
1:201
as specified in said notice, not exceeding $5; such payment shall bar a
prosecution for violation of Subsection F.
§ 107-26. Smoke detectors; interconnections between building
levels. [Added 6-15-1987]
In new construction, required smoke detectors on different levels of a
dwelling unit shall be electrically interconnected and arranged so that a
detector sensing smoke on any level will sound an alarm on all levels.
§ 107-27. Authority to issue citation. [Added 9-3-1996]
The provisions of this chapter may be enforced by citation, in addition to
other remedies. The following persons have authority to issue citations for
violations pursuant to this chapter: City of Meriden Fire Chief, Deputy Fire
Chief, Assistant Fire Chief, Fire Marshal and Deputy Fire Marshal.
Chapter 109
FLAG PLAZA
GENERAL REFERENCES
Flags and banners over streets and
sidewalks — See Ch. 180, § 180-37.
§ 109-1. Flags to be displayed.
Flags representative of our country's history shall be flown in the flag
plaza in front of City Hall and will include the following: Betsy Ross Flag;
Bennington Flag; Bunker Hill Flag; City of Meriden Flag; Continental Flag;
First Navy Jack Flag; Gadsen Flag; Grand Union Flag; Old Glory (50); Pine
Tree Flag; State of Connecticut Flag; Star Spangled Banner Flag; and the
U.S. Standard (48) Flag, to be displayed daily.
§ 109-2. Display of ethnic flags.
In order to accommodate the various ethnic groups who have/will donate(d)
flags on ethnic holidays and upon request of the ethnic group to the City
Manager, an ethnic flag may be displayed below the U.S. Standard on the
south side of City Hall.
§ 109-3. Committee review and report.
A review shall be made by the Parks and Recreation Committee at a time
after the dedication of the flag plaza (June 14, 1988) to determine if any
modifications should be made with a report to the City Council.
§ 107-25 MERIDEN CODE § 109-4
1:202
§ 109-4. Display of National Colors.47
The national colors shall be displayed upon public flagstaffs in the City
on the following days: Martin Luther King Jr. Day, January (third Monday);
Lincoln's Birthday, February 12; Washington's Birthday, February 22;
Memorial Day, May 30; Anniversary of Adoption of National Colors (Flag
Day), June 14; Independence Day, July 4; Labor Day, September (first
Monday); Columbus Day, October 12; and Veterans Day, November 11.
Chapter 110
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 77.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 180.
Zoning — See Ch. 213.
STATUTORY REFERENCES
Authority to adopt regulations — See C.G.S.
§ 7-194.
§ 110-1. Statutory authorization.
The Legislature of the State of Connecticut has, in § 7-194 of its General
Statutes, as amended, delegated the responsibility to local governmental
units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare of its citizenry.
§ 110-2. Findings of fact.
A. The flood hazard areas of the City of Meriden are subject to periodic
inundation which may result in loss of life and property, health and
safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services,
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and
impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public
health, safety and general welfare.
B. These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in
areas of special flood hazard which increase flood heights and velocities,
and when inadequately anchored, damage uses in other areas. Uses
that are inadequately floodproofed, elevated or otherwise protected from
flood damage also contribute to the flood loss.
47.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)
.This section was originally adopted 10-7-1963 and appeared in the 1980 Code as Ch. 1,
§ 1-9.
§ 109-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-3
1:203
§ 110-3. Statement of purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare within the City and to minimize public and private losses
due to flood conditions in the floodway and flood-fringe areas in the City and
to protect the aquifer within said areas by provisions designed to:
A. Protect human life and health;
B. Minimize expenditures of public money for costly flood-control projects;
C. Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding
and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
D. Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
E. Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities, such as water and gas
mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located
in areas of special flood hazards;
F. Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future
flood blight areas;
G. Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of
special flood hazard; and
H. Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume
responsibility for their actions.
§ 110-4. Methods of reducing flood losses.
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and
provisions for:
A. Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety,
and property due to water and erosion hazards, or which result in
damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
B. Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve
such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
C. Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel
floodwaters;
D. Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may
increase flood damage;
E. Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in
other areas;
F. Protecting the aquifer for use as a public water supply, by limiting the
amount of impervious surface within the floodplain area, and reducing
the effect of de-icing salts, chemicals and other pollutants.
§ 110-5. Definitions.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common
usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
§ 110-3 MERIDEN CODE § 110-5
1:204
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE — A use or structure on the same
lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the
principal use or structure.
ADMINISTRATOR — The City Engineer of the City of Meriden or his
designated representative.
APPEAL — A request for a review of the administrator's interpretation of
any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.
APPLICANT — The owner or authorized agent of the owner of land partially
or wholly in an area of special flood hazard and on which land development
is proposed. His/her name shall appear on the development permit
application and will be responsible for assuring that the provisions of this
chapter are met and that any stipulations or conditions placed at the time
of approval are adhered to.
AQUIFER — An underground stratum of earth, gravel or porous stone that
contains water.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — The land in the floodplain within
a community subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any
given year.
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — That portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.
BREAKAWAY WALL — A wall that is not part of the structural support of
the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse
under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to the elevated
portion of the building or the supporting foundation system.
BUILDING — Any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure for any
occupancy or storage.
DESIGNATED REPRESENTATIVE — A person designated, in writing, by the
Flood Control Implementation Agency48 to enforce the terms and provisions
of this chapter.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations located
within areas of special flood hazard.
DEVELOPMENT PERMIT — The formal granting of permission to an
applicant for land development in areas of special flood hazard, including
permitted uses, regulated uses and special exceptions as herein described
and specified.
48.Editor's Note: Throughout this chapter, references to the "Flood and Erosion Commission"
were amended to "Flood Control Implementation Agency" at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 110-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-5
1:205
ELEVATED BUILDING — A nonbasement building built to have the lowest
floor elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation
perimeter walls, pilings, columns (posts and piers), shear walls, or
breakaway walls.
FLOOD or FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP — The official map on which the
Federal Insurance Administration has delineated the areas of special flood
hazard applicable to the community.
FLOOD FRINGE AREA — The area outside of the floodway and within the
limits of the base flood.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map on which the
Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special
flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY — The official report provided by the Federal
Insurance Administration that includes flood profiles, the flood boundary -
floodway map, and the water surface elevation of the base flood.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water or sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one
foot.
FLOOR — The top surface of an enclosed area in a building (including
basement), i.e., top of slab in concrete slab construction or top of wood
flooring in wood frame construction. The term does not include the floor of
a garage used solely for parking vehicles.
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used
with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required
utilities. The term also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and similar
transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer
and intended to be improved property.
A. The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
B.
§ 110-5 MERIDEN CODE § 110-5
1:206
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel, or
contiguous parcels, of land divided into two or more manufactured home
lots for rent or sale.
MEAN SEA LEVEL — For purposes of the National Flood Insurance
Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, or other
datum to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood
insurance rate map are referenced.
NATIONAL GEODETIC VERTICAL DATUM (NGVD) — As corrected in 1929,
a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations
within the floodplain.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the "start of construction"
commenced on or after the effective date of this chapter.
PERMITTED USES — Those types of development in areas of special flood
hazard which do not require a development permit from the City.
REGULATED USES — Those types of development which require a
development permit from the City.
SPECIAL EXCEPTION — Those types of development which require a
development permit directly from the Meriden Flood Control
Implementation Agency.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — For other than new construction or
substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (P.L.
97-348), includes substantial improvement, and means the date the building
permit was issued, provided that the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date.
The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of a
structure (including a manufactured home) on a site such as the pouring of
slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work
beyond the stage of excavation, or placement of a manufactured home on a
foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such
as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets
and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings,
piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include
the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or
sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building or manufactured home that is
principally above ground.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — [Amended 7-20-1992]
Any combination repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure,
the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the
structure as determined by the cost approach to value method, with
the replacement cost as computed by the quantity survey method
(summation of quantity and cost of each item of material plus labor
necessary for installation), either:
(1) Before the improvement or repair is started; or
A.
§ 110-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-5
1:207
VARIANCE — A grant of relief by the Flood Control Implementation Agency
from the requirements of this chapter which permits construction in a
manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this chapter.
WATERCOURSE — A stream, river, brook, or channel which conveys surface
runoff for a majority of the year. These may or may not be part of designated
floodway areas.
WATER SURFACE ELEVATION — The height, in relation to the National
Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 (or other datum, where specified),
of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal
or riverine areas.
§ 110-6. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to all land parcels or portions thereof located within
areas of special flood hazards within the jurisdiction of the City of Meriden.
§ 110-7. Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard.
[Amended 3-20-2017]
A. The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency ("FEMA") in its Flood Insurance Study ("FIS")
for New Haven County, Connecticut, dated May 16, 2017, and
accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps ("FIRM") dated May 16, 2017
(Panels 09009C0161J, 09009C0163J, 09009C0164J, 09009C0167J,
09009C0169J, 09009C0190J, 09009C0307J), and December 17, 2010
(Panels 09009C0160H, 09009C0162H, 09009C0166H, 09009C0168H,
09009C0306H, 09009C0330H), and other supporting data applicable to
the City of Meriden, and any subsequent revisions thereto, are adopted
by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter.
B. Since mapping is legally adopted by reference into this regulation it
must take precedence until such time as a map amendment or map
revision is obtained from FEMA. The area of special flood hazard
includes any area shown on the FIRM as Zones A and AE, including areas
designated as a floodway on the FIRM. Areas of special flood hazard
are determined utilizing the base flood elevations ("BFE") provided on
If the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the
damage occurred.
(2)
For the purposes of this definition, substantial improvement is
considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor,
or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that
alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term
does not, however, include either:
Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing
state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which
are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
(1)
Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of
Historic Places or a state inventory of historic places.
(2)
B.
§ 110-5 MERIDEN CODE § 110-7
1:208
the flood profiles in the Flood Insurance Study ("FIS") for a community.
BFEs provided on a Flood Insurance Rate Map ("FIRM") are approximate
(rounded up or down) and should be verified with the BFEs published in
the FIS for a specific location. The FIS and FIRM are on file and available
for public use and inspection in the office of the City Clerk.
§ 110-8. Compliance required.
No development shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended,
converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and other applicable regulations.
§ 110-9. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter
and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or
overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
§ 110-10. Interpretation.
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:
A. Considered as minimum requirements;
B. Liberally construed in favor of the governing body;
C. Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under the
state statutes.
§ 110-11. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes.
This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood
hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or
flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the
City of Meriden, any officer or employee thereof, or the Federal Insurance
Administration, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this
chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
§ 110-12. Development permit required.
A development permit shall be obtained before construction or development
begins within any area of special flood hazard established in § 110-7.
Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished by
the administrator and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate
drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations
of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of
materials, drainage facilities; and the location of the foregoing. Specifically,
the following information is required:
§ 110-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-12
1:209
A. Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the lowest floor (including
basement) of all structures;
B. Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure has been
or will be floodproofed;
C. Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that
the floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet the
floodproofing criteria in § 110-19B;
D. A description, including maps, drawings, computations and other
information, of the extent to which any floodway and/or watercourse will
be altered or relocated as a result of the development, new or substantial
improvement; and
E. A description, including maps, drawings and site plans, which defines
the extent to which encroachment of the flood-fringe area results from
the proposed development, new or substantial improvement.
§ 110-13. City Engineer to administer provisions.
The City Engineer is hereby appointed to administer and implement this
chapter by granting or denying development permit applications in
accordance with its provisions. The actions of the City Engineer in the
implementation of this chapter are subject to review by the Flood Control
Implementation Agency of the City.
§ 110-14. Duties and responsibilities of City Engineer.
Duties of the City Engineer shall include, but not be limited to:
A. Permit review:
(1) Review all development permits to determine that the permit
requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.
(2) Review all development permits to determine that all necessary
permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local
governmental agencies from which prior approval is required.
(3) Review all development permits to determine if the proposed
development adversely affects the flood-carrying capacity of the
area of special flood hazard. For purposes of this chapter, "adversely
affects" means the cumulative effect of proposed development when
combined with all other existing and anticipated development that
increases the water surface elevation of the base flood more than
one foot at any point.
B. Use of other base flood data: When base flood elevation data has not
been provided in accordance with § 110-7, Basis for establishing the
areas of special flood hazard, the administrator shall obtain, review
and utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from
a federal, state, local or other source. When determined necessary by
the administrator, the applicant, at the request of the administrator, will
supplement such data with a hydraulic report which clearly describes
anticipated changes to base-flood flows and water surface elevations
which would result from the proposed development or activity. Such
reports shall be certified by a professional engineer registered in the
State of Connecticut. Where such data has been provided the provisions
§ 110-12 MERIDEN CODE § 110-14
1:210
of § 110-19, Specific standards for flood hazard reduction, shall be
administered in addition to those contained in § 110-18, General
standards for flood hazard reduction. [Amended 7-20-1992]
C. Information to be obtained from the applicant and maintained by the
administrator:
(1) Obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level)
of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially
improved structures within the areas of special flood hazard.
(2) For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures within
the areas of special flood hazard:
(a) Verification and recording of the actual elevation (in relation to
mean sea level); and
(b) Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in § 110-12C.
(3) Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the
provisions of this chapter.
D. Alteration of floodways and watercourses:
(1) Notify adjacent communities and the State Department of
Environmental Protection, Division of Water Resources, prior to any
alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of
such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA).
(2) Require that flows equal to or greater than those presently
encountered be maintained. Changes to existing flood-carrying
capacities shall not adversely affect upstream or downstream
floodways or watercourses.
(3) Require that flood stages and water surface heights be substantially
maintained at their present elevations.
E. Interpretation of FIRM boundaries: make interpretations where needed
as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood
hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a
mapped boundary and actual field conditions). The person contesting
the location of the boundary shall be given an opportunity to appeal the
interpretation as provided in § 110-20A.
F. Assure that subdivision proposals and proposals for other developments,
including their utilities and drainage, are located and designed to be
consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
G. Require that all subdivision proposals and other proposed new
developments and substantial improvements include base flood data.
H. Require new water and sewer systems (including on-site systems) to be
located and designed to avoid impairment and to minimize infiltration
into and exfiltration out of the system.
I. Require anchoring to prevent flotation and lateral movement of any type
of structural development.
J. Assure, through inspection of permitted activities, that compliance with
this chapter is maintained.
K. Grant permits for regulated use activities as defined in § 110-16.
L. Provide technical assistance to the Flood Control Implementation
Agency on matters concerning special exceptions.
§ 110-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-15
1:211
§ 110-15. Permitted uses.
A. The following open space uses shall be permitted within the flood-fringe
area, excluding the regulatory floodway, to the extent that they are
not prohibited by any other ordinance or regulation and provided that
they do not require structures, earth fill, the storage of materials or
equipment, or the use of utilities such as gas, electric, water or sewer:
(1) Agricultural uses such as general farming, pasture, grazing, outdoor
plant nurseries, horticulture, truck farming, forestry, sod farming,
and wild crop harvesting.
(2) Any parking areas for three vehicles or fewer.
(3) Private and public recreational uses, such as golf courses, open
tennis courts, driving ranges, archery ranges, picnic grounds, boat
launching ramps, swimming areas, parks, wildlife and nature
preserves, game farms, fish hatcheries, shooting preserves, target
ranges, trap and skeet ranges, hunting and fishing areas, hiking and
horseback riding trails.
(4) Residential uses, such as lawns, gardens and play areas.
B. Permitted uses shall be granted by the City Engineer when it has been
determined that the provisions of Subsection A above have been met.
§ 110-16. Regulated uses.
A. New development and substantial improvements shall be permitted
within areas of special flood hazard, excluding the regulatory floodway,
to the extent that they are not prohibited by any other ordinance or
regulation and provided that they meet the provisions of §§ 110-18 and
110-19, provisions for flood hazard reduction, of this chapter.
B. Regulated uses shall be granted by the City Engineer, provided that all
provisions of this chapter have been met.
§ 110-17. Special exceptions.
A. New developments and substantial improvements may be permitted as
a special exception in the regulated floodway and shall conform to the
provisions of this chapter, provided that:
(1) The area of the site covered by a proposed improvement, addition
or accessory structure shall be no more than 25% of the area of the
site covered by the existing building of principal use, as long as the
pertinent requirements of this section are met. A special exception
granted under these conditions shall be on a one-time-only basis.
(2) The applicant shall provide the Agency with a report prepared by
a professional engineer registered in the state, that certifies that
the construction, as proposed, will not adversely affect the storage
capacity of the affected watercourse during a base flood.
(3) Where floodproofing is utilized for a particular nonresidential
structure, a professional engineer or architect registered in the
state shall certify that the floodproofing methods conform to the
requirements in § 110-19B.
(4) No encroachment of the regulatory floodway, including fill,
substantial improvements, accessory structures or other
development, including public works projects of the state, federal
§ 110-15 MERIDEN CODE § 110-17
1:212
or local governments, shall be allowed except for those activities
specifically granted as special exceptions by the Meriden Flood
Control Implementation Agency. In no case, however, will any such
activity be allowed if an increase in flood levels within the community
would result.
(5) In the event that elimination of a structure takes place, by reason
of fire or other like catastrophe, and is subsequently replaced with
a new structure of like kind and intended use, this will be allowed
to the extent that the building coverage will not exceed 125% of the
displaced building coverage, as long as all requirements of pertinent
subsections of this section are met.
(6) Commercial or industrial loading areas, parking areas for more than
three vehicles, or airport landing strips are in accordance with the
pertinent subsections of this section.
B. Alterations, reconstruction or rehabilitation of watercourses and land
areas within the regulated floodway may be permitted as a special
exception and shall conform to the provisions of this chapter.
C. Special exceptions shall be granted only by the Meriden Flood Control
Implementation Agency, to the extent that they are not prohibited by any
other ordinance or regulation, and provided that all provisions of this
chapter are met.
D. In order to assure the furtherance of the purposes of this chapter, other
requirements may be imposed upon the applicant as a condition to the
granting of a special exception.
§ 110-18. General standards for flood hazard reduction.
In all areas of special flood hazard, the following standards are required:
A. Anchoring:
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the
structure.
(2) All new or substantially improved manufactured homes or
manufactured home parks or subdivisions to be placed in an area of
special flood hazard shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse,
or lateral movement. Anchoring may include, but not be limited to,
the use of over-the-top and frame ties to ground anchors. Specific
requirements shall be that:
(a) Over-the-top ties be provided at each of the four corners of
the manufactured home with two additional ties per side at
intermediate locations, with manufactured homes less than 50
feet long requiring four additional ties per side;
(b) Frame ties be provided at each corner of the home with five
additional ties per side at intermediate points, with
manufactured homes less than 50 feet long requiring four
additional ties per side;
(c) All components of the anchoring system be capable of carrying a
force of 4,800 pounds; and
(d) Any additions to the manufactured home be similarly anchored.
B. Construction materials and methods:
§ 110-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-18
1:213
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials resistant to flood damage. [Amended
7-20-1992]
(2) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood
damage.
C. Utilities:
(1) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system.
(2) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system and
discharge from the systems into floodwaters.
(3) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment
to them or contamination from them during flooding.
(4) Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air-conditioning
equipment, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within
the components during conditions of flooding.
D. Subdivision proposals:
(1) All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage;
(2) All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities,
such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, located and
constructed to minimize flood damage;
(3) All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to
reduce exposure to flood damage; and
(4) Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals
and other proposed development any portion of which is located
within areas of special flood hazard.
§ 110-19. Specific standards for flood hazard reduction.
In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has
been provided as set forth in § 110-7, Basis for establishing areas of special
flood hazard, or § 110-14B, Use of other base flood data, the following
provisions are required:
A. Residential construction: New construction and substantial
improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor,
including basement, elevated to or above base flood elevation, plus one
foot.
B. Nonresidential construction: New construction and substantial
improvement of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential
structure shall either have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated
to the level of the base flood elevation, plus one foot or, together with
attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall:
(1) Be floodproofed so that below the base flood level, plus one foot, the
structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the
passage of water;
(2) Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and
§ 110-18 MERIDEN CODE § 110-19
1:214
(3) Be certified by a registered Connecticut professional engineer or
architect that the standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such
certifications shall be provided to the official as set forth in
§ 110-14C(2).
C. Elevated buildings: New construction or substantial improvements of
elevated buildings that include fully enclosed areas formed by
foundation and other exterior walls below the base flood elevation shall
be designed to preclude finished living space and designed to allow for
the entry and exit of floodwaters to automatically equalize hydrostatic
flood forces on exterior walls.
(1) Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified
by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following
minimum criteria:
(a) Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not
less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area
subject to flooding;
(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above
the grade; and
(c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other
coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic
flow of floodwaters in both directions.
(2) Electrical, plumbing, and other utility connections are prohibited
below the base flood elevation.
(3) Access to the enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to
allow for parking of vehicles (garage door) or limited storage of
maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises
(standard exterior door) or entry to the living area (stairway or
elevator).
D. Manufactured homes:
(1) Manufactured homes shall be anchored in accordance with
§ 110-18A(2).
(2) For expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions;
for existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions where the
repair, construction or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads
equals or exceeds 50% of the value of streets, utilities and pads
before the repair, reconstruction or improvement has commenced;
and for manufactured homes not placed in a manufactured home
park or subdivision, it shall be required that:
(a) All manufactured homes (including mobile homes placed on a
site for 180 consecutive days or longer) be elevated so that the
lowest floor is above the base flood elevation;
(b) It shall be placed on a permanent foundation which itself is
securely anchored and to which the structure is securely
anchored so that it will resist flotation, lateral movement, and
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic pressures. Anchoring may
include, but not be limited to, the use of over-the-top or frame
ties to ground anchors;
(c) Adequate surface drainage and access for a hauler are provided;
and
§ 110-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-19
1:215
(d) In the instance of elevation on pilings, that lots are large enough
to permit steps; piling foundations are placed in stable soil no
more than 10 feet apart, and reinforcement is provided for
pilings more than six feet above the ground level.
(3) No manufactured homes shall be placed in a floodway.
E. Substantial improvements:
(1) Substantial improvements, additions or accessory structures to
residential structures within unnumbered A Zones on the
community's FIRM shall have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated to or above the base flood elevations, plus one foot, as
obtained from alternate sources.
(2) Substantial improvements, additions or accessory structures to
nonresidential structures within unnumbered A Zones on the
community's FIRM shall have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated or floodproofed to or above the base flood elevation, plus
one foot, as obtained from alternate sources.
(3) Substantial improvements or additions to residential structures or
accessory structures within Zones A1-30 and A4 on the community's
FIRM shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or
above the base flood level, plus one foot.
(4) Substantial improvements, additions or accessory structures to
nonresidential structures within Zones A1-30 on the community's
FIRM shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or
above the base flood level, plus one foot, or be floodproofed to or
above the base flood level, plus one foot.
F. Occupation of floodway areas: Located within areas of special flood
hazard established in § 110-7 are areas designated as floodways. Since
the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of
floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles, and erosion
potential, the following provisions apply:
(1) Encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements, and other development, are prohibited unless
certification by a registered professional engineer is provided
demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any increase in
flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
(2) If § 110-19E(1) is satisfied, all new construction and substantial
improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard
reduction provisions of §§ 110-18 and 110-19, provisions for flood
hazard reduction.
(3) The placement of any manufactured homes is prohibited.
G. Alteration of floodways and watercourses: Proposed changes to
floodways and watercourses as defined in § 110-17B shall be subject to
the following provisions:
(1) The applicant shall submit a hydrologic and hydraulic report which
clearly describes anticipated changes to base flood flows and water
surface elevations which would result from the proposed
development or activity. Such reports shall be certified by a
professional engineer, registered in the State of Connecticut.
§ 110-19 MERIDEN CODE § 110-19
1:216
(2) Any proposed stormwater conveyance element shall be designed to
carry existing base flood flows.
(3) Base floodwater surface elevations shall be substantially maintained
at their existing levels after development.
§ 110-20. Appeals; conditions for variances.
A. Appeals:
(1) Any decision of the City Engineer may be appealed on a form
provided by the City Engineer to the Meriden Flood Control
Implementation Agency within seven calendar days of the date of
said decision, the date of said decision being excluded in the
calculation of said seven days. Any such appeal shall not stay the
decision of the City Engineer, which shall remain effective until such
time as it may be overruled, modified or otherwise changed by said
Agency. All decisions by the City Engineer shall be conveyed to the
applicant in writing by certified mail.
(2) The Agency shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is
an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the
administrator in the enforcement or administration of this chapter.
(3) Those aggrieved by the decision of said Agency, or any taxpayer,
may appeal such decision to the Superior Court in the same manner
as an appeal under § 8-28 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as
amended, including all provisions relating to time limitations, hereby
imposing upon the Agency the same time limitations as are imposed
upon the Planning Commission for the purposes of § 8-28.49
(4) In passing upon such applications, the Agency shall consider all
technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in
other sections of this chapter, and:
(a) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
(b) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage;
(c) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual
owner;
(d) The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility
to the community;
(e) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
(f) The availability of alternate locations for the proposed use which
are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
(g) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;
(h) The relationship of the proposed use to the Comprehensive Plan
and floodplain management program for that area;
(i) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
49.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 110-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-20
1:217
(j) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave
actions, if applicable, expected at the site; and
(k) The costs of providing governmental services during and afterflood
conditions, including maintenance and repair of public
utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water
systems, and streets and bridges.
(5) Before making a final determination, the Agency shall consult with
the Meriden Planning Commission and take into account its advice
as part of the record of the appeal.50
(6) Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of 1/2 acre or less
in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures
constructed below the base flood level, provided that § 110-20A(4)
has been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the 1/
2 acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance
increases.
(7) Upon consideration of the factors of § 110-20A(4) and the purposes
the Agency may attach such conditions to the granting of variances
as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter.
(8) The administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions
and report any variances to the Federal Insurance Administration
upon request.
B. Conditions for variances:
(1) Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or
restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic
Places or the state inventory of historic places, without regard to the
procedures set forth in the remainder of this section.
(2) Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if
any increases in flood levels during the base flood discharge would
result.
(3) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to
afford relief.
(4) Variances shall only be issued upon:
(a) A showing of good and sufficient cause;
(b) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in
exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
(c) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on
or victimization of the public or conflict with existing local laws
or ordinances.
(5) Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest
floor elevation below the base flood elevation and that the cost
50.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 110-20 MERIDEN CODE § 110-20
1:218
of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk
resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation.
§ 110-21. Enforcement; penalties for offenses. [Amended
12-16-1996; 3-20-2017]
A. This chapter shall be enforced by the Administrator, the Director of
Public Works and/or the Flood Control Implementation Agency.
B. The provisions of this chapter may be enforced by citation of $250, in
addition to other remedies. Each day's failure to comply with any such
provision shall constitute a separate violation. The following persons
have authority to issue citations for violations pursuant to this section:
the Administrator, the Director of Public Works or their designee.
Chapter 112
FOOD AND FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Citation process — See Ch. 86.
§ 112-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADULTERATED — Has the meaning stated in the Federal Food, Drug, and
Cosmetic Act, § 402.
APPROVED — Acceptable to the Director of Health and Human Services
based on a determination of conformity with principles, practices, and
generally recognized standards that protect public health.
AUTHORIZED AGENT — The person designated by the Director of Health
and Human Services to act for him/her in the performance of their duties.
Aw — Water activity which is a measure of the free moisture in a food, is
the quotient of the water vapor pressure of the substance divided by the
vapor pressure of pure water at the same temperature, and is indicated by
the symbol "Aw."
CATERER — A business involved in the sale or distribution of food and
drink prepared in bulk at one geographic location for service in individual
portions at another location or which involves preparation or service of food
on public or private premises not under the ownership or control of the
operator of such service.
COMBINATION LICENSE — A license obtained by an otherwise licensed
food service establishment which permits the license holder to include
catering as part of the operation. A combination license may not be issued
separately, but may only be issued in conjunction with another license class.
§ 110-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-1
1:219
CONSUMER — A person who is a member of the public, takes possession
of food, is not functioning in the capacity of an operator of a food service
establishment or food processing plant, and does not offer the food for
resale.
DIRECTOR OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES — The local Director of
Health and Human Services or his/her authorized agent.
EMPLOYEE — The permit holder, person in charge, food employee, person
having supervisory or management duties, person on the payroll, family
member, volunteer, person performing work under contractual agreement,
or other person working in a food establishment.
EQUIPMENT — All stoves, ranges, hoods, meat blocks, tables, counters,
refrigerators, sinks, dishwashing machines, steam tables or other similar
items other than utensils used in the operation of a food service
establishment.
FOOD — Any raw, cooked, or processed edible substance, ice, beverage or
ingredient used or intended for use or for sale in whole or in part for human
consumption, or chewing gum.
FOOD ESTABLISHMENT —
"Food establishment" means an operation that:
Stores, prepares, packages, serves, vends food directly to the
consumer, or otherwise provides food for human consumption such
as a restaurant, satellite or catered feeding location, catering
operation if the operation provides food directly to a consumer
or to a conveyance used to transport people, market, vending
location, conveyance used to transport people, institution, or food
bank; and
(1)
Relinquishes possession of food to a consumer directly, or indirectly
through a delivery service such as home delivery of grocery orders
or restaurant takeout orders, or delivery service that is provided by
common carriers.
(2)
A.
"Food establishment" includes:
An element of the operation such as a transportation vehicle or
a central preparation facility that supplies a vending location or
satellite feeding location unless the vending or feeding location is
permitted by the regulatory authority; and
(1)
An operation that is conducted in a mobile, stationary, temporary,
or permanent facility or location; where consumption is on or off
the premises; and regardless of whether there is a charge for the
food.
(2)
B.
"Food establishment" does not include:
An establishment that offers only prepackaged foods that are not
time/temperature-control-for-safety foods;
(1)
C.
§ 112-1 MERIDEN CODE § 112-1
1:220
FOOD PROCESSING PLANT — A commercial operation that manufactures,
packages, labels, or stores food for human consumption, and provides food
for sale or distribution to other business entities such as food processing
plants or food establishments. "Food processing plant" does not include a
food establishment.
GAME ANIMAL — An animal, the products of which are food, that is not
classified as livestock, sheep, swine, goat, horse, mule, or other equine in
9 CFR 301.2, Definitions, or as poultry, or fish. "Game animal" includes
mammals such as reindeer, elk, deer, antelope, water buffalo, bison, rabbit,
squirrel, opossum, raccoon, nutria, or muskrat, and nonaquatic reptiles
such as land snakes. "Game animal" does not include ratites.
NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION — An organization holding a tax-exempt
status as defined by the United States Internal Revenue Code 26 U.S.C.
§ 501, which is operated by an entity which is not associated with a branch
of federal, state or local government.
PERSON — An association, a corporation, individual, partnership, other
legal entity, government, or governmental subdivision or agency.
PERSON IN CHARGE — The individual present at a food service
establishment who is responsible for the operation at the time of inspection.
A produce stand that only offers whole, uncut fresh fruits and
vegetables;
(2)
A food processing plant; including those that are located on the
premises of a food establishment;
(3)
A kitchen in a private home if only food that is not time/
temperature-control-for-safety food, is prepared for sale or service
at a function such as a religious or charitable organization's bake
sale if allowed by law and if the consumer is informed by a clearly
visible placard at the sales or service location that the food is
prepared in a kitchen that is not subject to regulation and
inspection by the regulatory authority;
(4)
An area where food that is prepared as specified in Subsection C(4)
of this definition is sold or offered for human consumption;
(5)
A kitchen in a private home, such as a small family day-care
provider or a bed-and-breakfast operation that prepares and offers
food to guests if the home is owner-occupied, the number of
available guest bedrooms does not exceed 6, breakfast is the only
meal offered, the number of guests served does not exceed 18,
and the consumer is informed by statements contained in published
advertisements, mailed brochures, and placards posted at the
registration area that the food is prepared in a kitchen that is not
regulated and inspected by the regulatory authority; or
(6)
(7) A private home that receives catered or home-delivered food.
§ 112-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-1
1:221
pH — A symbol for the negative logarithm of the hydrogen ion
concentration, which is a measure of the degree of acidity or alkalinity of
a solution. Values between 0 and 7 indicate acidity and values between 7
and 14 indicate alkalinity. The value for pure distilled water is 7, which is
considered neutral.
REGULATORY AUTHORITY — The local, state, or federal enforcement body
or authorized representative having jurisdiction over the food
establishment.
TEMPORARY FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT — Any food service
establishment which operates from a fixed location within the City of
Meriden only for a period of time not to exceed 14 days in connection with
a celebration or single event, such as a fair, carnival, circus or rodeo.
TIME/TEMPERATURE-CONTROL-FOR-SAFETY FOOD —
A food that requires time/temperature control for safety (TCS) to limit
pathogenic microorganism growth or toxin formation.
A.
Time/temperature-control-for-safety food includes:
An animal food that is raw or heat-treated; a plant food that is
heat-treated or consists of raw seed sprouts, cut melons, cut leafy
greens, cut tomatoes or mixtures of cut tomatoes that are not
modified in a way so that they are unable to support pathogenic
microorganism growth or toxin formation, or garlic-in-oil mixtures
that are not modified in a way so that they are unable to support
pathogenic microorganism growth or toxin formation; and
(1)
Except as specified in Subsection E(4) of this definition, a food that
because of the interaction of its Aw and pH values is designated as
product assessment required (PA) in Table A or B of this definition:
(2)
B.
Table A. Interaction of pH and Aw for control of spores in food heattreated
to destroy vegetative cells and subsequently packaged:
Aw values pH: 4.6 or less pH: >4.6 - 5.6 pH: >5.6
<0.92 Non-TCS food* Non-TCS food Non-TCS food
>0.92 - 0.95 Non-TCS food Non-TCS food PA**
>0.95 Non-TCS food PA** PA**
*TCS food means Time/temperature-control-for-safety food
**PA means product assessment required
C.
Table B. Interaction of pH and Aw for control of vegetative cells and
spores in food not heat-treated or heat-treated but not packaged.
D.
§ 112-1 MERIDEN CODE § 112-1
1:222
Aw values pH: <4.2
pH: 4.2 -
4.6
pH: >4.6 -
5.0 pH: >5.0
<0.88 Non-TCS
food*
Non-TCS
food
Non-TCS
food
Non-TCS
food
0.88 - 0.90 Non-TCS
food
Non-TCS
food
Non-TCS
food
PA**
>0.90 - 0.92 Non-TCS
food
Non-TCS
food
PA PA
>0.92 Non-TCS
food
PA PA PA
*TCS food means time/temperature-control-for-safety food
**PA means product assessment required
"Time/temperature-control-for-safety food" does not include:
An air-cooled hard-boiled egg with shell intact, or an egg with shell
intact that is not hard-boiled, but has been pasteurized to destroy
all viable salmonellae;
(1)
A food in an unopened hermetically sealed container that is
commercially processed to achieve and maintain commercial
sterility under conditions of nonrefrigerated storage and
distribution;
(2)
A food that because of its pH or Aw value, or interaction of Aw and
pH values, is designed as a Non-TCS food in Table A or B of this
definition;
(3)
A food that is designated as product assessment required (PA)
in Table A or B of this definition and has undergone a product
assessment showing that the growth or toxin formation of
pathogenic microorganisms that are reasonably likely to occur in
that food is precluded due to:
Intrinsic factors including added or natural characteristics of
the food such as preservatives, antimicrobials, humectants,
acidulants, or nutrients;
(a)
Extrinsic factors including environmental or operational
factors that affect the food such as packaging, modified
atmosphere such as reduced oxygen packaging, shelf life and
use, or temperature range of storage and use; or
(b)
(c) A combination of intrinsic and extrinsic factors; or
(4)
A food that does not support the growth or toxin formation of
pathogenic microorganisms in accordance with one of the
Subsections E(1) through (4) of this definition even though the food
(5)
E.
§ 112-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-1
1:223
VARIANCE — A written document issued by the regulatory authority that
authorizes a modification or waiver of one or more requirements of this
code if, in the opinion of the regulatory authority, a health hazard or
nuisance will not result from the modification or waiver.
§ 112-2. Terms defined in other codes.
Where terms are not defined in this chapter and are defined in either the
FDA Food Code, Connecticut General Statutes or the building, fire safety or
public health codes, they shall have the same meanings ascribed to them as
in the general statutes or as in these codes.
§ 112-3. Terms not defined.
Where terms are not defined under the provisions of either the FDA Food
Code, Connecticut General Statutes or the building, fire safety or public
health codes, they shall have ascribed to them their ordinarily accepted
dictionary meanings or such as the context may herein imply.
§ 112-4. Interchangeability.
Words used in the present tense include the future; words in the masculine
gender include the feminine and neuter; the singular number includes the
plural and the plural the singular.
§ 112-5. Enforcement.
The Director of Health and Human Services or his/her authorized agent
shall enforce the provisions of this chapter, the Connecticut General
Statutes, the FDA Food Code and the Public Health Code of the State of
Connecticut.
§ 112-6. Authority.
The Director of Health and Human Services or his/her authorized agent
may enter any building, structure or vehicle in the City in order to carry
out his duties as to food inspection and may take samples of food or drink
found in the City for purposes of inspection. The Director of Health and
Human Services or his/her agent, after showing proper identification, shall
be permitted to enter, during normal operating hours, any portion of any
food establishment for the purpose of making inspections to determine
compliance with this chapter, the FDA Food Code and the Public Health
Code of the State of Connecticut.
§ 112-7. Conflict of regulations.
In any case where a provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict with
the FDA Food Code, a regulation of the Connecticut Department of Public
may contain a pathogenic microorganism or chemical or physical
contaminant at a level sufficient to cause illness of injury.
§ 112-1 MERIDEN CODE § 112-7
1:224
Health and/or the Department of Consumer Protection on the effective date
of this chapter, the provision which establishes the higher standard for
the promotion and protection of the health and safety of the people shall
prevail.
§ 112-8. Establishment by Council of minimum requirements.
The City Council is authorized to establish minimum requirements for food
service establishments. Such requirements may be modified from time to
time in accordance with the recommendations of the Connecticut
Department of Public Health.
§ 112-9. License required; expiration; posting.
It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to operate a food service
establishment within the municipality of Meriden without a valid license
issued by the Director of Health and Human Services. Each such licensee
shall comply with the requirements of the FDA Food Code, the Public Health
Code of the State of Connecticut and the Code of the City of Meriden in
order to receive and retain such a license. Licenses shall not be transferable
from person to person or from location to location. All licenses shall expire
on December 31 of each year. A valid license shall be posted in a
conspicuous location in every food service establishment. Licenses for
temporary food service establishments shall be issued for a period of time
not to exceed 14 days. Any person or entity applying for a food handling
license is presumed to be knowledgeable about and agrees to abide by all
of the provisions of this chapter and the Public Health Code of the State of
Connecticut.
§ 112-10. Issuance of licenses; classification of establishments;
annual fee schedule.
A. Any person desiring to operate a food service establishment must make
written application for a license on forms provided by the Director
of Health and Human Services at least 30 days prior to the opening
or change of ownership of such establishment. Such application shall
include the applicant's full name, date of birth, mailing address,
telephone number, and signature and the name, mailing address, and
location of the food service establishment. The application shall also note
whether such applicant is an individual, firm, corporation or partnership
and, if not an individual, the name(s) of the officers or partners, together
with their addresses, the type of service, location of the proposed food
service establishment, and the signature of the applicant. If the
application is for a temporary food service establishment, it shall also
include the inclusive dates and scope of the proposed operation. Only
those persons who comply with the requirements of the Code of the
City of Meriden and the Public Health Code of the State of Connecticut
and the FDA Food Code shall be entitled to receive and retain such
license. At the time of filing the application, the applicant shall pay to
the Director of Health and Human Services the required fee that shall be
the license fee for one year.
§ 112-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-10
1:225
B. Food service establishment classification. The Director of Health and
Human Services shall classify each food service establishment by using
the criteria outlined in this subsection. Establishments shall be classified
at the time of licensure. The classification shall be reviewed during
each inspection and in no case less than annually. The food service
establishment shall be placed into the highest classification that
describes any of the food operations conducted. When it comes to the
attention of the Director of Health and Human Services that the food
service establishment has changed to a different class, the Director
of Health and Human Services shall reclassify that food service
establishment. No license fee adjustments will be made on current valid
food service licenses. No food service establishment shall change
operations to a different classification without prior approval by the
Director of Health and Human Services. The classifications for food
service establishments are as follows:
(1) Class I - A retail food establishment that does not serve a population
that is highly susceptible to foodborne illnesses and only offers
(A) commercially packaged processed food that (i) is time- or
temperature-controlled for safety and may be heated for hot holding,
but (ii) is not permitted to be cooled, or (B) food prepared in the
establishment that is not time- or temperature-controlled for safety.
(2) Class II - A retail food establishment that does not serve a population
that is highly susceptible to foodborne illnesses and offers a limited
menu of food that is prepared, cooked and served immediately, or
that prepares and cooks food that is time- or temperature-controlled
for safety and may require hot or cold holding, but that does not
involve cooling.
(3) Class III - A retail food establishment that (A) does not serve a
population that is highly susceptible to foodborne illnesses, and
(B) has an extensive menu of foods, many of which are time- or
temperature-controlled for safety and require complex preparation,
including, but not limited to, handling of raw ingredients, cooking,
cooling and reheating for hot holding.
(4) Class IV - A retail food establishment that serves a population that is
highly susceptible to foodborne illnesses, including, but not limited
to, preschool students, hospital patients and nursing home patients
or residents, or that conducts specialized food processes, including,
but not limited to, smoking, curing or reduced oxygen packaging for
the purposes of extending the shelf life of the food.
C. Annual license fees shall be charged according to the following schedule:
(1) Class I establishments: $125.
(2) Class II establishments: $175.
(3) Class III establishments: $225.
(4) Class IV establishments: $250.
(5) Nonprofit organizations (must show IRS tax-exempt status):
(a) Class I establishments: $50.
(b) Class II establishments: $75.
(c) Class III establishments: $100.
(d) Class IV establishments: $125.
§ 112-10 MERIDEN CODE § 112-10
1:226
(6) Public/private school/government organization: no fee.
(7) Catering combination (issued in conjunction with another license
class): $15.
(8) Temporary food service (14 days maximum): $50; nonprofit
organizations: $25.
D. Other fees.
(1) An additional fee of $50 will be charged to those establishments
which fail to renew their food service license before January 1 of
each year.
(2) A fee of $25 shall be charged for each reinspection of a food service
establishment due to a foodborne illness risk factor not in
compliance.
(3) Whenever a reinspection fee is charged, the Director of Health and
Human Services shall submit an invoice to the licensee. Such invoice
shall be payable within two weeks of receipt by the licensee. All
reinspection fees shall be paid before any license is renewable by the
Director of Health and Human Services.
(4) An additional fee of $20 shall be charged for all temporary food
license applications received within two working days before the
event.
E. Upon receipt of such an application, the Director of Health and Human
Services shall make an inspection of the food service establishment to
determine compliance with the provisions of this chapter, the FDA Food
Code, and the Public Health Code of the State of Connecticut. When
inspection reveals that the applicable requirements of this chapter, the
FDA Food Code and the Public Health Code of the State of Connecticut
have been met, the Director of Health and Human Services shall issue a
license to the applicant.
§ 112-11. Suspension of license.
A. A Director of Health and Human Services may suspend any license to
operate a food service establishment if:
(1) The license holder, person in charge, or the operation of the
establishment itself does not comply with the requirements of this
chapter, the FDA Food Code or the Public Health Code of the State
of Connecticut.
(2) The operation of the establishment otherwise constitutes an
immediate and substantial hazard to public health.
(3) The Director of Health and Human Services or his/her authorized
agent is interfered with in the performance of their duties.
(4) There is a failure to correct a violation which is continually found and
reported on the inspection form.
B. If the Director of Health and Human Services finds unsanitary or other
conditions in the operation of a food service establishment which, in his/
her judgment, constitute an immediate and substantial hazard to public
health, he/she will immediately issue a written notice of suspension to
the license holder or person in charge citing the reasons for such action.
Upon service of such notice, the license is suspended. When a license
§ 112-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-11
1:227
is suspended, all operations related to the processing, preparation,
storage, transportation, sale or service of food shall cease immediately.
C. Whenever a license is suspended, an opportunity for a hearing will be
provided if a written request for a hearing is filed with the Director of
Health and Human Services by the license holder within 48 hours. If no
written request for a hearing is filed within 48 hours, the suspension
is sustained. The license holder who is aggrieved by such action of the
Director of Health and Human Services may, within 48 hours after the
making of such decision, appeal to the Commissioner of Public Health
who shall thereupon notify the authority from whose decision the appeal
was taken and examine the merits of such case and may sustain, modify
or rescind such action.
D. The Director of Health and Human Services may end the suspension at
any time if reasons for the suspension no longer exist.
E. Upon receiving a request for hearing, the Director of Health and Human
Services shall thereupon immediately examine the merits of such
suspension and may sustain, modify or rescind such suspension. The
license holder who is aggrieved by such action of the Director of Health
and Human Services may, within 48 hours after the making of such
decision, appeal to the Commissioner of Public Health who shall
thereupon immediately notify the authority from whose decision the
appeal was taken and examine the merits of such case and may sustain,
modify or rescind such action.
F. During the process of appeal, the license shall remain suspended.
However, the Director of Health and Human Services may grant a stay
upon a showing of good cause.
§ 112-12. Revocation of license.
A. The Director of Health and Human Services may, after providing an
opportunity for hearing and appeal, revoke a license for serious or
repeated violations of any of the requirements of this chapter, the FDA
Food Code or the Public Health Code of the State of Connecticut, or for
interference with the Director of Health and Human Services, or his/
her authorized agent, in the performance of their duties, or for cases
where the license to operate has been obtained through nondisclosure,
misrepresentation, or intentional misstatement of material fact, or for
nonpayment of personal property taxes in accordance with § 12-146a of
the Connecticut General Statutes.
B. Prior to revocation, the Director of Health and Human Services shall
notify the license holder or person in charge, in writing, of the reasons
for which the license is subject to revocation, and that the license shall
be revoked at the end of 10 days following service of such notice, unless
a request for a hearing is filed with the Director of Health and Human
Services by the license holder within 48 hours of the notice being issued.
If no request for a hearing is filed within 48 hours, the revocation of the
license becomes final.
C. If a written request for a hearing is filed with the Director of Health and
Human Services by the license holder or the person in charge within
48 hours following the service of such notice, the Director of Health
§ 112-11 MERIDEN CODE § 112-12
1:228
and Human Services shall thereupon immediately examine the merits of
such revocation and may sustain, modify or rescind such revocation. The
license holder or person in charge who is aggrieved by such action of
the Director of Health and Human Services may, within three business
days, appeal to the Commissioner of Public Health who shall thereupon
immediately notify the authority from whose decision the appeal was
taken and examine the merits of such case and may sustain, modify or
rescind such action.
§ 112-13. Service of notice.
A notice provided for in this chapter shall be deemed to have been properly
served when a copy of the inspection report form or other notice has been
delivered to the license holder or person in charge or when it is sent by
registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the address of the
license holder as reported on the license application. A copy of the notice
shall be filed in the records of the Director of Health and Human Services.
§ 112-14. Reinstatement of suspended and revoked licenses.
A. Suspension. Whenever a license has been suspended, the holder of the
suspended license may make a written request for license reinstatement.
Such written request shall specifically indicate how each of the
conditions which caused the suspension have been corrected and shall
be signed by the license holder. Within 10 days following receipt of
written request, the Director of Health and Human Services shall make
a reinspection. If the Director of Health and Human Services determines
that the applicant has complied with the requirements of the chapter, the
FDA Food Code and the Public Health Code of the State of Connecticut,
the license shall be reinstated.
B. Revocation. After a period of 60 days from the date of revocation, a
written application may be made for the issuance of a new license, as
provided for in §§ 112-9 and 112-10 of this chapter, and payment of the
annual fee.
§ 112-15. Inspections.
Prior to the issuance of a license and periodically thereafter, the Director
of Health and Human Services shall visit every food service establishment
within the City of Meriden to make as many inspections and additional
reinspections as are necessary to ensure effective compliance with the
enforcement of this chapter. Every person operating a food service
establishment shall, upon the request of the Director of Health and Human
Services, permit access during business hours, or, in the case of a public
health hazard, upon notification by the Director of Health and Human
Services, to all parts of the establishment to determine compliance with
the requirements of this chapter and the examination of all records of food
purchased or received if a public health hazard is suspected. If the Director
of Health and Human Services discovers a violation of any provision of
this chapter, he shall notify the responsible person of the condition found,
provide a reasonable period for correction and explain that failure to
§ 112-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-15
1:229
correct within the specified time may result in suspension or revocation of
the license or prosecution. An opportunity for a hearing will be provided if a
written request for a hearing is filed with the Director of Health and Human
Services within 48 hours following service of such notice, provided that
when any condition found is deemed an imminent public health hazard, the
Director of Health and Human Services shall send the operator an official
notice of immediate suspension of the license. In the case of temporary
food service establishments, violations must be corrected within a specified
period of time not to exceed 24 hours. Failure to comply with such notice
shall result in immediate suspension of the license.
§ 112-16. Food from approved source; examination; hold order;
condemnation of food.
A. Food from approved source. All food and drink in a food service
establishment shall be from sources approved or considered satisfactory
by the Director of Health and Human Services.
B. Examination. Food may be examined or sampled by the Director of
Health and Human Services as often as necessary for enforcement of
this chapter or the Public Health Code of the State of Connecticut.
C. Hold order. The Director of Health and Human Services may, upon
written notice to the license holder or person in charge specifying with
particularity the reason(s) therefor, place a hold order on any food or
beverage which he/she believes is adulterated or otherwise unfit for
human consumption. The Director of Health and Human Services shall
tag, label, or otherwise identify any food subject to the hold order. No
food subject to a hold order shall be used, served, or moved from the
establishment. The Director of Health and Human Services shall direct
storage of the food under conditions specified in the hold order without
risk to the public health. The hold order shall state that a request for
hearing may be filed with the Director of Health and Human Services
within 48 hours, and that if no hearing is requested, the food shall be
destroyed. Within 48 hours following receipt of a request for a hearing,
the Director of Health and Human Services shall hold a hearing. On
the basis of evidence procured at that hearing, the hold order may be
rescinded or the license holder or person in charge of the food may be
directed, by written order, to denature or destroy such food or bring it
into compliance with the provisions of this chapter or the Public Health
Code of the State of Connecticut.
D. Condemnation. Food shall be subject to immediate condemnation by the
Director of Health and Human Services when it is found to be from
an unapproved source or is found to be unfit for human consumption
by reason of the appearance or odor of decomposition, adulteration, or
by having been contaminated by exposure to water, smoke, fire, heat,
lack of refrigeration or animal or insect contact. Exposure to nonfood
chemicals in solid, liquid, or gaseous forms shall also be grounds for
condemnation. Such action of condemnation shall only be used when,
in the opinion of the Director of Health and Human Services, there is
substantial risk that the suspected food would otherwise be used for
§ 112-15 MERIDEN CODE § 112-16
1:230
human consumption, or if the license holder agrees in writing as to the
grounds for condemnation.
§ 112-17. Equipment design.
A. All new and replacement equipment used in the storage, processing,
holding and transportation of food shall be commercial grade and
conform with the design and fabrication standards for food equipment
that is certified or classified for sanitation by an American National
Standards Institute (ANSI) accreditation.
B. A three-compartment sink shall be provided and used wherever washing
and sanitization of equipment is conducted manually. The sink shall be a
single unit. Sink compartments shall be of adequate length, width, and
depth to permit the complete immersion of the equipment and utensils
used in the operation of the facility. Each compartment shall be supplied
with hot and cold running water. Drainboards or easily movable utensil
tables of a size acceptable to the Director of Health and Human Services
shall be provided at all dishwashing sinks. The design and location of
such drainboards or utensil tables shall not interfere with the proper use
of the dishwashing facilities.
C. Equipment in use in a food service establishment prior to the effective
date of this chapter which does not fully meet all of the design and
construction standards as stated may be continued in use, under the
same ownership, if it is in good repair and is capable of being maintained
in a sanitary condition, or is otherwise deemed acceptable by the
Director of Health and Human Services.
§ 112-18. Grease interceptors.
The design, installation, and maintenance of grease interceptors shall
comply with the requirements of the Department of Energy and
Environmental Protection and the Meriden Water Pollution Control
Authority.
§ 112-19. Cleaning facilities.
In new or extensively remodeled establishments, at least one utility sink or
curbed cleaning facility with a floor drain shall be provided and used for the
cleaning of mops or similar wet floor cleaning tools and for the disposal of
mop water or similar liquid wastes. The sink or facility shall be equipped
with hot and cold running water. The use of handwashing, utensil-washing,
equipment-washing, or food preparation sinks for this purpose is prohibited.
§ 112-20. Review of establishments.
A. When food service establishments are hereafter constructed or
remodeled, or when existing structures are converted for use as food
service establishments, properly prepared plans and specifications for
such construction, remodeling or alteration, showing layout,
arrangement and construction materials of work areas and location, size
and type of equipment and facilities, shall be submitted to the Director
of Health and Human Services for approval before such work is begun.
§ 112-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-20
1:231
B. Information and application for plan review shall be submitted on forms
approved by the Director of Health and Human Services. At the time of
application, the applicant shall pay to the Director of Health and Human
Services the required fee which shall be $100.
C. The Director of Health and Human Services shall review and approve
these plans and specifications prior to the start of construction,
remodeling or conversion. No food service establishment shall be
constructed, remodeled, or converted except in accordance with the
plans and specifications approved by the Director of Health and Human
Services. No building permit shall be issued until such time as the
Director of Health and Human Services has submitted to the Building
Official a written statement indicating his approval of plans and
specifications. Existing establishments which have a change in
ownership or license holder shall be reviewed by the Director of Health
and Human Services prior to the issuance of a new license. Such
establishments shall be required to make any physical modifications
deemed necessary by the Director of Health and Human Services to
bring the establishment into compliance with the provisions of this
chapter, the FDA Food Code and the Public Health Code of the State of
Connecticut.
D. Whenever plans and specifications are required by this chapter to be
submitted to the Director of Health and Human Services, the Director of
Health and Human Services shall inspect the food service establishment
as many times as he shall deem necessary prior to the start of operations
to determine compliance with the approved plans and specifications
and with the requirements of this chapter, the FDA Food Code and
the Public Health Code of the State of Connecticut. No certificate of
occupancy shall be issued until such time as the Director of Health
and Human Services has submitted to the Building Official a written
statement indicating his approval of the food service establishment.
§ 112-21. Regulation of food service establishments in other
jurisdictions.
Food from service establishments outside the jurisdiction of the Director
of Health and Human Services of the City of Meriden may be sold within
the City of Meriden if such food service establishments conform to the
provisions of this chapter or to substantially equivalent provisions. To
determine the extent of compliance with such provisions, the Director
of Health and Human Services may accept reports from responsible
authorities in other jurisdictions where such food service establishments
are located.
§ 112-22. Penalties for offenses other than suspension and
revocation.
Any person who shall violate any provisions of this chapter, the FDA Food
Code, and/or the Public Health Code of the State of Connecticut shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor. Upon conviction thereof, such person shall
be subject to a fine of not more than $100 for each day that an offense
§ 112-20 MERIDEN CODE § 112-22
1:232
continues between the date of notice of violations and the date of correction
as known by reinspection, or the date of disposition by a court of competent
jurisdiction. Absent proof of a claim that said violation(s) has (have) been
corrected as herein provided for, said violation(s) shall be deemed to have
continued consecutively each day during the period of time prior to said
disposition. In addition thereto, such persons may be enjoined from
continuing such violation(s).
§ 112-23. Authority to issue citation.
The provisions of this chapter may be enforced by citation, in addition to
other remedies. The following persons have the authority to issue citations
for violation pursuant to this section: the Director of Health and Human
Services, the Associate Director of Health (in Acting Status), the
Environmental Health Administrator and any sanitarian.
Chapter 120
HAZARDOUS WASTE
§ 120-1. Purpose.
Purpose. The prohibition of oil and gas drilling and extraction wastes are
hereby declared necessary for the protection of the health, property, safety
and welfare of the residents of the City of Meriden pursuant to C.G.S.
§ 7-148(c)(7)(H), C.G.S. § 7-148(c)(4)(H); C.G.S. § 7-148(c)(7)(H)(xi), C.G.S.
§ 7-148(c)(8), and § 7-148(c)(7)(H)(ii) as amended.
§ 120-2. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, and words
shall have the meanings given here, unless otherwise clearly indicated by
the context:
APPLICATION — The physical act of placing or spreading natural gas waste
or oil waste on any road or real property located within the City of Meriden.
HYDRAULIC FRACTURING — The fracturing of underground rock
formations, including shale and nonshale formations, by man-made, fluiddriven
techniques for the purpose of stimulating oil, natural gas, or other
subsurface hydrocarbon production.
NATURAL GAS EXTRACTION ACTIVITIES — All geologic or geophysical
activities related to the exploration for or extraction of natural gas,
including, but not limited to, core and rotary drilling and hydraulic
fracturing.
NATURAL GAS WASTE —
Any liquid or solid waste or its constituents that is generated as a result
of natural gas extraction activities, which may consist of water, brine,
A.
§ 112-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-2
1:233
OIL EXTRACTION ACTIVITIES — All geologic or geophysical activities
related to the exploration for or extraction of oil, including, but not limited
to, core and rotary drilling and hydraulic fracturing.
OIL WASTE —
§ 120-3. Storage, disposal, or use of oil and natural gas drilling and
extraction waste prohibited.
A. The application of natural gas waste or oil waste, whether or not such
waste has received beneficial use determination or other approval for
use by DEEP (Department of Energy and Environmental Protection) or
any other regulatory body, on any road or real property located within
the City for any purpose is prohibited.
B. The introduction of natural gas waste or oil waste into any wastewater
treatment facility within or operated by the City is prohibited.
C. The introduction of natural gas waste or oil waste into any solid waste
management facility within or operated by the City is prohibited.
D. The storage, disposal, sale, acquisition, transfer, handling, treatment,
and/or processing of waste from natural gas or oil extraction activities is
prohibited within the City.
§ 120-4. Penalties for offenses.
A. In addition to other remedies allowable under the law, the City may
require remediation of any damage done due to a violation of § 120-3 to
any land, road, building, aquifer, well, watercourse, air quality or other
asset, be it public or private, within the City of Meriden.
chemicals, naturally occurring radioactive materials, heavy metals, or
other contaminants;
Leachate from solid wastes associated with natural gas extraction
activities;
B.
Any waste that is generated as a result of or in association with the
underground storage of natural gas;
C.
Any waste that is generated as a result of or in association with
liquefied petroleum gas well storage operations; and
D.
Any products or by-products resulting from the treatment, processing,
or modification of any of the above wastes.
E.
Any liquid or solid waste or its constituents that is generated as a
result of oil extraction activities, which may consist of water, brine,
chemicals, naturally occurring radioactive materials, heavy metals, or
other contaminants;
A.
B. Leachate from solid wastes associated with oil extraction activities; and
Any products or by-products resulting from the treatment, processing,
or modification of any of the above wastes.
C.
§ 120-2 MERIDEN CODE § 120-4
1:234
B. In addition to other remedies allowable under the law, the City may issue
citations in the amount of $250 per violation per day for any violation
of this section. Absent proof that a violation has been corrected, said
violation shall be deemed to be continuing consecutively each day during
the period of time prior to said disposition. The following persons shall
have authority to issue citations for violations pursuant to this Chapter:
Director of Health and Human Services, Director of Public Utilities,
City Planner and Director of Development and Enforcement, Director of
Public Works, or their designee.
Chapter 122
HOUSING DISCRIMINATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Equal opportunities — See Ch. 101.
§ 122-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to affirmatively provide for fair housing
and equal opportunity for every local citizen without regard to race, color,
national origin, sex or religion, and further to provide equal opportunity to
all of the citizens of Meriden in accordance with the requirements of all
federal and state laws and executive orders related to housing.
§ 122-2. Applicability to state and federal laws.
This chapter is consistent with and meets the requirements and objectives
of the United States Constitution, Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964,
Title VIII of the Civil Rights Act of 1968, Section 109 of the Housing and
Community Development Act of 1974, Executive Order 11063 and any other
applicable federal or state laws relative to equal opportunity in housing.
§ 122-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BLOCKBUSTING — The practice of inducing owners of real property to sell
or list real property for sale because of the actual or rumored advent into a
neighborhood of a member of a racial, religious or ethnic group.
HOUSING ACCOMMODATIONS — Any real property permitted for human
habitation within the City.
LENDING INSTITUTION — Any bank, insurance company, savings and loan
association or any other person regularly engaged in the business of lending
money or guaranteeing loans.
§ 120-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 122-3
1:235
PERSON — Includes one or more individuals, partnerships, associations,
corporations, organizations, legal representatives, employees, agents,
anyone acting for or on behalf of any person or other legal entities.
REAL PROPERTY — Real estate, lands, tenements and/or hereditaments.
UNLAWFUL DISCRIMINATION — Includes those unlawful practices and
acts specified herein.
§ 122-4. Prohibited acts.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person:
(1) To refuse to sell, rent, lease, assign or sublease or otherwise deny
any housing accommodation to any person or persons because of
race, color, religion, creed, national origin, ancestry, ethnic origin,
sex or marital status.
(2) To refuse to negotiate for the sale, rent, lease, assignment or
sublease of any housing accommodation to any person or persons
because of race, color, religion, creed, national origin, ancestry,
ethnic origin, sex or marital status.
(3) To represent that any housing accommodation is not available for
inspection, sale, lease, sublease, assignment or rent or to withhold
information about any housing accommodation which is, in fact,
available for inspection, sale, lease, sublease, rent or assignment or
to otherwise deny or withhold any housing accommodation to any
person or persons because of race, color, religion, creed, national
origin, ancestry, ethnic origin, sex or marital status.
(4) To discriminate against any person or persons because of race, color,
religion, creed, national origin, ancestry, ethnic origin, sex or marital
status in the terms, conditions or privileges of the sale, rental, lease,
assignment or sublease of any housing accommodation.
(5) To directly or indirectly advertise that the purchase or rental by
persons of any particular race, color, religion, creed, national origin,
ancestry, ethnic origin, sex or marital status is unwelcome,
objectionable, unacceptable or not solicited.
(6) To use any form of application for purchase, rental, lease,
assignment, sublease or financing of any housing accommodation
which inquires into the race, color, religion, creed, national origin,
ancestry or ethnic origin of any person.
(7) To engage in the practice of blockbusting, including but not limited
to the following:
(a) To induce, directly or indirectly, or attempt to induce, directly
or indirectly, the sale or listing for sale of real property by
representing that an adverse change has occurred or will or may
occur with respect to the racial, religious or ethnic composition
of the block, neighborhood or area in which the property is
located.
(b) To induce, directly or indirectly, or attempt to induce, directly
or indirectly, the sale or listing for sale of real property by
representing that the presence or anticipated presence of
§ 122-3 MERIDEN CODE § 122-4
1:236
persons of any particular race, religion or national origin in the
area will or may result in:
[1] The lowering of property values.
[2] An increase in the criminal or antisocial behavior in the area.
[3] A decline in the quality of the schools serving the area.
(c) To make any misrepresentations concerning the listing for sale
or the anticipated listing for sale or the sale of real property in
the area for the purpose of inducing or attempting to induce the
sale or listing for sale of real property.
(d) To make any representation to any prospective purchaser that
any block, neighborhood or area has, will or might undergo an
adverse change with respect to the religious, racial or ethnic
composition of the block, neighborhood or area for the purpose
of discouraging the purchase of property in a particular area.
(e) To place a sign purporting to offer for sale any property that is
not in fact offered for sale.
(f) To advertise for sale or rental property which is nonexistent or
which is not actually for sale or rental.
(g) To engage in or hire or conspire with others to commit acts or
activities of any nature, the purpose of which is to coerce, cause
panic, incite unrest or create or play upon fear with the purpose
of inducing or attempting to induce the sale or listing for sale of
real property.
(h) To engage in any economic reprisal or any other form of
intimidation against any person because that person has filed a
complaint, testified, assisted or participated in any manner in
any investigation, proceeding or conference under the terms of
this chapter.
(i) To aid, abet, incite, compel or coerce any person to engage in
any of the practices forbidden by this chapter or to obstruct or
prevent any person from complying with the provisions of this
chapter.
B. No person, bank or lending institution shall discriminate against any
applicant because of the race, color, religion, creed, national origin,
ancestry, ethnic origin, sex or marital status of such applicant or the
prospective occupants or tenants of such housing accommodation in the
granting, extending or renewing the rates, terms or conditions of any
such loan.
§ 122-5. Enforcement. [Amended 9-15-1980; 1-21-1997]
The Human Rights Advocate shall be responsible for the enforcement of this
chapter.
§ 122-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 122-5
1:237
Chapter 125
HOUSING STANDARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 77.
Citation process — See Ch. 86.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 107.
Housing discrimination — See Ch. 122.
Health nuisances — See Ch. 144.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 146.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 159.
Sewers — See Ch. 170.
Solid waste, recycling and littering — See Ch.
176.
Trailers and trailer camps — See Ch. 194.
Zoning — See Ch. 213.
§ 122-5 MERIDEN CODE § 122-5
1:238
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 125-1. Definitions and word usage.
A. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BASEMENT — A portion of a building located partly underground but
having less than 1/2 its clear floor-to-ceiling height below the average
grade of the adjoining ground.
CELLAR — A portion of a building located partly or wholly underground
and having 1/2 or more than 1/2 of its clear floor-to-ceiling height below
the average grade of the adjoining ground.
DEPARTMENT OF DEVELOPMENT AND ENFORCEMENT — The legally
designated department charged with administrating the Building Code
and Housing Code and pertaining ordinances as designated by the City
Council.
DIRECTOR OF DEVELOPMENT AND ENFORCEMENT — The
Department Head of the Department of Development and Enforcement.
DIRECTOR OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES — The legally
designated health authority of the City, or his authorized representative.
DWELLING — Any building which is wholly or partly used or arranged or
designed to be used for living or sleeping by human occupants, provided
that temporary housing as hereinafter defined shall not be regarded as a
"dwelling."
DWELLING UNIT — Any room or group of rooms located within a
dwelling and forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are
used, arranged or designed to be occupied for living, sleeping, cooking
and eating.
EXCEEDS STANDARDS — The particular condition is reasonably
expected to meet the standards set forth in the Housing Code for at least
the following five years.
EXTERMINATION — The control and elimination of insects, rodents
or other pests by eliminating their harborage places, by removing or
making inaccessible materials that may serve as food, by poisoning,
spraying fumigating or trapping or by any other recognized and legal
pest elimination methods approved by the Director of Health and Human
Services.
GARBAGE — The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
HABITABLE ROOM — A room of enclosed floor space used or intended
to be used for living, sleeping, cooking or eating purposes, excluding
bathrooms, water closet compartments, laundries, pantries, foyers or
communicating corridors, closets and storage spaces.
§ 125-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 125-1
1:239
INFESTATION — The presence, within or around a dwelling, of any
insects, rodents or other pests.
MULTIPLE DWELLING — Any dwelling containing more than two
dwelling units.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — A dwelling or dwelling unit that is new from
the ground up including a new foundation, new utility services, and
all new material constructed with all applicable approvals, permits,
inspections and certifications as required by the Building Official.
OCCUPANT — Any person over one year of age living, sleeping, cooking
or eating in or having actual possession of a dwelling unit or rooming
unit.
OPERATOR — Any person who has charge, care or control of a building,
or part thereof, in which dwelling units or rooming units are let.
OWNER — Any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others:
PLUMBING — Includes all of the following supplied facilities and
equipment: gas pipes, gas-burning equipment, water pipes, garbage
disposal units, waste pipes, water closets, sinks, installed dishwashers,
lavatories, bathtubs, shower baths, installed clothes washing machines,
catch basins, drains, vents and any other similar supplied fixtures,
together with all connections to water, sewer or gas lines.
ROOMING HOUSE — Any dwelling, or that part of any dwelling
containing one or more rooming units, in which space is let by the owner
or operator to three or more persons who are not the husband or wife,
son or daughter, mother or father or sister or brother of the owner or
operator.
ROOMING UNIT — Any room or group of rooms forming a single
habitable unit used or intended to be used for living and sleeping, but for
no cooking or eating purposes.
RUBBISH — Combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except
garbage; and the term shall include the residue from the burning of
wood, coal, coke and other combustible material, paper, rags, cartons,
boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings,
tin cans, metals, mineral matter, glass, crockery and dust.
Shall have legal title to any dwelling or dwelling unit with or without
accompanying actual possession thereof; or
(1)
Shall have charge, care or control of any dwelling or dwelling unit,
as owner or agent of the owner, or as executor, executrix,
administrator, administratrix, trustee or guardian of the estate of the
owner. Any such person thus representing the actual owner shall be
bound to comply with the provisions of this chapter and of the rules
and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, to the same extent as if
he were the owner.
(2)
§ 125-1 MERIDEN CODE § 125-1
1:240
SUBSTANTIAL RENOVATION — A dwelling or dwelling unit that has
been renovated within the past 24 months (from the date of inspection)
to bring all electrical, plumbing and heating systems up to current code;
new or like new windows, doors, kitchen and bathroom fixtures, and no
defective interior or exterior surfaces and porches, stairs and railings
must meet current code whether new or existing. Substantial renovation
to be confirmed by all applicable permits, inspections and signatures of
the Building Official.
SUPPLIED — Paid for, furnished or provided by or under the control of
the owner or operator.
TEMPORARY HOUSING — Any tent, trailer or other structure used for
human shelter which is designed to be transportable and which is not
attached to the ground, to another structure or to any utilities system on
the same premises for more than 30 consecutive days.
TOTAL RENOVATION — An entire dwelling or dwelling unit that has
been gutted and newly renovated with code compliant electrical,
plumbing, HVAC, windows, doors, insulation, stairs, railings, roofing,
siding, porches and foundation. Total renovation to be designated by
the final approval of the Building Official, upon confirmation of proper
permits and inspections.
B. Meaning of certain words. Whenever the words "dwelling," "dwelling
unit," "rooming house," "rooming unit" or "premises" are used in this
chapter, they shall be construed as if they were followed by the words
"or any part thereof."
§ 125-2. Administration and coordination of Housing Code.
The Director of Development and Enforcement shall be responsible for
administering and coordinating the Housing Code compliance program in
accordance with the provisions of the Charter, and he shall perform such
other duties as may be delegated to him. All references in this chapter
to inspections by the Director of Development and Enforcement shall also
apply to other inspectors within the Department of Development and
Enforcement.
§ 125-3. Penalties for offenses.
A. Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter may, in
addition to other remedies, including but not limited to criminal
prosecution, be fined up to $100, and each day's failure to comply with
any such provision shall constitute a separate violation.
B. The provisions of this chapter may be enforced by citation, in addition to
other remedies. The following persons have authority to issue citations
for violations pursuant to this section: Housing Code Inspectors,
Director of Development and Enforcement, Zoning Enforcement Officer,
Building Official, Electrical Inspector, Plumbing and Heating Inspector
and Rehabilitation Specialist.
§ 125-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 125-4
1:241
§ 125-4. Maintenance of accessory structures.
All accessory structures, including detached garages, sheds, fences,
retaining walls and private walkways shall be maintained structurally sound
and in good repair.
§ 125-5. Inspections.
A. The Director of Development and Enforcement is hereby authorized and
directed to make periodic inspections within the purview of this chapter
and such inspections as are required by a code compliance program of
the City of Meriden, by and with the consent of the owner, occupant
or person in charge, to determine the condition of dwellings, dwelling
units, rooming units and premises within this City for the purpose of
determining compliance with the provisions of this chapter. For the
purpose of making such inspections, the Director of Development and
Enforcement, with the consent of the owner, occupant or person in
charge, is hereby authorized to enter, examine and survey all dwellings,
dwelling units, rooming units and premises, between the hours of 9:00
a.m. and 5:00 p.m. or at such other time mutually satisfactory to and
agreed upon by the Director of Development and Enforcement and the
owner and occupant of a dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit or the
person in charge thereof. Such inspection, examination or survey shall
not have for its purpose the undue harassment of owner or occupant,
and such inspection, examination or survey shall be made so as to
cause the least amount of inconvenience to said owner or occupant,
consistent with an efficient performance of the duties of the Director of
Development and Enforcement. To further ensure that the policy of this
chapter, which is to achieve compliance through cooperation of owners
and occupants, shall be successfully maintained, it shall be the practice
of the Director of Development and Enforcement, whenever practicable,
to provide reasonable advance notice to owners and/or occupants of
inspections.
B. The owner or occupant of each dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit
or premises, or the person in charge thereof, upon presentation by the
Director of Development and Enforcement of proper credentials, may
give the Director of Development and Enforcement entry to the dwelling,
dwelling unit, rooming unit or premises and free access to every part
thereof, provided that no inspection shall be conducted except during
the hours designated above.
C. Whenever an owner, occupant or person in charge of a dwelling,
dwelling unit, rooming unit or premises shall deny the Director of
Development and Enforcement right of entry for the purpose of
inspection, examination or survey, the Director of Development and
Enforcement shall not enter until he presents a duly issued search
warrant describing the dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit or premises
to the owner, occupant or person in charge thereof or is otherwise
authorized to enter by court order.
D. Nothing in this section shall be construed to preclude the entry of the
Director of Development and Enforcement at any time when, in his
judgment, an emergency tending to create an immediate danger to the
§ 125-4 MERIDEN CODE § 125-5
1:242
public welfare or safety exists or when such entry is requested by the
owner, occupant or person in charge of the dwelling, dwelling unit,
rooming unit or premises or when the Director of Development and
Enforcement presents a duly issued search warrant to said owner or
occupant or person in charge thereof.
§ 125-6. Access to remedy noncompliance.
Every occupant of a dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit shall give
the owner thereof, or his agent or employee, access to any part of such
dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit, or its premises, at all reasonable
times for the purpose of making such repairs or alterations as are necessary
to effect compliance with the provisions of this chapter or with any lawful
rule or regulation adopted or any lawful order issued pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter.
§ 125-7. Conflicts with other standards.
In any case where a provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict with
a provision of any other provision of the City code existing on the effective
date of this section, the provision which establishes the higher standard for
the promotion and protection of the health and safety shall prevail.
§ 125-8. Owner responsible for maintenance of public areas.
Every owner of a dwelling containing two or more dwelling units shall
be responsible for maintaining in a safe, clean and sanitary condition the
interior and exterior shared or public areas of the dwelling and premises
thereof property.
§ 125-9. Off-street parking.
A. The parking of vehicles on the property of any multiple dwelling located
in any zoning district as defined in Chapter 213 of the City Code shall be
limited to designated areas located on the same property as the multiple
dwelling.
B. The parking areas are to be designated by and are the responsibility of
the owner:
C. All designated parking areas must be approved by the Department of
Development and Enforcement of the City of Meriden and must conform
to the following conditions:
(1) The designated parking area shall be located within the side or rear
yard wherever possible;
(2) The designated parking area shall not be located such that any
vehicle parking in this area will overhang the sidewalk within the
City's right-of-way or obstruct access to the main entrance;
(3) The designated parking area shall be paved with a dust-free allweather
surface;
(4) The designated parking area shall have a paved apron between the
edge of the roadway and the front property line (driving over City
curbing is not allowed);
§ 125-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 125-9
1:243
(5) For safety and aesthetic purposes or for reasons of code compliance,
the Department of Development and Enforcement may require
additional conditions under particular or unique circumstances.
§ 125-10. Responsibility of occupant.
Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall keep in a safe, clean
and sanitary condition that part of the dwelling, dwelling unit and premises
thereof which he occupies and controls.
§ 125-11. Disposal of garbage and rubbish.
Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall dispose all their
garbage/rubbish, in a clean, safe and sanitary manner by placing their
garbage/rubbish in approved containers (refer to Chapter 176) and placing
containers at their curbside no more than 24 hours prior to scheduled
collection and removed no later than 24 hours after said collection and, if
feasible, stored in an area not readily visible from the street.
§ 125-12. Responsibility for extermination of rodents.
Every occupant of a dwelling containing a single dwelling unit shall be
responsible for the extermination of any insects, rodents or other pests
therein or on the premises, and every occupant of a dwelling unit in a
dwelling containing more than one dwelling unit shall be responsible for
such extermination whenever his dwelling unit is the only one infected.
Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this section, whenever
infestation is caused by failure of the owner to maintain a dwelling in a
ratproof or reasonably insectproof condition, extermination shall be the
responsibility of the owner. Whenever infestation exists in two or more of
the dwelling units in a dwelling or in the shared or public areas of any
dwelling containing two or more dwelling units, extermination thereof shall
be the responsibility of the owner.
§ 125-13. Control of vegetation.
It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of any premises in the City
to allow grass to grow more than one foot in height, unless such grass is to
be harvested as hay, or to allow any weeds or similar growth to grow more
than one foot in height, or to allow any weed or other plant which causes
hay fever or similar diseases to grow, or to allow any wild and untrimmed
bushes to grow, on any land fronting on a paved street or on any interior lot
bounded on three or more sides by land fronting on any such street.
§ 125-14. Responsibility for maintenance of plumbing fixtures.
Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall keep all plumbing fixtures therein in
a clean and sanitary condition and shall be responsible for the exercise of
reasonable care in the proper use and operation thereof.
§ 125-15. Use of lead paint.
§ 125-9 MERIDEN CODE § 125-15
1:244
A. Definition. "Lead paint" shall mean any pigmented, liquid substance
applied to surfaces by brush, roller or spray in which the total nonvolatile
ingredients contain more than 0.06% of lead, by weight, calculated as
metallic lead.
B. Prohibited conduct. No person shall apply lead paint to the interior or
exterior surfaces of any dwelling, rooming house, dwelling unit, rooming
unit or facility nor on or around the common areas thereof and any other
structure located within the same lot line.
C. Hazardous conditions. Where the Department of Development and
Enforcement determines that the presence of defective paint upon any
premises creates a potential hazard to children, any suspected violation
shall be referred to the Health Department, and the owner or occupant
shall eliminate the hazard in accordance with lead-safe work practices,
local and state codes and the U.S. EPA renovation, repair and painting
program rule.
§ 125-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 125-15
1:245

ARTICLE II
Enforcement
§ 125-16. Responsibility for enforcement.
A. The Director of Development and Enforcement shall be responsible for
coordinating the code compliance program in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter and all other related codes of the City of
Meriden, and he shall perform such other duties as may be delegated to
him.
B. The Director of Development and Enforcement shall also keep and
maintain all records of the actions and work of all code compliance
programs undertaken by him and provide reports of the same to the City
Manager or any official of the City designated by the City Manager.
C. Whenever the Director of Development and Enforcement determines
that conditions exist which cause any dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming
unit or premises to fail to meet the minimum standards provided for
in this chapter or regulations pursuant thereto, he shall issue a notice
setting forth the alleged failure or failures and an order requiring that
such failures be corrected. The notice and order shall:
(1) Be put in writing.
(2) Set forth the alleged violation or violations of this chapter, or of the
rules and regulations pursuant thereto, and describe the dwelling,
dwelling unit, rooming unit or premises wherein the violation is
alleged to exist or to have been committed.
(3) Provide a reasonable time, not to exceed 60 days, for the correction
of any violation alleged.
(4) Be served upon the owner, occupant or person in charge of the
dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit or premises by personal
service, as provided for in the rules of the courts of this state, or by
registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, delivered to
the addressee only. If one or more persons to whom such a notice
and order is addressed cannot be found after diligent effort to do
so, service may be made upon such person or persons by posting a
notice in a conspicuous place in or about the dwelling, dwelling unit,
rooming unit or premises described in this notice.
D. After the passage of the period of time allowed for the correction of
any alleged violation, the Director of Development and Enforcement
shall reinspect the dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit or premises
detailed in the notice, following the procedure described in § 125-5
above. Before such reinspection is undertaken, the owner, occupant
or person in charge of the dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit or
premises to be inspected shall be informed that any evidence of a
violation of any provisions of this chapter or any regulation pursuant
thereto, as enumerated in said notice and order, may form the basis of
a prosecution. The consent of the owner, occupant or person in charge
of such reinspection shall then be requested, and no such reinspection
shall be undertaken without such consent.
E. In the event that such consent to reinspection is refused and the Director
of Development and Enforcement has reasonable grounds to believe
§ 125-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 125-16
1:247
that a violation of any provisions of this chapter or any regulation
pursuant thereto has occurred or is occurring, he shall apply for a search
warrant describing the dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit or premises
in question or take such other action as may be authorized by law to
secure a court order to enter the dwelling. Upon procurement of a
duly issued search warrant or such other court order, the Director of
Development and Enforcement may enter, inspect, examine and survey
the described dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit or premises for the
purpose of determining whether there has been compliance with his
notice of violation and accompanying order.
§ 125-17. Appeals procedure.
Any person aggrieved by a notice or an order of the Director of Development
and Enforcement issued in connection with any inspection, examination or
survey pursuant to this chapter, or any rule or regulation pursuant thereto,
may appeal the same to the Neighborhood Rehabilitation Advisory Board.
§ 125-18. When permits deemed revoked.
After a hearing in the case of any notice suspending any permit required
by this chapter, when such notice has been sustained by the Neighborhood
Rehabilitation Advisory Board, the permit shall be deemed to have been
revoked. Any permit which has been suspended by a notice shall be deemed
automatically revoked if a petition for hearing is not filed in the office of
the Department of Development and Enforcement within 20 days after such
notice is served.
§ 125-16 MERIDEN CODE § 125-18
1:248
ARTICLE III
Minimum Standards
§ 125-19. Basic equipment and facilities.
No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let to another for occupancy
any dwelling or dwelling unit for the purpose of living, sleeping, cooking or
eating therein which does not comply with the following requirements:
A. Kitchen sink. Every dwelling unit shall contain a kitchen sink in good
working condition and properly connected to a water and sewer system
approved by the Department of Development and Enforcement.
B. Flush water closet and lavatory basin. Every dwelling unit shall contain
a room which affords privacy to a person within the room and which is
equipped with a flush water closet and a lavatory basin in good working
condition and properly connected in a water and sewer system approved
by the Department of Development and Enforcement.
C. Bathtub or shower. Every dwelling unit shall contain, within the room
which affords privacy to a person within the room, a bathtub or shower
in good working condition and properly connected to a water and sewer
system approved by the Department of Development and Enforcement.
D. Hot and cold water. Every kitchen sink, lavatory basin and bathtub or
shower required under the provisions of Subsections A, B and C of this
section shall be properly connected with both hot and cold water lines.
E. Rubbish storage facilities. Every dwelling unit shall have adequate
rubbish storage facilities whose type and location are approved by the
Department of Development and Enforcement.
F. Garbage disposal facilities. Every dwelling unit shall have adequate
garbage disposal facilities of garbage containers whose type and
location are approved by the Department of Development and
Enforcement.
G. Hot water heating facilities. Every dwelling unit shall have supplied
water heating facilities which are properly installed, are maintained in
safe and good working condition, are properly connected with the hotwater
lines required under the provisions of Subsection D of this section
and are capable of heating water to such a temperature as to permit
an adequate amount of water to be drawn at every required kitchen
sink, lavatory basin, bathtub or shower at a temperature of not less than
110° F. or more than 120° F. Such supplied water heating facilities shall
be capable of meeting the requirements of this subsection whether the
dwelling unit heating facilities required under the provisions of § 125-20
are or are not in operation.
H. Every dwelling unit shall have safe unobstructed means of egress
leading to a safe and open space at ground level. The Director of
Development and Enforcement shall report any suspected violation to
the Fire Marshal or other responsible official.
I. The Director of Development and Enforcement or designee, during a
housing code inspection, will note the presence of smoke detectors, and
report suspected violations to the Fire Marshal for further action.
§ 125-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 125-20
1:249
§ 125-20. Light, ventilation and heating.
No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let to another for occupancy
any dwelling unit for the purpose of living therein which does not comply
with the following requirements:
A. Light: Every habitable space shall have at least one window of approved
size facing directly to the outdoors or to a court. The minimum total
glazed area for every habitable space shall be 8% of the floor area
of such room. Wherever walls or other portions of a structure face a
window of any room and such obstructions are located less than three
feet from the window and extend to a level above that of the ceiling
of the room, such window shall not be deemed to face directly to the
outdoors nor to a court and shall not be included as contributing to the
required minimum total window area for the room. Where natural light
for rooms or spaces without exterior glazing areas is provided through
an adjoining room, the unobstructed opening to the adjoining room shall
be at least 8% of the floor area of the interior room or space, but a
minimum of 25 square feet. The exterior glazing area shall be based
on the total floor area being served. Any suspected violation of this
subsection shall be reported to the Building Official and other officials
responsible for further action.
B. Ventilation: Where rooms and spaces without openings to the outdoors
are ventilated through an adjoining room, the unobstructed opening
to the adjoining room shall be at least 8% of the floor area of the
interior room or space, but a minimum of 25 square feet. The ventilation
openings to the outdoors shall be based on the total floor area being
ventilated. Any suspected violation of this subsection shall be reported to
the Building Official and all other officials responsible for further action.
C. Light and ventilation of bathrooms and water closets. Every bathroom
and water closet compartment shall comply with the light and ventilation
requirements for habitable rooms contained in Subsections A and B
of this section, except that no window or skylight shall be required
in adequately ventilated bathrooms and water closet compartments
equipped with a ventilation system which is kept in continuous operation
when in use and approved by the Department of Development and
Enforcement.
D. Electric service. Every habitable room of a dwelling unit shall contain at
least two separate floor or wall-type electric convenience outlets; every
kitchen shall contain at least two separate wall-type electric convenience
outlets and one supplied ceiling-type electric light fixture; every water
closet compartment and/or bathroom shall contain at least one separate
ground fault interrupter (GFI) electric convenience outlet and one
supplied ceiling or wall-type, switch-operated electric light fixture; every
laundry room and furnace room shall contain at least one wall-type
electric convenience outlet and one supplied ceiling or wall-type electric
light fixture. Every such outlet and fixture shall be properly installed,
shall be maintained in good and safe working condition and shall be
connected to the source of electric power in a safe manner.
E. Heating. Every dwelling shall have supplied heating facilities which are
properly installed, are maintained in safe and good working condition
§ 125-20 MERIDEN CODE § 125-20
1:250
and are capable of safely and adequately heating all habitable rooms,
bathrooms and water closets in every dwelling unit located therein.
Heat, where supplied by the owner, shall be supplied to a temperature of
at least 65° F. at a distance three feet above floor level.
F. Screens. Every window or other device with openings to outdoor space
shall likewise be supplied with screens.
G. Rodent control. Every basement or cellar window used or intended to
be used for ventilation, and every other opening to a basement, which
might provide an entry for rodents shall be supplied with a screen or
such other device as will effectively prevent their entrance.
§ 125-21. Space, use and location.
No person shall let to another for occupancy any dwelling or dwelling unit
for the purpose of living therein which does not comply with the following
requirements:
A. Rooms for sleeping. In every dwelling unit of two or more rooms every
room occupied for sleeping purposes by one occupant shall contain at
least 70 square feet of floor space, and every room occupied for sleeping
purposes by more than one occupant shall contain at least 50 square feet
of floor space for each occupant thereof.
B. Access to bathroom; access to sleeping room. No dwelling or dwelling
unit containing two or more sleeping rooms shall have such
arrangements that access to a bathroom or water closet compartment,
intended for use by occupants of more than one sleeping room, can
be had only by going through another sleeping room; nor shall room
arrangements be such that access to a sleeping room can be had only
by going through another sleeping room or a bathroom or water closet
compartment.
C. Minimum ceiling height. At least 1/2 of the floor area of every habitable
room in a multiple dwelling shall have a ceiling height of at least seven
feet, four inches, except for an attic room which shall be at least seven
feet high in 1/2 of its area; and the floor area of that part of any room
where the ceiling height is less than five feet shall not be considered as
part of the room area in computing the floor area of the room for the
purpose of determining the maximum permissible occupancy thereof.
D. Cellar and basement occupancy. No cellar or basement shall be occupied
as a habitable room or dwelling unit, except as a workshop or recreation
room, unless it shall comply with applicable provisions of the City of
Meriden Building Code as applied to new construction in existing
buildings.
E. Handrails and guardrails. Every exterior and interior flight of stairs
having more than four risers shall have a handrail on one side of the stair
and every open portion of a stair, landing, balcony, porch, deck, ramp or
other walking surface which is more than 30 inches above the floor or
grade below shall have guards. Handrails shall not be less than 34 inches
in height or more than 38 inches in height measured vertically above the
nosing of the tread or above the finished floor of the landing or walking
surfaces. Guards shall not be less than 36 inches in height above the
§ 125-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 125-21
1:251
floor of the landing, balcony, porch, deck, ramp or other walking surface.
Guardrails shall not be required when exempted by the Building Code.
§ 125-22. Maintenance.
No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let to another for occupancy
any dwelling or dwelling unit for the purpose of living therein which does
not comply with the following requirements:
A. Foundations, floors, walls, ceilings and roof. Every foundation, floor,
wall, ceiling and roof shall be reasonably weathertight, watertight and
rodentproof, shall be capable of affording privacy and shall be kept in
good repair.
B. Windows, exterior doors and basement hatchways. Every window,
exterior door and basement hatchway shall be reasonably weathertight,
watertight and rodentproof and shall be kept in sound working condition
and good repair.
C. Stairs and porches. Every inside and outside stair, every porch and every
appurtenance thereto shall be so constructed as to be safe to use and
capable of supporting the load that normal use may cause to be placed
thereon and shall be kept in sound condition and good repair.
D. Plumbing. Every plumbing fixture and water supply and waste pipe shall
be properly installed and maintained in good sanitary working condition,
free from defects, leaks and obstructions.
E. Kitchen and bathroom floor surfaces. Every kitchen floor surface, water
closet compartment floor surface and bathroom floor surface shall be
constructed and maintained as to be reasonably impervious to water
and so as to permit such floor to be easily kept in a clean and sanitary
condition.
F. Repair and safety of equipment. Every supplied facility, piece of
equipment or utility which is required under this chapter shall be so
constructed or installed that it will function safely and effectively and
shall be maintained in satisfactory working condition.
G. Removal of equipment or discontinuance of service. No owner or
operator shall cause any service, facility, equipment or utility, which is
required under this chapter and supplied by him, to be removed from
or shut off from or discontinued for any occupied dwelling let by him
except for such temporary interruption as may be necessary while actual
repairs or alterations are in process or during temporary emergencies
when discontinuance of service is approved by the Department of
Development and Enforcement.
H. Vacant dwelling units to be clean before occupancy. No owner shall
occupy or let to any other occupant any vacant dwelling unit unless it is
clean, sanitary and fit for human occupancy.
I. Exterior facilities. All exterior wood surfaces shall be periodically
treated with a coating of paint or other suitable preservative. All exterior
siding shall be maintained in good repair. All exterior dwelling
components, including but not limited to chimneys, soffits, trim, fascia,
leaders and gutters, shall be maintained in good repair.
J. Interior walls, ceilings and floors. Every interior wall, ceiling and floor
shall be maintained in a safe condition and kept in good repair.
§ 125-21 MERIDEN CODE § 125-22
1:252
K. Maintenance of house numbers. Every owner of a dwelling or dwelling
unit shall be responsible for affixing and maintaining house numbers as
required under Chapter 146 of Code of the City of Meriden.
§ 125-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 125-22
1:253

ARTICLE IV
Rooming Houses
§ 125-23. Compliance required.
No person shall operate a rooming house or occupy or let to another for
occupancy any rooming unit in any rooming house, except in compliance
with the General Statutes of Connecticut and the provisions of every section
of this chapter except the provisions of §§ 125-8 to 125-14 and 125-19.
§ 125-24. License required.
No person shall operate a rooming house unless he holds a valid rooming
house license issued by the Department of Development and Enforcement
and Fire Marshal in the name of the operator and for the specific dwelling
or dwelling unit.
§ 125-25. License application and issuance.
The rooming house operator shall apply to the Department of Development
and Enforcement for the license, which shall be issued upon compliance by
the operator with the applicable provisions of this chapter.
§ 125-26. Display of license.
The rooming house license shall at all times be displayed in a conspicuous
place within the rooming house.
§ 125-27. License not transferable; notice of change in ownership.
No rooming house license shall be transferable. Every person holding such
a license shall give notice in writing to the Department of Development and
Enforcement within 24 hours after having sold, transferred, given away or
otherwise disposed of ownership of, interest in or control of any rooming
house.
§ 125-28. Term of license.
Every rooming house license shall expire at the end of two years following
the date of issuance, unless sooner suspended or revoked as provided in
§ 125-30.
§ 125-29. Hearing upon appeal.
Any person whose application for a license to operate a rooming house has
been denied may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter
before the Neighborhood Rehabilitation Advisory Board.
§ 125-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 125-30
1:255
§ 125-30. Inspections; procedure upon discovery of violations.
Whenever, upon inspection of any rooming house, conditions or practices
are found to exist which are in violation of any provisions of this chapter, the
Department of Development and Enforcement shall give notice in writing
to the operator of such rooming house that unless such conditions or
practices are corrected within a reasonable period, to be determined by
the Department of Development and Enforcement, the operator's rooming
house license will be suspended. At the end of such period the Department
of Development and Enforcement shall reinspect such rooming house, and if
it finds that such conditions or practices have not been corrected, notice in
writing shall be given to the operator that his license has been suspended.
Upon receipt of notice of suspension such operator shall immediately cease
operation of such rooming house, and no person shall occupy for sleeping
or living purposes any rooming unit therein.
§ 125-31. Hearings on license suspension; revocation if no appeal.
Any person whose license to operate a rooming house has been suspended,
or who has received notice from the Department of Development and
Enforcement that his license is to be suspended unless existing conditions
or practices at his rooming house are corrected, may request and shall be
granted a hearing on the matter before the Neighborhood Rehabilitation
Advisory Board, provided that if no petition for such hearing is filed within
20 days following the day on which such permit was suspended, such
license shall be deemed to have been automatically revoked.
§ 125-32. Washing and toilet facilities.
At least one flush water closet, lavatory basin and bathtub or shower,
properly connected to a water and sewer system approved by the
Department of Development and Enforcement and in good working
condition, shall be supplied for each two rooming units of three rooms or
fewer, or each eight persons or fractions thereof residing within a rooming
house, including members of the operator's family whenever they share the
use of the facilities, provided that in a rooming house where rooms are let
only to males, flush urinals may be substituted for not more than 1/2 of
the required number of water closets. All such facilities shall be so located
within the dwelling as to be reasonably accessible from a common hall or
passageway to all of the persons sharing such facilities and shall be on the
same floor as the rooming units which they service. Every lavatory basin
and bathtub or shower shall be supplied with hot water at all times. No such
facilities shall be located in a basement except by written approval of the
Department of Development and Enforcement.
§ 125-33. Change of linen.
The operator of every rooming house shall change supplied bed linen and
towels therein at least once a week and prior to the letting of any room to
§ 125-30 MERIDEN CODE § 125-33
1:256
any occupant. The operator shall be responsible for the maintenance of all
supplied bedding in a clean and sanitary manner.
§ 125-34. Required floor space for sleeping rooms.
Every room occupied for sleeping purposes by one person shall contain at
least 70 square feet of floor space, and every room occupied for sleeping
purposes for more than one person shall contain at least 50 square feet
of floor space for each occupant thereof. The provisions of § 125-21C are
qualified to permit in rooming units ceiling heights of at least seven feet
over 1/2 of the floor area.
§ 125-35. Means of egress and smoke detectors.
A. Every rooming unit shall have safe unobstructed means of egress leading
to a safe and open space at ground level. The Director of Development
and Enforcement or designee will note and report any suspected
violation to the Fire Marshal. The Director of Development and
Enforcement or designee will note the presence of operating smoke
detectors, and report suspected violations to the Fire Marshal for future
action.
§ 125-36. Responsibility for maintenance in sanitary condition.
The operator of every rooming house shall be responsible for the sanitary
maintenance of all walls, floors and ceilings and for maintenance of a
sanitary condition in every other part of the rooming house, and he shall
be further responsible for the sanitary maintenance of the entire premises
where the entire structure or building is leased or occupied by the operator.
§ 125-37. Applicability to hotels.
Every provision of this chapter which applies to rooming houses shall also
apply to hotels, except as provided in § 125-38 and except to the extent that
any such provision may be found in conflict with the laws of the state or
with the lawful regulations of any state board or agency.
§ 125-38. Restrictions on preparation of meals.
No meals may be prepared or eaten in a rooming house, other than in a
dwelling unit contained therein, unless such meals are prepared and eaten
in communal kitchens and dining rooms conforming to the standards of
§§ 125-39 and 125-40, except that this section shall not apply to the eating
of meals in establishments which hold valid restaurant licenses issued by
the Director of Health and Human Services and which have the rooming
house and restaurant operations integrated as a single business enterprise.
§ 125-39. Communal kitchens.
A communal kitchen as mentioned in § 125-38 shall comply with the
following standards:
§ 125-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 125-39
1:257
A. It shall contain at least 60 square feet of floor space in every case and at
least 100 square feet if meals are both prepared and eaten therein.
B. If occupants are permitted to eat meals therein, it shall be supplied with
one dining chair and two linear feet of dining table space, in addition
to the surface area for food preparation required under Subsection F
below, for each occupant of the rooming house permitted to eat in
the kitchen, the surface of each dining table to be smooth and easily
cleanable.
C. It shall contain at least one supplied kitchen sink of an approved type
which shall be supplied with hot water at all times in accordance with
the provisions of Subsections D and G of § 125-19.
D. It shall contain at least one supplied kitchen gas stove or electric stove,
every such stove to have at least two top burners and an oven.
E. It shall contain one supplied electric or gas refrigerator with an
adequate food storage capacity.
F. It shall contain one or more supplied tables or other facilities having
a total surface area for food preparation of not less than six square
feet, the surface of each table or other facility to be suitable for the
preparation of food, smooth and easily cleanable.
G. It shall contain at least one supplied cabinet of adequate size for and
suitable for storage of food and eating and cooking utensils.
H. It shall be supplied by the operator with the rubbish storage facilities
and the garbage disposal or storage facilities specified by Subsections E
and F of § 125-19.
I. It shall be located within a room accessible to the occupant of each
rooming unit sharing the use of such kitchen without going outside of
the dwelling and without going through a dwelling unit or a rooming unit
of another occupant.
§ 125-40. Communal dining rooms.
Where a communal kitchen does not conform to the provisions of § 125-39
relating to the eating of meals therein, meals shall be eaten in a communal
dining room that complies with the following standards:
A. It shall contain at least 70 square feet of floor area.
B. It shall be supplied with one dining chair and two linear feet of dining
table space for each occupant of the rooming house permitted to eat in
the dining room, the surface of each dining table to be smooth and easily
cleanable.
C. It shall be located on the same floor of the rooming house as the
communal kitchen in which meals are prepared and shall be as nearly
adjacent to the communal kitchen as is practicable.
D. It shall be located within a room accessible to the occupant of each
rooming unit sharing such dining room without going outside of the
dwelling and without going through a dwelling unit or rooming unit of
another occupant.
§ 125-39 MERIDEN CODE § 125-41
1:258
§ 125-41. Posting of signs prohibiting cooking.
The operator of any rooming house shall post in every rooming unit a sign
on which shall be written or printed, in letters not less than 3/8 inch in
height, the following words: "No Cooking Permitted In This Room," and such
sign shall remain so posted at all times the room is occupied.
§ 125-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 125-41
1:259

ARTICLE V
Enforcement of Provisions on Rental Units
§ 125-42. Certificate of compliance required.
No owner, agent or person in charge of a dwelling or dwelling unit offered
for rent shall allow any person to occupy the same as a tenant or lessee or
for a valuable consideration unless he holds a valid certificate of compliance
issued by the Department of Development and Enforcement for the specific
dwelling or dwelling unit. Every certificate of compliance shall expire at the
end of two years following the date of issuance unless the unit is rated as
"exceeds standards," in which case the certificate of compliance expires five
years following date of issuance. The "exceeds standards" category rating is
based upon the unit receiving an "exceeds standards" overall rating in the
three critical inspection categories of exterior, dwelling unit and landlord
cooperation.
§ 125-43. Conditions for issuance of certificates.
Upon request of the owner, agent or other person authorized to rent a
dwelling unit (hereinafter referred to as the "applicant"), the Director of
Development and Enforcement or his designated agent will be available
at an appointed time, within 48 hours, agreed upon by himself and the
applicant, or later if the applicant requests, to inspect such dwelling or
dwelling unit. If such inspection establishes that the dwelling or dwelling
unit is in substantial compliance with the Housing Code, he shall issue a
certificate of compliance for said dwelling or dwelling unit. One copy of
the certificate of compliance shall be handed to or sent to the applicant;
a second copy shall be posted by the owner or his designated agent in a
conspicuous location inside the dwelling or dwelling unit for the information
of the tenant and shall not be removed by or at the direction of anyone other
than the tenant; and a third copy shall be kept on file in the files of the
Department of Development and Enforcement.
§ 125-44. Reinspections.
If said dwelling or dwelling unit does not comply with the Housing Code
standards, the Director of Development and Enforcement or his designated
agent shall furnish the applicant with a written list of the specific violations
which would have to be corrected before a certificate of compliance could
be issued for the dwelling or dwelling unit. Upon the representation of the
applicant that the listed violations have been corrected, the Director of
Development and Enforcement or his designated agent shall reinspect said
dwelling or dwelling unit and issue a certificate of compliance or a list of
violations, as above provided.
§ 125-45. Waiver pending correction.
Any applicant who is delayed in correcting violations necessary to entitle
him to a certificate of compliance and who has a valid contract in writing
§ 125-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 125-45
1:261
with a person for the performance of the work may petition the Director
of Development and Enforcement or his designated agent in writing for a
temporary waiver of compliance with no fee being required. The petition
shall contain the information therein which is reasonably necessary for a
decision and shall include a written and signed statement by the person
under contract to correct the violation, specifying the date of beginning and
completion of the work. If the Director of Development and Enforcement
or his designated agent shall find that the delay in the correction of the
violation is reasonable, taking into consideration the availability of persons
to do the work and the current work load, and that the work can reasonably
be undertaken and completed while the premises are occupied or that
appropriate provision has been made for housing the tenant elsewhere
during the necessary period when the dwelling or dwelling unit will not be
habitable because of the work of correcting the Housing Code violation,
the Director of Development and Enforcement or his designated agent shall
issue a temporary waiver of compliance expiring on the date when the
corrective work should be completed. The applicant shall, on or before
that said date, request a reinspection. The Director of Development and
Enforcement or his designated agent shall reinspect the dwelling or
dwelling unit and issue the certificate of compliance or list any remaining
violations as above provided.
§ 125-46. Appeals.
Any applicant who deems himself aggrieved by the decision of the Director
of Development and Enforcement or his designated agent may, by written
request to the Neighborhood Rehabilitation Advisory Board and without
payment of a fee, have the entire matter heard by it on his original petition.
After hearing the applicant, his witnesses, his counsel, if any, the Director of
Development and Enforcement or his designated agent and any witnesses
he may produce and his counsel, if any, the Neighborhood Rehabilitation
Advisory Board shall, if it shall find the existence of all the required
prerequisites to the granting of a temporary waiver of compliance by the
Director of Development and Enforcement or his designated agent, direct
him to issue such a waiver.
§ 125-47. Penalties for offenses.
Any owner, agent or other authorized persons who shall let for occupancy
any dwelling or dwelling unit in the City of Meriden who does not hold
a valid certificate of compliance from the Director of Development and
Enforcement or his designated agent, may upon conviction, be punishable
by a fine of not more than $100 for each and every day that such violation
continues.
§ 125-48. Exceptions to requirements.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to the letting for occupancy of
any dwelling or dwelling unit that is new construction for a period of 10
years; that has undergone total renovation for a period of 10 years; that
§ 125-45 MERIDEN CODE § 125-48
1:262
has undergone substantial restoration for a period of seven years; or to
any dwelling unit which was inspected under the provisions of this section
within two years of the date of letting.
§ 125-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 125-48
1:263

ARTICLE VI
Unfit Dwellings
§ 125-49. Conditions which make dwellings unfit.
A. The designation of dwellings or dwelling units as unfit for human
habitation and the procedure for condemnation and placarding of such
unfit dwellings or dwelling units shall be carried out in compliance with
the following requirements.
B. Any dwelling or dwelling unit which shall be found to have any of the
following defects shall be condemned as unfit for human habitation and
shall be so designated and placarded by the Department of Development
and Enforcement:
(1) One which is so damaged, decayed, dilapidated, unsanitary, unsafe
or vermin infested that it creates a serious hazard to the health or
safety of the occupants or to the public.
(2) One which lacks illumination, ventilation or sanitation facilities
adequate to protect the health or safety of the occupants or of the
public as prescribed by the provisions of this chapter.
(3) One which because of its general condition or location is unsanitary
or otherwise dangerous to the health or safety of the occupants or of
the public.
§ 125-50. Condemned buildings to be vacated.
Any dwelling or dwelling unit condemned as unfit for human habitation
and so designated and placarded by the Department of Development and
Enforcement shall be vacated within a reasonable time as ordered by the
Department of Development and Enforcement.
§ 125-51. Conditions upon which building may be reoccupied.
No dwelling or dwelling unit which has been condemned and placarded
as unfit for human habitation shall again be used for human habitation
until a written approval is secured from, and such placard is removed
by, the Department of Development and Enforcement. The Department of
Development and Enforcement shall remove such placard whenever the
defect or defects upon which the condemnation and placarding were based
have been eliminated.
§ 125-52. Defacing or removing placards prohibited.
No person shall deface or remove the placard from any dwelling or dwelling
unit which has been condemned as unfit for human habitation and
placarded as such, except as provided in § 125-49.
§ 125-53. Hearings upon appeal.
Any person affected by any notice or order relating to the condemning
and placarding of a dwelling or dwelling unit as unfit for human habitation
may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the
§ 125-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 125-53
1:265
Neighborhood Rehabilitation Advisory Board, under the procedure set forth
in § 125-17.
§ 125-53 MERIDEN CODE § 125-53
1:266
Chapter 129
JEWELRY AUCTIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 156.
Special sales — See Ch. 165.
Signs and posters — See Ch. 174.
STATUTORY REFERENCES
State regulation of auctioneers — See C.G.S.
§ 21-1 et seq.
§ 129-1. Applicability.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any auction of jewelry
held under the direction of any executor or administrator in the process
of settling his decedent's estate or to an auction held according to the
provisions of any court order or to an auction of household goods or
personal effects held under the direction of the owner thereof.
§ 129-2. License required; fee.
All persons licensed by the Commissioner of State Police to sell jewelry at
auction under the provisions of § 21-3 of the General Statutes51 shall, in
addition to such license, secure a license from the Town and City Clerk to
sell such jewelry at auction and shall pay therefor a license fee of $25 a day
for the period covered by such license.
§ 129-3. Supervision of auctions. [Amended 9-15-1980]
The license fees collected under the provisions of the preceding section
shall be used for the employment of a uniformed police officer and a jewelry
expert appointed by the City Manager to prevent the perpetration of fraud
upon the public, who shall be in continuous attendance during each day
of any auction sale held under any license issued under this chapter. The
jewelry expert shall check over and appraise the goods to be sold and shall
receive $15 per day therefor.
§ 129-4. Restrictions on persons holding auctions.
No auctioneer shall hold an auction for any person in the jewelry business
unless such person has been in such business continuously in the City
for a period of one year immediately preceding such auction, nor shall
an auctioneer conduct any auction for a person who has sold watches,
51.Editor's Note: Section 21-3 of the statutes was repealed by P.A. 96-259.
§ 125-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 129-4
1:267
diamonds, jewelry, sterling silverware, clocks or any goods commonly sold
by jewelers at auction in the City for an aggregate period of 30 days during
a period of one year immediately preceding such contemplated auction.
§ 129-5. Closing hours.
Except as otherwise provided under the General Statutes, no person shall
sell, offer for sale or dispose of jewelry, watches, diamonds, sterling
silverware, clocks or any goods commonly sold by jewelers at public auction
in the City after 6:00 p.m. of any day.
§ 129-6. Time limit on auction sale.
No auctioneer shall conduct any auction sale of jewelry for more than 30
days from the date of commencement of such sale.
§ 129-7. False representations of merchandise.
No auctioneer shall make any false representations as to the type, quality,
condition, value or present or previous ownership of any watches,
diamonds, jewelry, sterling silverware, clocks or any goods commonly sold
by jewelers which are offered for sale by him or substitute another article
for any such article sold by him.
§ 129-8. Mock bids prohibited.
No person shall act as an accomplice for the purpose of making mock bids
at any auction sale of jewelry.
§ 129-9. Enforcement; penalties for offenses. [Added 9-16-1996]
The provisions of this chapter may be enforced by citation, in addition
to other remedies. The citation fine amount shall be $77. The following
persons have authority to issue citations for violations pursuant to this
chapter: City of Meriden police officer.
Chapter 130
LASER POINTING DEVICES
§ 130-1. Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
LASER POINTING DEVICE — Any hand-held device which emits light
amplified by the stimulated emission of radiation which is visible to the
human eye.
§ 129-4 MERIDEN CODE § 130-2
1:268
§ 130-2. Pointing at another person or animal prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to focus, point or shine a laser beam
directly or indirectly on another person or animal.
§ 130-3. Prohibited sale to minors.
No person, firm or corporation within the City of Meriden shall sell to a
consumer under the age of 18 years any laser pointing device.
§ 130-4. Restrictions on storage and display.52
No person, firm or corporation within the City of Meriden engaged in the
sale of laser pointing devices shall store or display laser pointing devices
unless such items are contained within a sealed and locked case or are
located behind the service counter or in any other manner which restricts
direct access to laser pointing devices by his or its customers and/or the
general public.
§ 130-5. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be punished by
a fine not to exceed $99.
Chapter 131
LIVING WAGE
§ 131-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter to establish a living wage for all service workers
employed for work performed in execution of service contracts with the City
of Meriden.
§ 131-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms have the meanings indicated,
unless the context clearly requires a different meaning:
AFFORDABLE HOUSING — Housing that houses families and individuals
whose income does not exceed 80% of area income as defined by the
Department of Housing and Urban Development.
CITY — The government of the City of Meriden or any agency, board,
commission, department or other entity thereof, or any successor thereto.
CITY PROPERTY — Land and buildings owned or leased by the City of
Meriden, which property is used to house City programs or offices, and
public streets, parks and spaces owned by the City; however, "City property"
52.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 130-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 131-2
1:269
does not mean such property leased by the City to non-City persons, or such
property obtained by the City for eventual sale or lease to non-City persons.
FULL RESTITUTION — The difference between the sum paid by the service
contractor to the service worker and the living wage.
LIVING WAGE — An hourly wage rate which on an annual basis (based on
40 hours per week, 52 weeks a year) is equivalent to either of the following:
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, partnership, joint venture, or other
entity; however, "person" does not mean a private corporation organized
under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code [26 U.S.C. § 501(c)(3)]
whose chief executive officer earns a salary which when calculated on an
hourly basis is less than eight times the lowest wage paid by the corporation
or which employs 20 or fewer year-round employees in the City of Meriden.
SERVICE CONTRACT —
One hundred ten percent of the federal poverty level for a family of four,
if health benefits are provided to the employee. Health benefits, for
the purpose of this chapter, mean paid comprehensive family medical
coverage which does not require the employee to contribute more than
3% of his annual wages toward the payment of the health plan; or
A.
If health benefits are not provided to the employee, the employer must
pay wages in accordance with Subsection A above and in addition make
payments to its employee in lieu of health benefits, as determined by
the City of Meriden. The City of Meriden shall calculate and set forth
the amount of these payments in lieu of health benefits on a yearly
basis, based upon the average cost of comprehensive health insurance
in the State of Connecticut.
B.
A contract that is:
Paid in whole or in part from one or more of the City's general
funds, capital project funds, or special revenue funds and is in
excess of $50,000.
(1)
Awarded by the City to a service contractor to provide one or more
of the following services on a weekly or more frequent basis:
Food preparation and/or distribution on an ongoing basis on
or to City property for programs of the City, except occasional
meetings, receptions, or similar occasional functions;
(a)
(b) Security services on City property;
Custodial, cleaning and/or routine, nontechnical maintenance
services on City property;
(c)
(d) Clerical or other nonsupervisory office work;
(e) Transportation services to, from and among City facilities;
(f) Parking services on City property.
(2)
A.
§ 131-2 MERIDEN CODE § 131-2
1:270
SERVICE CONTRACTOR — The person awarded a City service contract and
includes all subcontractors for said service contractor performing work on
a City service contract.
SERVICE WORKER — Any employee of a service contractor or his
subcontractor who performs one or more of the services specified in the
definition of "service contract" above, pursuant to a service contract.
However, "service worker" does not mean:
§ 131-3. Living wage required.
All service contractors shall pay their service workers no less than the living
wage. No service contractor may use the living wage requirement of this
chapter to reduce the compensation paid to any of its service workers.
§ 131-4. Implementation.
All requests for bids and requests for proposals for service contracts,
whether advertised or informally solicited, shall include appropriate
information about the living wage requirements.
§ 131-5. Responsibility for effectuation and enforcement.
A. The Finance Department shall establish such written procedures,
require such record keeping and/or reporting, and provide for the
monitoring or other review of the service contractor's records or reports
as the Finance Department shall deem necessary for the faithful
effectuation and enforcement of this chapter. These records and/or
All service contracts satisfying the criteria specified in this definition
shall be designated as service contracts by the Department of
Finance.53
B.
An individual person whose wage rate is subject to a United States
or Connecticut statute, law or regulation mandating a prevailing wage
rate imposed by such statute, law or regulation, or any regulation duly
promulgated pursuant to such statute, law or regulation by the United
States, the State of Connecticut, or any official, department, agency, or
other entity thereof.
A.
An individual person, the majority of whose employment duties
constitute work as a carpenter, electrician, glazier, painter, roofer, or
any other trade as defined by the Department of Labor of the United
States or of the State of Connecticut.
B.
An individual who is under the age of 18 years or is in a youth
employment program or is a student intern, or is an employee with a
disability who is employed by a special needs employment program, or
at the discretion of the City Manager if it is determined to be in the best
interest of the City of Meriden.
C.
53.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 131-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 131-5
1:271
reports prepared by the service contractor shall be made available to the
Finance Department, Human Rights Advocate and/or a designee of the
City Manager during business hours upon request.
B. The Human Rights Advocate and/or a designee of the City Manager shall
investigate violations of this chapter and make recommendations to the
City Manager for enforcement. The City Manager shall consider these
recommendations and take enforcement action, if a violation is found.
The Human Rights Advisory Board shall receive annually a report by the
Human Rights Advocate and/or a designee of the City Manager detailing
the complaints of violations of this chapter and a report by the City
Manager of all enforcement action taken.
§ 131-6. Enforcement.
A. Every service contractor shall post copies of documents, provided by the
City of Meriden, stating the living wage applicable to service workers. In
addition, such posting shall include a form which may be used by service
workers to file a complaint for noncompliance with the provisions of this
chapter. Such postings shall be made at the work site in a prominent
place where all documents posted in accordance with this chapter may
be easily seen and read by service workers. A copy of each document
pertaining to this chapter shall be given by the service contractor to
each service worker, who shall sign and date a form stating that he has
received, read and understood the documents. The signed forms shall be
kept by the service contractor on file and available to the City of Meriden
upon request. A copy of each document shall be given by the service
contractor to each service worker upon request of that service worker
no later than the last hour of the service worker's next shift or the last
hour of the next business day.
(1) Fine. For each violation of Subsection A of this section, the City
Manager shall levy upon and collect from the service contractor a
fine, due and payable to the City within five business days, of $100
per day for such violation.
B. In the event that the City Manager determines that a service contractor
has paid a service worker a sum less than the living wage for service
work, the City Manager shall require the service contractor to make full
restitution to the service worker in the service worker's next paycheck
or within five business days if the service worker is no longer employed
by the service contractor.
(1) Fine. For each violation of Subsection B of this section, the City
Manager shall levy upon and collect from the service contractor a
fine, due and payable to the City within five business days, of $100
per day for such violation. A violation for purposes of this subsection
shall mean one payroll, or payday or date of payment, regardless of
the number of employees affected by each violation.
C. Additional fines. The City Manager shall levy upon and collect from a
service contractor additional fines, dues and payable to the City within
five business days, as follows:
(1) For failure to rectify a violation of Subsection A of this section
before the end of the business day following the day such service
§ 131-5 MERIDEN CODE § 131-6
1:272
contractor received notice of such violation from the City Manager,
$100 per day for every business day subsequent to the last day of
such violation so noticed.
(2) For failure to make restitution to a service worker pursuant to
Subsections B and B(1) of this section, $100 per day fore every
calendar day subsequent to the last day upon which such service
contractor paid such service worker a sum less than the living wage
for service work.
(3) For failure to make proper, timely payment in full of any fine levied
pursuant to this section, $100 per day from the day payment of such
fine was due.
(4) For failure to submit payroll records within one week of the payroll
period, $10 per day for each day after such week shall expire.
§ 131-7. Termination of contract.
In addition to other provisions of law or contract which may constitute
grounds for termination, such contracts or grants may be terminated
following a determination that a service contractor:
A. Failed to fully rectify or correct any violation of a provision of this
chapter within 30 calendar days of receipt by the service contractor or
the service contractor's agent of the notice of violation.
B. Failed to make full restitution to a service worker pursuant to the
terms of this chapter within 30 calendar days of receipt by the service
contractor or the service contractor's agent of the notice of violation.
C. Failed to pay any or all of any fine levied by the City Manager pursuant
to any provision of this chapter within 60 calendar days of receipt by
the service contractor or the service contractor's agent of the notice of
violation.
D. Failed to provide to the Human Rights Advocate, in a timely manner and
on a regular basis, verification of wages paid to service employees.
E. Failed to cooperate with the City's audit of the service contractor's
payroll records.
§ 131-8. Ineligibility to obtain service contracts.
A. In addition to other provisions of law or contract which may constitute
grounds for ineligibility, the Purchasing Agent is authorized to declare
a service contractor ineligible to obtain service contracts as provided
herein:
(1) The Purchasing Agent shall declare any service contractor whose
service contract with the City was terminated pursuant to this
chapter to be ineligible to contract with the City.
(2) The Purchasing Agent may declare any service contractor who has
committed three or more violations of the provisions of this chapter
to be ineligible to contract with the City.
B. "Ineligible to contract with the City" means that such service contractor
and any parent or subsidiary or related entity of such service contractor
shall be ineligible to submit bids or proposals for any contract or other
agreement with the City and shall be ineligible to enter into any contract
or agreement (including a new contract or other agreement or a renewal
§ 131-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 131-8
1:273
or extension or amendment of an existing contract or other agreement)
with the City.
C. Such period of ineligibility shall be for at least one but not more than
three calendar years. At any time after the first year of ineligibility has
been completed, the Purchasing Agent may declare that the period of
such ineligibility is terminated.
D. Declarations made pursuant to this section shall be issued in writing
to the service contractor, and the Purchasing Agent shall furnish copies
of all such declaration promptly upon issuance to the Human Rights
Advocate, the Human Rights Advisory Board, the City Manager,
department heads and elected officials.
§ 131-9. Investigations; appeals.
The Human Rights Advocate or other designee of the City Manager shall
investigate violations of this chapter and make recommendations to the City
Manager. The City Manager shall consider the recommendations and take
enforcement action, if needed. An enforcement action issued by the City
Manager shall be appealable by written notice by the service contractor to
the Human Services Committee of the City Council within five business days
after the receipt of the enforcement action by the Human Rights Advocate
or the City Manager. The Human Services Committee may reverse the City
Manager's determination by a majority vote.
§ 131-10. Annual report.
Each January, the Human Rights Advocate, City Manager or a designee of
the City Manager shall submit to the City Council and the Human Rights
Advisory Board an annual report for the preceding year regarding the
implementation of this chapter, including fiscal impact and the impact on
hiring of Meriden residents.
Chapter 133
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Health nuisances — See Ch. 144. Zoning — See Ch. 213.
§ 133-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words shall have the following
meanings:
EMPLOYEE — Any and all persons, other than the masseurs or masseuses,
who render any service to the permittee and who have no physical contact
with customers and clients.
§ 131-8 MERIDEN CODE § 133-1
1:274
MASSAGE and/or MASSAGE THERAPY — Any method of pressure on, or
friction against, or stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, range
of motion or nonspecific stretching, vibrating or stimulating the external
soft parts of the body with the hands or with the aid of any mechanical or
electrical apparatus or appliance, with or without any such supplementary
aids as rubbing alcohol, liniments, antiseptics, oils, powders, creams,
lotions, ointments, or other similar preparations commonly used in this
practice. This massage and/or massage therapy may include the use of oil,
ice, hot and cold packs, tub, shower, steam, dry heat, or cabinet baths for
the purpose of, but not limited to, maintaining good health and establishing
and maintaining good physical and mental condition. "Massage therapy"
does not encompass diagnosis, the prescribing of drugs or medicines, spinal
or other joint manipulations, nor any service or procedure for which a
license to practice medicine, chiropractic, natureopathy, physical therapy,
or podiatry is required by law. The term "massage" shall be synonymous and
interchangeable with the term "massage therapy."
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment having a fixed business
where any person, firm, association or corporation engages in or carries on,
or permits to be engaged in or carried on, any of the activities mentioned
under "massage," and shall also include any business advertised or listed
under the heading "massage."
MASSEUR and MASSEUSE — Any person who, for any consideration
whatsoever, engages in the practice of massage and/or massage therapy
as herein defined. Said individual shall be required to be a Connecticut
certified massage therapist and shall be subject to Connecticut General
Statutes Chapter 384a, and other related state statutes, as they are, from
time to time amended. Any masseur or masseuse so certified shall be
permitted to engage in this activity at the licensed massage establishment
or on an out call basis.
§ 133-2. Exceptions. [Amended 2-16-1999]
This chapter shall not apply to schools, hospitals, nursing homes,
sanitariums, or persons holding an unrevoked certificate to practice the
healing arts under the laws of the state, including a licensed massage
therapist pursuant to Chapter 384a of the Connecticut General Statutes, as
amended, or to persons working under the direction of any such person, or
in any such establishment.
§ 133-3. Promulgation of rules and regulations.
The Director of Health and Human Services or his designee may promulgate
and enforce reasonable rules and regulations not in conflict with, but to
carry out, the intent of this chapter.
§ 133-4. Permit required.
A. No person, firm, partnership or corporation shall engage in, conduct,
or carry on or permit to be engaged in, conducted, or carried on, in or
upon any premises in the City, the operation of a massage establishment
§ 133-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 133-4
1:275
without first having obtained a permit from the Director of Health and
Human Services or his designee.
B. Any massage establishment existing on the date of the passage of this
chapter which is operating without a permit shall, within 30 days of
the effective date of this chapter, make application for said permit in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 133-5. Permit application; contents.
A. The application for a permit to operate a massage establishment shall
set forth the exact nature of the massage to be administered, proposed
place of business and facilities therein, and the name and address of
each applicant.
B. In addition to the foregoing, any applicant for a permit shall furnish the
following information:
(1) Written proof that the applicant is at least 18 years of age.
(2) Two portrait photographs of at least two inches by two inches and
fingerprints.
(3) Business, occupation or employment of the applicant for the three
years immediately preceding the date of the application.
(4) Massage or similar business license history of the applicant, whether
such person has previously operated in this or another municipality
or state under license, has had such license revoked or suspended,
the reason therefor, and the business activity or occupation
subsequent to such action of suspension or revocation.
(5) Any felony convictions, any conviction for an offense involving sexual
misconduct, and any conviction involving obscenity, keeping or
residing in a house of prostitution, solicitation of a lewd or unlawful
act, prostitution or pandering.
§ 133-6. Filing of application; fee.
A. Each applicant for a permit to maintain, operate or conduct a massage
establishment shall file an application with the Director of Health and
Human Services or his designee and pay a permit fee of $250 as set by
the City Council.
B. In the event that the massage establishment permit is disapproved, 1/2
of the permit fee shall be retained by the City for expenses incurred in
the investigation of the application.
C. The permit shall be renewed annually upon payment of a fee of $250 as
set by the City Council.
§ 133-7. Hearing.
When the application is filed for a massage establishment permit, the
Director of Health and Human Services shall fix the time and place of a
hearing where the applicant may present evidence upon the question of
his application. Not less than 10 days before the date of such hearing, the
Director of Health and Human Services shall cause to be posted a notice of
such hearing in a conspicuous place on the property in which or on which
§ 133-4 MERIDEN CODE § 133-7
1:276
the proposed massage establishment is to be operated. The applicant shall
maintain the notices posted until the day following the hearing.
§ 133-8. Action on application; conditions.
A. The Director of Health and Human Services or his designee may issue
a permit within 30 days following a hearing if all requirements for a
massage establishment described in this chapter are met, unless he finds
that:
(1) The operation as proposed by the applicant, if permitted, would not
have complied with all the applicable laws, including but not limited
to the building, health, City planning, housing, zoning and fire codes
of the City.54
(2) The applicant and any other person who will be directly engaged in
the management and operation of a massage establishment has been
convicted of:
(a) A felony;
(b) An offense involving sexual misconduct; or
(c) Obscenity, keeping or residing in a house of ill fame, solicitation
of a lewd or unlawful act, prostitution or pandering.
B. Each such establishment shall conform to all rules and regulations
contained herein and the State Sanitary Code as well as to such terms
and conditions as the State Commissioner of Public Health and/or local
Director of Health and Human Services finds necessary and proper.
C. The issuance of a massage establishment permit shall be conditioned
upon the right of the Director of Health and Human Services to inspect
the premises during business hours.
§ 133-9. Revocation or suspension of permit.
A. Any permit issued for a massage establishment may be revoked or
suspended by the Director of Health and Human Services or his designee
after a hearing:
(1) If it is found that any of the provisions of this chapter are violated;
(2) Where the permittee or any employee of the permittee, including a
masseur or masseuse, has been convicted of any offense found in
§ 133-5B(5) and the permittee has actual or constructive knowledge
of the violation or conviction; or
(3) Where the permittee or licensee refuses to permit any duly
authorized health inspector of the City to inspect the premises or the
operation therein.
B. The Director of Health and Human Services or his designee, before
revoking or suspending any permit, shall give the permittee at least 10
days' written notice of the charges against him and the opportunity for a
hearing, at which time the permittee may present evidence bearing upon
the question. In such cases, the charges shall be specific and in writing.
Any person aggrieved by the decision of the hearing officer may, within
15 days of the notice of such decision, appeal to the Superior Court for
the County of New Haven at New Haven or Meriden, Connecticut.
54.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 133-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 133-10
1:277
§ 133-10. Transfer of permit.
No permit shall be transferable except with the written consent and
approval of the Director of Health and Human Services or his designee,
provided that, upon the death or incapacity of the permittee, the massage
establishment may continue in business for a reasonable period of time to
allow for an orderly transfer of the permit.
§ 133-11. Minimum requirements for facilities.
No permit to conduct the massage establishment shall be issued unless an
inspection by the Director of Health and Human Services or his authorized
representative reveals that the establishment complies with each of the
following minimum requirements:
A. Construction of rooms used for toilets, tubs, steam baths, and showers
shall be waterproofed with approved waterproof materials.
B. Toilet facilities shall be provided in convenient locations. When five or
more employees and patrons of different sexes are on the premises at
the same time, separate toilet facilities shall be provided. A single water
closet per section shall be provided for each 20 or more employees or
patrons of that sex on the premises at any one time. Urinals may be
substituted for water closets after one water closet has been provided.
Toilets shall be designated as to the sex accommodated therein.
C. Lavatories or wash basins provided with both hot and cold running water
should be installed in either the toilet room or vestibule. Lavatories or
wash basins shall be provided with soap in a dispenser and with sanitary
towels.
§ 133-12. Operating requirements.
A. The only individuals permitted to have any physical contact with patrons
shall be only those masseurs and masseuses as defined in § 133-1.
B. Every portion of the massage establishment, including appliances,
apparatus and personnel, shall be kept clean and operated in a sanitary
condition.
C. Private parts of patrons must be covered by towels, cloth or
undergarments when in the presence of any employee, masseur or
masseuse. Any contact with a patron's genital area is strictly prohibited.
D. All massage establishments shall be provided with clean, laundered
sheets and towels in sufficient quantity and which shall be laundered
after each use thereof and stored in an approved sanitary manner.
E. Wet and dry heat rooms, shower compartments, and toilet rooms shall
be thoroughly cleaned each day the business is in operation. Bathtubs
shall be thoroughly cleansed after each use.
F. Advertising. No massage establishment granted a permit under the
provisions of this chapter shall place, publish or distribute, or cause
to be placed, published or distributed, any advertising material that
depicts any portion of the human body that would reasonably suggest
to prospective patrons that any services are available other than those
services as described in § 133-1, nor shall any massage establishment
§ 133-10 MERIDEN CODE § 133-12
1:278
indicate in the text of such advertising that any services are available
other than those services described in § 133-1.
G. No alcoholic beverage or other intoxicants shall be displayed, served,
ingested or sold on the premises of the massage establishment unless
under a valid liquor permit issued under the regulations of the State of
Connecticut.
H. A full schedule of service rates shall be posted in a prominent place
within the massage establishment in such a manner as to come to the
attention of all patrons. No charges other than the specified rates for
specified services are to be allowed without the patron being notified of
the full cost prior to the rendering of any service.
I. Any massage must be carried on in one cubicle, room, booth or area
within the massage establishment. No massage shall be carried on
within any cubicle, room, booth or any area within a massage
establishment which is fitted with a door capable of being locked.
§ 133-13. Register of patrons.
A. Every person who engages in or conducts a massage establishment shall
keep a daily register, approved as to form by the Director of Health and
Human Services or his designee, of all patrons with names, addresses
and hours of arrival and the name of the person performing the massage
therapy and, if applicable, the rooms or cubicles assigned. The daily
register shall at all times during business hours be subject to inspection
by Health Department officials and by the Police Department and shall
be kept on file for one year. This daily register shall also apply to
massages performed on an outpatient or out call basis.
B. No person shall give, sign or use any false name or address in the daily
register required to be kept by the massage establishment.
§ 133-14. Inspections.
The Department of Public Health shall, at least twice a year, make an
inspection of each massage establishment in the City for the purposes of
determining that the provisions of this chapter are complied with. Such
inspections shall be made at a reasonable time and in a reasonable manner.
No permittee shall fail to allow such inspector access to the premises or
hinder such inspector in any manner.
§ 133-15. Penalties for offenses.55
Every person, except persons who are specifically exempt by this chapter,
whether acting as individuals, owner, employee of the owner, operator or
employee of operator, or acting as a participant or worker in any way,
who conducts a massage establishment without first obtaining a permit and
paying a permit fee to the City or who violates any of the provisions of this
chapter, in addition to the revocation and/or suspension of the permit, shall,
55.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 133-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 133-15
1:279
upon conviction, be punished by a fine not to exceed $100. Each day of said
violation shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 136
MEAT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Food and food service establishments — See
Ch. 112.
Milk and milk products — See Ch. 139.
Health nuisances — See Ch. 144.
Solid waste — See Ch. 176.
Zoning — See Ch. 213.
§ 136-1. Applicability. [Amended 9-15-1980; 8-21-2000]
A. This chapter shall not apply to cattle, calves, sheep, swine or goats
slaughtered under the supervision of the United States government
in accordance with the regulations relating to inspection of meats as
prescribed by the Department of Agriculture of the United States and
bearing the stamp of such inspection, or to any meats slaughtered under
the supervision of and bearing the stamp of an official meat or food
inspector of another municipality in the state in which the inspection of
meat has been approved by the Director of Health and Human Services
of this City, showing that such meat has been inspected and passed by
the meat or food inspector of such other municipality, but shall apply to
all other meat slaughtered for sale for human consumption in the City.
B. No person shall slaughter, butcher, dress, process, or tan hides of any
farm animals, including but not limited to cattle, calves, sheep, swine,
goats, chickens, rabbits or other meats, in a residential zone as identified
by the Zoning Regulation of Meriden except in duly licensed
slaughterhouses or in slaughterhouses under United States government
inspection. [Amended 9-20-2010; 12-6-2010]
§ 136-2. Inspection and approval required. [Amended 9-15-1980]
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, sell or expose for sale or to have
in possession with intent to sell for human food or for use in manufacturing
food products in the City the flesh of any cattle, calves, sheep, swine or
goats, unless the same have been slaughtered under the supervision of the
Director of Health and Human Services in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter and unless there has been placed on each primal part thereof,
by or under the personal supervision of an inspector designated by the
Director of Health and Human Services, a mark, stamp or brand showing
that the same has been inspected and passed for food purposes.
§ 133-15 MERIDEN CODE § 136-3
1:280
§ 136-3. Meat inspected by other municipalities. [Amended
9-15-1980]
Whenever the Director of Health and Human Services determines that meat
inspected and stamped in any other municipality in the state is inspected
and stamped under regulations substantially equivalent to the regulations
of the United States government, the Director of Health and Human
Services may by rule or regulation admit such inspected and stamped meat
for sale in the City without further inspection.
§ 136-4. Inspection of slaughterhouses. [Amended 9-15-1980]
The inspectors designated by the Director of Health and Human Services
may enter all places in which the slaughtering of animals for food is being
carried on and shall make such inspections of the premises and of the
animals therein as the Director of Health and Human Services may deem
necessary to determine the fitness of the meat therefrom for human food.
Such inspectors shall mark, stamp or brand the meat so inspected as
approved or condemned in accordance with the standards and regulations
established by the Director of Health and Human Services.
§ 136-5. Inspection fees. [Amended 9-15-1980]
Persons operating slaughterhouses who are furnished inspection services
by inspectors of the City directed toward maintaining adequate sanitation
and providing antemortem and postmortem inspection of all animals
slaughtered, as required by the General Statutes or federal or local
regulations, shall pay to the City Treasurer fees for such services at a rate
to be fixed by the Director of Health and Human Services. The Director
of Health and Human Services shall designate the number of inspectors
necessary for the conduct of an efficient inspection service at each
establishment. The fees provided herein shall be paid not later than 30 days
after an establishment has been billed for services by the Director of Health
and Human Services.
§ 136-6. Restrictions on removal of meat from slaughterhouse.
[Amended 9-15-1980]
It shall be unlawful for any person owning or having charge of any place
in the City in which animals are slaughtered for food to permit the removal
therefrom of any carcass or part thereof until the same has been inspected
and stamped as provided in this chapter. Condemned carcasses or parts
shall not be removed from a slaughterhouse until they have been treated,
in the presence of an inspector designated by the Director of Health and
Human Services, in such a way as to prevent their future use for human
food.
§ 136-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 136-7
1:281
§ 136-7. Unauthorized possession of marks, stamps or brands.
[Amended 9-15-1980]
It shall be unlawful for any person, except inspectors appointed by the
Director of Health and Human Services, to have in his possession, keep
or use any mark, stamp or brand provided or used for marking, stamping
or branding as inspected and passed any meat herein required to be so
marked, stamped or branded, or any mark, stamp or brand having thereon
a device or words similar in character or import to the marks, stamps or
brands provided or used for such purposes by the Director of Health and
Human Services.
§ 136-8. Restrictions on where slaughtering may be done.
[Amended 9-15-1980]
No person shall slaughter any animals subject to inspection under this
chapter in the City except in a licensed slaughterhouse, provided that,
in cases where the transportation of an animal for slaughter to such
slaughterhouse would be dangerous or impracticable and permission has
been given by an inspector designated by the Director of Health and Human
Services, after due notice before the slaughter and an opportunity for such
inspector to be present, such animal may be slaughtered elsewhere. If the
inspector is not present at such slaughtering, the carcass with viscera and
head attached by their natural attachments shall be presented to him at
the licensed slaughterhouse for inspection before such carcass or any part
thereof is offered for sale.
§ 136-9. Inspection of meat slaughtered outside City.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no animals shall be
slaughtered outside the limits of the City for sale within the City unless
the transportation to the City for slaughter would be dangerous or
impracticable and an inspector of the City has been notified and given an
opportunity to be present before slaughter. If such inspector is unable to
be present at such slaughter, carcasses may be presented at the municipal
slaughterhouse for inspection, provided that the viscera and head are
attached to such carcasses by their natural attachments.
§ 136-10. Inspection of slaughterhouses outside City. [Amended
9-15-1980]
The inspectors designated by the Director of Health and Human Services
shall, from time to time, visit places in the vicinity of the City where animals
are slaughtered and their meat sent to the City for sale, to see whether
such places are clean and sanitary. If, in their opinion, conditions are such
as to render meat from such places unfit for food, they shall refuse to allow
any such meat to be brought into the City. If the proprietor or person in
charge of any such place refuses to allow the inspectors designated by the
Director of Health and Human Services to enter and inspect the premises,
§ 136-7 MERIDEN CODE § 136-10
1:282
the Director of Health and Human Services shall refuse to allow meat or
other food products from such establishments to be brought into the City.
§ 136-11. Inspections of other food establishments. [Amended
9-15-1980]
The inspectors designated by the Director of Health and Human Services
shall, from time to time, as often as the Director of Health and Human
Services deems necessary, enter every place in the City where the meat
or flesh of any animal required to be inspected under this chapter, or the
products thereof, may be stored, held, exposed or offered for sale and every
place where meat is manufactured into articles of food or preserved, cured,
canned or otherwise prepared for human food and inspect the same for the
purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter.
§ 136-12. Condemnation and disposal of uninspected meat.
[Amended 9-15-1980]
Whenever any meat or flesh of any animal required to be inspected under
this chapter shall, upon inspection, be found in the possession of any person
in violation of the provisions of this chapter, the Director of Health and
Human Services shall condemn the same and shall order such disposal
thereof as will prevent its use as human food.
§ 136-13. Transportation.
It shall be unlawful for any person to transport or cause to be transported
in any vehicle through the streets of the City any meat, unless the same is
securely wrapped in paper or a tightly sewed cloth covering or such vehicle
is provided with a tight cover which is kept closed at all times during such
transportation, so as not to expose such meat to dust, dirt, filth or other
deleterious substances.
§ 136-14. Additional rules and regulations. [Amended 9-15-1980]
The Director of Health and Human Services shall adopt and promulgate
such additional rules and regulations as are necessary to carry into effect
the provisions of this chapter.
§ 136-15. Authority to issue citations. [Added 12-6-2010]
The provisions of this chapter may be enforced by citation, in addition to
other remedies. The following persons have the authority to issue citations
for violation pursuant to this section: the Director of Health, the
Environmental Health Administrator, registered sanitarians or Meriden
police officers.
§ 136-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 136-15
1:283
Chapter 139
MILK AND MILK PRODUCTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Food and food establishments — See Ch. 112.
Meat — See Ch. 136.
Health nuisances — See Ch. 144.
STATUTORY REFERENCES
State regulation — See C.G.S. § 22-127 et seq.
§ 139-1. Applicability of statute.
The provisions of Chapter 430 of the General Statutes of the State of
Connecticut, as amended, and the rules and regulations of the Milk
Regulation Board authorized thereunder, as amended, are made part of this
chapter.
§ 139-2. Pasteurization required.
The sale of milk which has not been properly pasteurized is prohibited.
§ 139-3. Caps or covers.
The cap or cover of each container of milk or cream sold shall cover the
pouring lip of the container to at least its largest diameter.
§ 139-4. Transportation.
All vehicles used for the transportation of milk or milk products shall be
so constructed and operated as to protect their contents from the sun,
contamination and freezing. All vehicles shall be kept clean, and no
substance capable of contaminating milk or milk products shall be
transported with milk or milk products in such manner as to permit
contamination.
§ 139-5. Labeling of vehicles.56
Every person engaged in the business of peddling or distributing milk or
cream shall cause the name of such person and permit number to be placed
in legible characters of Roman block type of at least two inches in height on
the outer surface of each side of the vehicle used for the sale or distribution
of milk or cream. No person shall display such permit number unless he is
duly authorized by an unexpired permit.
56.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 136-15 MERIDEN CODE § 139-6
1:284
§ 139-6. Permit required. [Amended 9-15-1980]
No person shall sell milk or cream in the City without first making
application to the Director of Health and Human Services upon blanks
furnished by the Director of Health and Human Services and obtaining
a permit from the Director of Health and Human Services to sell milk
or cream, which permit shall expire on the 31st day of January in each
year, unless sooner revoked by the Director of Health and Human Services.
Applications shall be made and filed in accordance with the rules and
regulations of the Director of Health and Human Services. This section shall
not apply to milk in stores or sales of milk from a producer to a dealer.
§ 139-7. Inspections prior to issuance of permit. [Amended
9-15-1980]
The Director of Health and Human Services shall, before issuing a permit
to sell milk or cream, determine that an inspection has been made of every
dairy farm where such milk or cream is produced and of every milk plant in
which it is thereby received, bottled, pasteurized or otherwise handled.
§ 139-8. Issuance of permit; fee. [Amended 9-15-198057]
Upon giving satisfactory evidence to the Director of Health and Human
Services, after the inspection, that the milk and cream to be sold under
the permit will be produced and handled in accordance with the state laws,
the provisions of this chapter, the ordinances of the City and the rules and
regulations of the State Milk Regulation Board and the Director of Health
and Human Services, the permit shall be furnished by the Director of Health
and Human Services on the payment of a permit fee of $1.
§ 139-9. Revocation of permit. [Amended 9-15-1980]
Such permit may be revoked or suspended by the Director of Health and
Human Services upon the violation by the holder thereof of any of the milk
regulations or in any emergency when in the judgment of the Director of
Health and Human Services the milk supply in question has become a public
health menace.
§ 139-10. Authority to prohibit sale. [Amended 9-15-1980]
Whenever, in the opinion of the milk sanitarian or the Director of Health
and Human Services, milk is unsafe, not decent or not produced or handled
in accordance with the above milk ordinances, the Director of Health and
Human Services may prohibit the further sale of milk from this source
until such time as he deems it safe, decent and produced and handled in
a satisfactory manner. Decency is considered that characteristic of foods
which gives pleasure to its consumption, while the lack of decency means
distaste, displeasure and even disgust; therefore, decency in milk is a
57.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 139-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 139-10
1:285
characteristic of milk entirely apart from its significance as an indication of
its safety.
Chapter 141
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarms — See Ch. 60.
Animals — See Ch. 65.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 153.
Zoning — See Ch. 213.
§ 141-1. Purpose.
It is recognized that people have a right to and should be ensured an
environment free from excessive sound and vibration that may jeopardize
their health, safety or welfare or degrade the quality of their lives. This
chapter is enacted to protect, preserve and promote the health, safety,
welfare and quality of life for the citizens of the City of Meriden through the
reduction, control and prevention of noise.
§ 141-2. Definitions.
When used in this chapter, the terms below shall have the following
meanings:
AMBIENT NOISE or BACKGROUND NOISE — Noise of a measurable
intensity which exists at a point as a result of a combination of many distant
sources individually indistinguishable.
CHIEF OF POLICE — The Chief of Police of the City of Meriden or a duly
authorized officer subject to his/her order.
COMMERCIAL ZONE — Those areas designated as commercial districts in
Chapter 213, Zoning, of the City Code.58
CONSTRUCTION — The assembly, erection, substantial repair, alteration,
demolition or site preparation for or of public or private rights-of-way,
buildings or other structures, utilities or property.
CONSTRUCTION EQUIPMENT — Any equipment or device operated by fuel
or electric power used on construction or demolition.
CONTINUOUS NOISE — Ongoing noise, the intensity of which remains at
a measurable level (which may vary) without interruption over an indefinite
period or a specified period of time.
58.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 139-10 MERIDEN CODE § 141-2
1:286
DAYTIME HOURS — The hours between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. Monday
through Saturday and the hours between 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on
Sunday.
DECIBEL — A unit of measure of the sound level, the symbol for which is
"dB."
DEMOLITION — Any dismantling, intentional destruction or removal of
structures, utilities, public or private right-of-way surfaces or similar
property.
DOMESTIC POWER EQUIPMENT — Equipment including, but not limited
to, power saws, drills, grinders, lawn and garden tools and equipment
and other power equipment intended for use in a residential area by a
homeowner.
EMERGENCY — Any occurrence or set of circumstances involving actual or
imminent physical trauma or property damage which demands immediate
action.
EMERGENCY VEHICLE — Any motor vehicle authorized by any local
authority to have sound warning devices, such as sirens and bells, which
can lawfully be used when responding to an emergency.
EMERGENCY WORK — Work made necessary to restore property to a safe
condition following an emergency or work required to protect persons or
property from exposure to imminent changes.
EXCESSIVE NOISE — Any sound, the intensity of which exceeds the
standards set forth in § 141-5.
IMPULSE NOISE — Sound of short duration, usually less than one second,
with an abrupt onset and rapid decay, the level of which is measured with a
sound-level meter, which shall conform to ANSI S127-1986 (R1993).
INDUSTRIAL ZONE — Those areas designated as industrial districts in
Chapter 213, Zoning, of the City Code.59
INTRUSION ALARM — A device with an audible signal and which, when
activated, indicates an intrusion by an unauthorized person.
LEGAL HOLIDAY — All legal holidays designated by the City of Meriden,
the State of Connecticut and the United States of America.
MOTOR VEHICLE — A vehicle as defined in § 14-1(51) of the Connecticut
General Statutes, as amended.
MUFFLER — A device for abating sounds such as escaping gas.
NIGHTTIME HOURS — The hours between 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. Sunday
evening through Saturday morning, between 9:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m.
Saturday evening through Sunday morning, and between 9:00 p.m. and
7:00 a.m. Monday through Friday.
59.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 141-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 141-2
1:287
NOISE — Any sound, the intensity of which exceeds the standards as set
forth in this chapter.
NOISE LEVEL — The sound-pressure level as measured with a sound-level
meter.
NOISE LEVEL, A-WEIGHTED — The sound-pressure level as measured with
a sound-level meter using the A-weighting network. The sound level is
designated "dBA."
OCTAVE BAND SOUND-PRESSURE LEVEL — The sound-pressure level for
the sound contained within the specified preferred octave band stated in
dB, as described in ANSI 81.6-1984 (R 1994).
ONE-THIRD OCTAVE BAND SOUND-PRESSURE LEVEL — The soundpressure
level for the sound contained within the specified preferred onethird
octave band, stated in dB, as described in ANSI 81.6-1984 (R 1994).
PEAK SOUND-PRESSURE LEVEL (SPL) — The absolute maximum value of
the instantaneous sound-pressure level occurring in a specified time period.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, association, syndicate,
company, trust, corporation, municipality, agency or administration
subdivision of the state or other legal entity of any kind.
PREMISES — Any building, structure, land or portion thereof, including all
appurtenances, owned or controlled by a person, and including yards, lots,
courts, inner yards and real properties without buildings or improvements,
owned or controlled by a person. A noise emitter's premises includes
contiguous publicly dedicated street and highway rights-of-way, all road
rights-of-way and waters of the state.
PROPERTY LINE — That real or imaginary line along the ground surface
and its vertical extension which separates real property owned or controlled
by any person from contiguous real property owned and controlled by
another person and which separates real property from the public right-ofway.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY — Any street, avenue, boulevard, highway,
sidewalk, alley, park, waterway, railroad or similar place which is owned or
controlled by a government entity, over which the public in general has a
right of passage.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — Any nonregistered, internal-combustionengine-
powered vehicle which is being used for recreational purposes.
RESIDENTIAL ZONE — Those areas so designated in the Zoning
Regulations of the City of Meriden.60
SOUND — A transmission of energy through solid, liquid or gaseous media
in the form of vibrations which constitute alteration in pressure or position
of particles in the medium and which, in air, evoke physiological sensations,
including but not limited to an auditory response when impinging on the
ear.
60.Editor's Note: See Ch. 213, Zoning.
§ 141-2 MERIDEN CODE § 141-2
1:288
SOUND ANALYZER — A device generally used in conjunction with a soundlevel
meter for measuring the sound-pressure level of a noise as a function
of frequency, expressed in hertz (Hz) in octave bands, one-third octave
bands or other standard ranges. The sound analyzer shall conform, at a
minimum, to Type E, Class II, as specified in ANSI 8I.11-1986 (R 1993).
SOUND-LEVEL METER — An instrument used to measure sound levels. A
sound-level meter shall conform, at a minimum, to the American National
Standards Institute operation specifications for sound-level meters SI.
4-1983 (R 1994).
SOUND-PRESSURE LEVEL (SPL) — Equals 20 times the logarithm to the
base 10 of the ratio of the sound pressure in question to the standard
reference pressure of 20 micro pascals expressed in decibel (dB) units.
SOUND-PRESSURE LEVEL, A-WEIGHTED — The A-weighted soundpressure
level expressed in decibels (dBA), measured on a sound-level
meter.
VIBRATION — An oscillary motion of sound bodies of deterministic or
random nature described by displacement, velocity, or acceleration with
respect to a given reference point.
§ 141-3. Noise measurement procedures.
For the purpose of determining noise levels as set forth in this chapter, the
following guidelines shall be applicable:
A. A person conducting sound measurement shall be trained in the current
techniques and principles of sound measuring equipment and
instrumentation.
B. Instruments used to determine sound-level measurement shall be soundlevel
meters and analyzers as defined by this chapter.
C. The following steps should be taken when preparing to take sound-level
measurements:
(1) The instrument manufacturer's specific instructions for the
preparation and use of the instrument shall be followed.
(2) If using a sound-level meter, it shall be calibrated before and after
each set of measurements.
(3) If using a sound-level meter, it shall be placed at an angle from the
sound source as specified by the manufacturer's instructions and at
least four feet above the ground. It shall be placed at that location so
as not to be interfered with by individuals conducting measurements.
(4) Measurements to determine compliance with § 141-5 shall be taken
at a point that is located more or less than one foot beyond the
property line of the noise emitter's premises and within the noise
receptor's premises.
(5) While measurements are being recorded, a continual visual and
aural surveillance of extraneous sound sources shall be made to
ensure that the measurements are due to the sound being
investigated. The sound levels of extraneous sound sources shall be
recorded.
§ 141-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 141-3
1:289
(6) The intentional moving or rendering inaccurate or inoperative of any
sound-monitoring device or instrument positioned or used by or for
the City of Meriden, provided that such device or the immediate
area is clearly labeled to warn of the potential illegality, shall be a
violation of this chapter.
§ 141-4. Classifications of noise zones.61
Noise zones within the City of Meriden shall be classified as to zoning
applicable for the parcel or tract of land and the surrounding parcels or
tracts. Noise zones specified herein shall correspond to the following zoning
descriptions in the Zoning Regulations and Zoning Map of the City of
Meriden:62
Zone Actual or Intended Use
Class A Residential
Class B Commercial
Class C Industrial
NOTE: Based on the Zoning Regulations and Zoning Map of the City of
Meriden.
§ 141-5. Noise zone standards.
A. No person shall, except as provided in this chapter, allow or permit the
creation, continuance or maintenance of any noise beyond the property
line of his/her premises in excess of the noise levels established in these
regulations.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to emit or cause to be emitted any noise
beyond the property lines or boundaries of his/her premises in excess of the
following noise levels:
Receptor Zone Class
Emitter Noise Zone
C
(dBA)
B
(dBA)
A-Day
(dBA)
A-Night
(dBA)
Class C 70 66 61 51
Class B 62 62 55 45
Class A 62 55 55 45
C. Impulse noise standards.
(1) Class A receptor, nighttime. It shall be unlawful for any person to emit
or cause to be emitted any impulse noise beyond the property lines
of his/her premises to a Class A receptor noise zone during nighttime
hours in excess of 80 dB peak sound-pressure level.
61.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
62.Editor's Note: See Ch. 213, Zoning.
§ 141-3 MERIDEN CODE § 141-5
1:290
(2) Any receptor, at any time. It shall be unlawful for any person to emit or
cause to be emitted any impulse noise beyond the property lines of his/
her premises to any receptor noise zone at any time in excess of 100 dB
peak sound-pressure level.
D. High background noise levels and impulse noise.
(1) In those individual cases where the background noise levels caused by
sources not subject to these regulations exceed the standards contained
herein, a source shall be considered to cause excessive noise if the noise
emitted by such source exceeds the background noise levels by five
dBA, provided that no source subject to the provisions of this chapter
shall emit noise in excess of 80 dBA at any time and provided that this
section does not decrease the permissible levels of other sections of this
chapter.
(2) No person shall cause or allow the emission of impulse noise in excess of
80 dB peak sound-pressure level during the nighttime to any residential
noise zone.
(3) No person shall cause or allow the emission of impulse noise in excess
of 100 dB peak sound-pressure level at any time to any zone.
§ 141-6. Prohibited noise activities.
A. General prohibition. It shall be unlawful for any person to make,
continue or cause to be made or continued any loud, unnecessary or
unusual noise or any noise which either annoys, disturbs, injures or
endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others.
B. Enumeration of prohibited acts. Each of the following acts, among
others, is declared unlawful and is prohibited, but this enumeration shall
not be deemed to be exclusive:
(1) Animals. The keeping of any animal or bird which by causing
frequent or long-continued noise shall disturb the comfort or repose
of any person in the vicinity.
(2) Blowing horns, etc. The sounding of any horn or signal device on any
automobile, motorcycle, bus, streetcar or other vehicle while not in
motion, except as a danger signal if another vehicle is approaching
apparently out of control, or if in motion only as a danger signal
after or as brakes are being applied and deceleration of the vehicle
is intended; the creation by means of any such signal device of any
unreasonably load or harsh sound; and the sounding of such device
for an unnecessary and unreasonable period of time.
(3) Building operations. The erection (including excavating), demolition,
alteration or repair of any building, or the excavation of streets
and highways, other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00
p.m. on the weekdays, except in the case of urgent necessity in
the interest of public safety, and then only with a permit from the
appropriate municipal department, board or commission, which
permit may be granted for a period not to exceed three days while
the emergency continues.
(4) Exhaust discharge. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust
of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine, motor
§ 141-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 141-6
1:291
vehicle or motorboat engine except through a muffler or other device
which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom.
(5) Radios, portable radios, cd players, etc. The playing of any radio,
portable radio, CD player, phonograph or any musical instrument in
such a manner or with such volume, particularly during the hours
between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., as to annoy or disturb the quiet,
comfort or repose of persons in any office, or in any dwelling, hotel
or other type of residence, or of any person in the vicinity.
(6) Shouting, singing, etc. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or
singing on the public street, particularly between the hours of 10:00
p.m. and 7:00 a.m., or at any time or place so as to annoy or
disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of person in any office or in any
dwelling, hotel or other type of residence, or of any person in the
vicinity.
(7) Steam whistles. The blowing of any steam whistle attached to any
stationary boiler except to give notice of the time to begin or stop
work or as a warning of fire or danger, or upon request of proper City
authorities.
§ 141-7. Vehicle noise restrictions.
The following activities are prohibited:
A. Motor vehicle noise. All motor vehicles operated within the limits of the
City of Meriden shall be subject to the noise standards and decibel levels
set forth in the regulations authorized in § 14-80a of the Connecticut
General Statutes.
B. Motor vehicle sound-amplifying devices. No sound-amplifying devices on
or within motor vehicles shall emit noise in excess of the noise levels as
specified in § 141-5 of this chapter.
C. Unregistered recreational vehicle noise. No person shall create or cause
to be created any unreasonably loud or disturbing noise due to the
operation of an unregistered recreational vehicle. A noise shall be
deemed to be unreasonably loud and a violation of this chapter when the
noise so generated exceeds the noise level standards set forth in § 141-5.
§ 141-8. Exceptions.
A. This chapter shall not apply to noise emitted by or related to:
(1) Natural phenomena.
(2) Any bell or chime from any building clock, school or church.
(3) Any siren, whistle or bell lawfully used by emergency vehicles or any
other alarm system in an emergency situation.
(4) A public emergency sound system.
(5) Warning devices required by the Occupational Safety and Health
Administration or other state or federal safety regulations.
(6) Farming equipment or farming activity.
(7) An emergency.
(8) Snow removal equipment operated at the order of the City of
Meriden.
B. The following shall be exempt from this chapter, subject to special
conditions as specified:
§ 141-6 MERIDEN CODE § 141-8
1:292
(1) Noise generated by any construction equipment which is operated
during daytime hours, provided that the operation of construction
equipment during nighttime hours shall not exceed the maximum
noise levels as specified in § 141-5 of this chapter.
(2) Noise from domestic power equipment during daytime hours.
(3) Noise from demolition work conducted during daytime hours,
provided that, when considered emergency work, demolition shall
be exempted at all times from the noise levels set in this chapter.
(4) Noise created by aircraft flight operations which are specifically
preempted by the Federal Aviation Administration.
(5) Noise created by any recreational activities which are permitted by
law and for which a license or permit has been granted by the City,
including but not limited to parades, sporting events, concerts and
fireworks displays.63
(6) Noise created by blasting other than that conducted in connection
with construction activities, provided that the blasting is conducted
between 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. local time, at a specified hour
previously announced to the local public, and provided that a
permit for such blasting has been obtained from local authorities.
(7) Noise created by leaf, refuse and solid waste collection, provided
that the activity is conducted during daytime hours.
(8) Noise created by a fire or intrusion alarm, from the time of
activation of the audible signal for a period of time not exceeding 10
minutes, when such alarm is attached to any building or structure.
(9) Noise generated by engine-powered or motor-driven lawn care or
maintenance equipment on Class A property between the hours
of 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m., provided that noise discharge from
exhaust is adequately muffled to prevent loud noises therefrom.
(10) Public-address systems used in election campaign activities during
daytime hours only.
(11) Noise created by those activities which are subject to the
requirements and performance standards as set forth in § 213-54 of
Meriden City Code.
§ 141-9. Enforcement; penalties for offenses.
A. The provisions of this chapter may be enforced by citation, in addition to
other remedies. The following persons have authority to issue citations
for violations pursuant to these sections: the Police Department.
B. Any person in violation of any of the sections of this chapter shall be
fined in an amount not to exceed $77. Each day that such violation
continues after the time for correction of the violation given in an order
shall constitute a continuing violation, and the amount of the fine shall
be doubled for each day said violation continues, said fine not to exceed
$500 per day.
§ 141-10. Variances.
63.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 141-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 141-10
1:293
A. Any person living or doing business in the City of Meriden may apply
to the Chief of Police or his designee for a variance from one or more
of the provisions of this chapter which are more stringent than the
Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection regulations for the
control of noise, provided that the applicant supplies all of the following
information to the Chief of Police or his designee at least 20 days prior
to the start of the activity for which the variance is sought:
(1) The location and nature of the activity.
(2) The time period and hours of operation of said activity.
(3) The nature and intensity of the noise that will be generated.
(4) Any other information required by the Chief of Police or his
authorized agent.
B. No variance from this chapter shall be granted unless it has been
demonstrated that:
(1) The proposed activity will not violate any provisions of the
Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection regulations;
(2) The noise levels generated by the proposed activity will not
constitute a danger to the public health; and
(3) Compliance with this chapter constitutes an unreasonable hardship
on the applicant.
C. The application for a variance shall be reviewed and approved or
rejected at least five days prior to the start of the proposed activity by
the Chief of Police or his authorized agent. Approval or rejection shall be
made in writing and shall state the condition(s) of approval, if any, or the
reason(s) for rejection.
D. Failure to rule on an application within the designated time shall
constitute approval of the variance.
§ 141-11. Conflict with other regulations; severability.
All provisions of the Zoning Regulations of the City of Meriden which are
more stringent than those set forth herein shall remain in force. If, for
any reason, any word, clause, paragraph or section of this chapter shall
be held to make the same unconstitutional or be superseded by any state
law or regulation, this chapter shall not thereby be invalidated, and the
remainder of this chapter shall continue in effect. Any provision herein
which is in conflict with the Connecticut General Statutes, the Connecticut
Department of Environmental Protection regulations or the Public Health
Code of the State of Connecticut is hereby repealed, it being understood
that the statutes and code shall take precedence over this chapter.
§ 141-10 MERIDEN CODE § 141-11
1:294
Chapter 144
NUISANCES, HEALTH
GENERAL REFERENCES
Air pollution — See Ch. 58.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 107.
Food and food service establishments — See
Ch. 112.
Housing standards — See Ch. 125.
Massage establishments — See Ch. 133.
Meat — See Ch. 136.
Milk and milk products — See Ch. 139.
Sewers — See Ch. 170.
Solid waste, recycling and littering — See Ch.
176.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 180.
Trailers and trailer camps — See Ch. 194.
STATUTORY REFERENCES
State Public Health Code — See C.G.S.
§ 19a-36.
Abatement of nuisances — See C.G.S.
§ 19a-206.
§ 144-1. Determination of nuisances. [Amended 9-15-1980]
Every condition or activity in the City which is offensive or prejudicial to
the health and welfare of the residents of the City shall be deemed to be
a nuisance, and where an activity or condition is not expressly declared
to be a nuisance by law or ordinance the Director of Health and Human
Services shall have the power and authority to determine that such activity
or condition constitutes a nuisance as defined in this section.
§ 144-2. Prohibited acts.
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit, or aid, advise, abet or
encourage the commission of, any act declared to be a nuisance or
prohibited as such by the provisions of this Code or other ordinance or law.
§ 144-3. Right of entry for inspections. [Amended 9-15-1980]
The Director of Health and Human Services or any authorized inspector
may, at any reasonable time, enter into any building or upon any premises
in the City for the purpose of investigating sanitary conditions therein.
§ 144-4. Abatement of nuisances in public places. [Amended
9-15-1980]
Whenever the Director of Health and Human Services has notice or
knowledge of the existence of any unsanitary condition or nuisance in any
street or upon any public grounds, he shall cause the same to be abated or
removed at once.
§ 141-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 144-5
1:295
§ 144-5. Required records. [Amended 9-15-1980]
The Director of Health and Human Services shall maintain complaint
records, which shall be kept in his office, open to inspection at any time,
in which shall be entered the name and address of any person making
a complaint of any violation of the health ordinances or of unsanitary
conditions on premises of the City, if such information can be secured, and
the name and address of the person owning or occupying the premises
complained of or who is alleged to have violated a health ordinance.
§ 144-6. Procedure upon receipt of complaints. [Amended
9-15-1980]
Whenever any complaint of a violation of the health ordinances of the City,
or of unsanitary premises in the City, is made to the Director of Health and
Human Services or any such violation or condition otherwise comes to his
attention, he shall, within a reasonable time, make whatever investigation
may be necessary to determine whether or not in his opinion such violation
or condition exists.
§ 144-7. Issuance of order to abate. [Amended 9-15-1980]
If the Director of Health and Human Services, after making the
investigation required by the preceding section, finds that any unsanitary
condition or nuisance exists on any premises inspected by him, he shall
issue an order to the owner or occupant responsible for such condition,
directing such person to abate such condition or nuisance within a time to
be specified in such order, which shall in no case be later than two weeks
from the date of service of such order, in the manner specified therein.
§ 144-8. Service of orders. [Amended 9-15-1980]
Every order issued by the Director of Health and Human Services under
the provisions of the preceding section shall be served on the person to
whom it is directed by leaving a true attested copy thereof at the usual
place of abode of such person if he is a resident of the City, and, if he is
a nonresident, then by leaving such copy with the agent in charge of the
premises on which the condition to be remedied exists, and, if no such agent
can be found in the City, then by mailing such copy to such nonresident
person by registered mail to his last known post office address.
§ 144-9. Action upon noncompliance. [Amended 9-15-1980]
If any person fails to comply with any order issued by the Director of Health
and Human Services and served as provided in the preceding section,
within the time and in the manner specified in such order, the Director
of Health and Human Services shall cause the condition ordered to be
remedied to be abated by the City. The expense of such abatement shall
be chargeable to the person to whom the order is directed and shall be
collectible by the City in the same manner that other debts due the City are
collected.
§ 144-5 MERIDEN CODE § 144-10
1:296
§ 144-10. Restrictions on disposition of filth or offensive matter.
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or deposit any filth or offensive
matter in any street or public place or upon the premises of another or in
any sewer, catch basin or drain or stream or watercourse in the City.64
§ 144-11. Poisonous growth.
It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of any premises in the City
to allow any poison ivy, poison oak or poison sumac to grow or remain on
such premises within 25 feet of an established street line, or within 25 feet
of adjoining property except with the written consent of the owner of such
adjoining property.65
§ 144-12. Enforcement. [Added 6-3-1996; amended 4-3-2017]
The provisions of this chapter may be enforced by citation up to $250,
in addition to other remedies. The following persons have the authority
to issue citations for violation pursuant to this chapter: sanitarian,
Environmental Health Administrator, Associate Director of Health and
Director of Health and Human Services.
Chapter 146
NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS
§ 146-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to require the clear display of authorized
and assigned house or building numbers on every building fronting on any
street in the City of Meriden in order to assist the general public and
emergency services, public and private, in identifying any property in case
of emergency or otherwise.
§ 146-2. Applicability.
All dwelling houses, stores or other principal buildings erected or to be
erected within the City of Meriden shall display numbers assigned by the
Engineering Division and in conformity with the specifications provided for
herein.
§ 146-3. Placing of numbers required.
The owner, occupant or lessee of each and every house, store or other
building which now fronts or which may hereafter front upon any public
or private street within the City of Meriden shall, at his own expense,
64.Editor's Note: Former § 144-11, Creation of air pollution prohibited, which immediately
followed this section, was deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II). See Ch. 58, Air Pollution.
65.Editor's Note: Former § 144-13, which immediately followed this section, was renumbered
by ordinance adopted 6-2-1997. See now § 125-16, Control of vegetation.
§ 144-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 146-3
1:297
within three months after the adoption and publication of this chapter,
cause the authorized and assigned number of such house or building to
be permanently and conspicuously placed in accordance with the
specifications set forth herein.
§ 146-4. Specifications.
House or building numbers shall be:
A. In Arabic numerals.
B. A minimum height of three inches.
C. Mounted in a secure fashion to the front wall or porch of the building or
other fixed appurtenance in the front of the building so as to be clearly
visible from the street.
D. Sufficiently legible as to contrasting background arrangement, spacing
and uniformity so as to be clearly visible from the street.
E. At least 30 inches above ground level and so placed that trees, shrubs
and other obstructions do not block the line of sight of the numbers from
the street upon which the building fronts.
§ 146-5. Visibility of numbers on building which is set back.
If said house or building has such a setback location that the provisions
cannot be complied with, then the owner, occupant or lessee shall provide a
post, rod or other type of fixture of a substantial nature, including a mailbox,
with the number affixed thereon and so located on the premises that the
number shall be conspicuous and visible from the street upon which the
building fronts.
§ 146-6. Assignment of numbers.
House numbers shall be assigned by the Engineering Division of the City of
Meriden. Every owner, occupant or lessee of a building constructed or to be
constructed in the City of Meriden shall apply to the Engineering Division
for an authorized number in accordance with this chapter and applicable
provisions of the Subdivision Ordinance of the City of Meriden.
§ 146-7. Penalties for offenses. [Added 11-4-199666]
A. Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter may, in
addition to other remedies, including but not limited to criminal
prosecution, be fined $50 to $90, and each day's failure to comply with
any such provision shall constitute a separate violation.
B. The provisions of this chapter may be enforced by citation, in addition to
other remedies. The following persons have authority to issue citations
for violations pursuant to this section: NPP/Housing Manager, Housing
Code Inspector, Director of Development and Enforcement, Zoning
Enforcement Officer, Building Official, Electrical Inspector, Plumbing
and Heating Inspector and Rehabilitation Specialist.
66.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former § 146-7, which pertained to affixing
numbers to buildings by the City, and former § 146-8, which pertained to violations and
penalties.
§ 146-3 MERIDEN CODE § 146-7
1:298
Chapter 150
PARKS AND RECREATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 65.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 153.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 156.
Solid waste, recycling and littering — See Ch.
176.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 200.
§ 150-1. Definitions. [Added 6-1-1992]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meaning
indicated:
PARK PROPERTY — Includes all parks, squares, boulevards, and areas of
land within the management of the Parks and Recreation Department and
all buildings, structures, improvements, seats, benches, fountains, boats,
floats, walks, drives, roads, trees, plants, herbage, flowers, and other things
thereon, and enclosures of the same; all shade trees on streets or
thoroughfares, resting places, watering stations, playgrounds, other than
school grounds, owned, leased or operated by the City, parade grounds or
the like; all connecting parkways and roads or drives between parks; all
avenues, roads, ways, drives, and walks, with all trees, shrubbery, vines,
flowers and ornaments of any description, and all birds, animals, curiosities
or objects of interest or instruction and all tools and implements placed in
or on any of such enclosures, ways, parkways, roads or places; and such
including term shall be liberally construed.
§ 150-2. Rules for use of facilities. [Amended 9-15-1980; 9-16-1985;
2-15-1986; 5-5-1986; 12-15-1986; 6-1-1992]
A. Rules for parks, recreational facilities and municipally owned property
are the following:
(1) Use of facilities at own risk. The City of Meriden and the Parks and
Recreation Department and their employees or volunteers assume
no responsibility for lost or stolen property, personal injuries or
property damage. All persons using facilities of the City of Meriden
shall do so at their own risk.
(2) Disturbing or injuring animals and fowl; limitations on fishing.
No person shall disturb or injure any bird, bird's nest or eggs
or any other animal in said municipality, or disturb or injure any
animal wildlife within said City, or fish in its waters except waters
designated for such purpose.
(a) Fishing at Mirror Lake is limited to individuals aged 15 and
under and adults if accompanied by a fishing minor as long as
the adult has the proper license. [Amended 6-19-2000]
(b) Fishing at Giuffrida Park (Crescent Lake) is by special license
only, purchased from the Parks and Recreation Department.
§ 146-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-2
1:299
(3) Designation of areas for special events; permit required. The
Director of the Parks and Recreation Department may designate
areas for special events and schedule their use through the
issuance of permits that must be obtained in advance. Anyone
violating this rule will be subject to arrest or suspension of park and
recreational privileges.
(4) Solicitation and admission charges by users of facilities; permit
required. No person, group or organization shall expose or offer
for sale any article or thing in parks and recreational facilities or
charge admission in any park or recreational facility or portion
thereof without written permission of the Director of Parks and
Recreation. If granted, the Director of Parks and Recreation will
determine the amount to be assessed the group, person or
organization for the use of the grounds and/or facilities.
(5) Ballplaying limited to designated areas; permit required for tents,
shelters or signs. Ballplaying or golfing practice is allowed only
in designated areas at all parks. No tents, shelters or signs of
any nature are allowed to be erected on any City property or
recreational facility without the written permission of the Director
of Parks and Recreation.
(6) Opening and closing hours; exceptions. All parks and watershed
areas will open at sunrise. All parks and watershed areas will
be considered closed 1/2 hour after sundown, with the exception
of designated camping areas in the parks or where activities
authorized by the Parks and Recreation Department are being held,
such as (but not limited to) tennis, softball, baseball and special
events. The Department of Parks and Recreation may close or
restrict the hours of any park or facility without notice.
(7) Parking. Parking shall be limited to designated areas only. Parking
off paved or graveled areas is not permitted except by expressed
written consent of the Director of Parks and Recreation.
(8) Injury to public property; monetary liability. No person shall move,
remove, cut, write upon, deface or otherwise injure any structure,
building, fence, fountain, seat or picnic table, shrub, tree or flower
within any municipally owned property. Any person violating this
rule will be held monetarily responsible.
(9) Animals in parks. All dogs in the parks shall be on a leash, and
owners will be responsible for "curbing their dog" (animal) in
actively maintained areas. No horses or any animal/pet shall be
allowed in any park during a special event sponsored by the City of
Meriden without the expressed written permission of the Director
of Parks and Recreation. All dogs or other animals must be curbed
in all parks and public areas. Owners will be subject to arrest.
(10) Intoxicating beverages. Absolutely no intoxicating beverages will
be allowed in any park or recreational facility, except with the
written permission of the Director of Parks and Recreation.
(11) Games of chance. It shall be unlawful for any person to play any
games of chance or have any instrument of gambling in any park
or recreational facility, except for carnivals and circuses with the
§ 150-2 MERIDEN CODE § 150-2
1:300
written permission of the Director of Parks and Recreation and
Chief of Police.
(12) Traffic patterns; speed limit; prohibition of commercial vehicles and
buses. The Director of Parks and Recreation will have the authority
to regulate traffic patterns and flow, to include road closings, on
all park property. The speed limit in all parks shall not exceed 15
miles per hour. Absolutely no commercial vehicles or buses will be
allowed on any park property without the written permission of the
Director of Parks and Recreation.
(13) Motorized vehicles, such as (but not limited to) motorcycles, allterrain
vehicles, four-wheel-drive vehicles, dirt bikes, etc.,
prohibited; exception. No motorized vehicles will be permitted on
municipally owned property off paved areas except for official City
of Meriden personnel or when authorized in writing by the Director
of Parks and Recreation.
(14) Washing or polishing vehicle: No washing or polishing of any
vehicle is permitted in any park or watershed area.
(15) No person shall hunt, trap, or pursue wildlife at any time, and no
person shall use, carry, or possess firearms, air rifles, spring guns,
bow and arrows, slings, or any kind of trapping device, or any other
weapons potentially inimical to wildlife and dangerous to human
safety.
(16) Fires. Fires are allowed only in provided fireplaces or portable grills
in designated camping or picnic areas.
(17) Boating. Boating is restricted to use of canoes and sunfish-type
sailboats and shall be by permit only, except upon Hanover Pond
and Beaver Lake. There shall be no boating of any type on Mirror
Lake except with the written permission of the Director of Parks
and Recreation.
(18) Overnight camping. No overnight camping is allowed except by
written permission of the Parks and Recreation Department.
(19) Fishing permits are required of persons 16 or over.
(20) Limitation on use of certain parks. Hubbard Park, on weekends and
holidays, is limited to Meriden residents only.
(21) Hang gliding. The ascension and landing of hang gliders in the City
of Meriden is hereby prohibited.
(22) Dirigibles; balloons. The ascension and landing of lighter-than-air
dirigibles and balloons in the City of Meriden are hereby prohibited
unless a permit has been issued by the Director of Parks and
Recreation.
(23) There will be no dumping of domestic garbage in City parks.
Violators will be arrested. A carry-in-carry-out policy will be
enforced.
(24) Other specific rules governing each park shall be enforced where
officially posted.
(25) No person shall dig, remove, or cut any sand, soil, rock, stones,
trees, shrubs, turf, grass, plants, or down timber or other wood
or materials or make any excavation by tools, equipment or other
§ 150-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-2
1:301
means (including metal detectors) without the expressed written
permission of the Director of Parks and Recreation.
(26) All rock climbing is prohibited in any park area except with the
written consent of the Director of Parks and Recreation and
appropriate insurance waiver.
B. Enforcement.
(1) The City of Meriden Police Department shall enforce all regulations
with assistance of City personnel and private security when
applicable.
(2) Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be subject to
a fine, in addition to other remedies, of $50 to $90 for each violation.
[Amended 9-16-1996]
C. Any and all fines and fees due to the arrest for violations of these rules
and regulations or other park regulations shall be deposited into City of
Meriden Parks and Recreation Capital and Nonrecurring Account held
by a financial institution to repair/replace park damage and vandalism.
D. A violation of any of the above rules or regulations, in addition to the
penalty provided in said rule or regulation, or in the Connecticut General
Statutes, can result in a fine of up to $100 for each offense as well as
payment to rectify any damage sustained to any park property.
Chapter 151
PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 65.
Parks and recreation — See Ch. 150.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 153.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 156.
Solid waste, recycling and littering — See Ch.
176.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 200.
§ 150-2 MERIDEN CODE § 150-2
1:302
ARTICLE I
Smoking and Use of Tobacco Products
[Adopted 5-2-2016]
§ 151-1. Definitions.
As used in this article the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PARK OR RECREATION AREA — Any outdoor area owned or operated by
the City of Meriden and open to the general public for primary recreational
purposes, regardless of any fee or age requirement, including but not
limited to picnic areas, playgrounds, sports or athletic fields, bleachers,
walking paths, gardens, hiking trails, bike paths and dog parks. A park or
recreational area shall not include any paved public sidewalk immediately
abutting the boundary of the park or recreational area. This article shall not
apply to the Hunter Golf Course.
SMOKING — Inhaling, exhaling, burning, or carrying any lighted or heated
cigar, cigarette, or pipe, or any other lighted or heated tobacco or plant
product intended for inhalation, including hookahs and marijuana, whether
natural or synthetic, in any manner or in any form. "Smoking" also includes
the use of an electronic smoking device which creates an aerosol or vapor,
in any manner or in any form.
TOBACCO PRODUCT —
§ 151-2. Use of tobacco products prohibited in City-owned park or
recreation areas.
No person shall smoke or use any tobacco product in any City-owned park
or recreation area.
§ 151-3. Posting of signs.
Every park or recreation area shall have at least one conspicuously
displayed sign stating that smoking and the use of tobacco products are
prohibited. Such signs must have appropriate text and/or graphics to clearly
Any product containing, made, or derived from tobacco or nicotine that
is intended for human consumption, whether smoked, heated, chewed,
dissolved, inhaled, snorted, sniffed, or ingested by any other means,
including, but not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, little cigars, chewing
tobacco, pipe tobacco, snuff, snus; and
A.
Any electronic device that delivers nicotine or other substances to
the person inhaling from the device, including, but not limited to, an
electronic cigarette, cigar, pipe, or hookah.
B.
Notwithstanding any provision of Subsections A and B to the contrary,
"tobacco product" includes any component, part, or accessory of a
tobacco product, whether or not sold separately.
C.
§ 151-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 151-3
1:303
indicate that smoking and the use of tobacco products are prohibited and
include the appropriate City of Meriden ordinance citation. Such signs shall
be posted in a quantity and manner reasonably likely to inform individuals
occupying the area that tobacco use is prohibited within the area.
§ 151-4. Designation of smoking/tobacco use area for large events.
With the written permission of the Director of Parks and Recreation, a
designated smoking/tobacco use area may be identified within the park
or recreation area for large events. A person smoking or using tobacco
products in the designated area during a large event shall not be subject to
a penalty.
§ 151-5. Enforcement.
The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by citation. The following
persons have authority to issue citations for violations pursuant to this
chapter: City of Meriden Police Officer.
§ 151-6. Penalties for offenses.
A warning shall be issued for a first offense. The citation amount for a
second offense shall be $25. The citation amount for a third offense shall be
$50. The citation amount for the fourth or more offenses shall be $99. Such
citation shall be on a form as prescribed by the City of Meriden.
§ 151-3 MERIDEN CODE § 151-6
1:304
Chapter 153
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarms — See Ch. 60.
Animals — See Ch. 65.
Curfew — See Ch. 91.
Noise — See Ch. 141.
Health nuisances — See Ch. 144.
Parks and recreation — See Ch. 150.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 156.
Solid waste, recycling and littering — See Ch.
176.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 180.
STATUTORY REFERENCES
Liquor control generally — See C.G.S. § 30-1
et seq.
Hours for liquor establishments — See C.G.S.
§ 30-91.
§ 151-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 151-6
1:305

ARTICLE I
General Restrictions
[Adopted 10-7-1963 as §§ 18-8 through 18-17 of the 1963 Code]
§ 153-1. Injuring property.
No person shall injure, deface or soil any public or private building, fence
or enclosure in the City or trespass upon any garden or yard or public or
private enclosure therein.
§ 153-2. Kite flying.
No person shall fly a kite in the City at an altitude greater than 500 feet.
§ 153-3. Damaging or interfering with light system.
It shall be unlawful for any person maliciously to cut, break, injure, destroy
or deface any streetlight, lamp, lantern, post or frame in the City or to light
any such light without proper authority or to extinguish the same or in any
way to interfere with or meddle with the proper use or management of the
public lighting system.
§ 153-4. Hours for liquor package stores.
Except as otherwise provided by the General Statutes, all liquor package
stores shall close on Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday at 8:00
p.m. and on Friday and Saturday at 9:00 p.m.
§ 153-5. Sunday sales of liquor.
Except as otherwise provided by the General Statutes, the sale of alcoholic
liquor with meals shall be lawful in the City on Sunday, between the hours
of 12:00 noon and 9:00 p.m., in hotels, restaurants and clubs.
§ 153-6. Loitering on public property.
No person shall loiter upon the steps or other projection of any church,
hotel, hall or public building or in any hall, space or way leading thereto
so as to obstruct free passage into and out of the same, and no person
shall loiter against any fence or wall surrounding or adjoining any such
building.67
§ 153-7. Unlawful use of police whistle.
No person not a member of the Police Department of the City shall have in
his possession or blow upon, whistle or use in any manner the whistle or
call known as the "bean police call."
67.Editor's Note: Former § 153-7, which immediately followed this section and pertained to
noise, was repealed 10-18-1999. See now Ch. 141, Noise.
§ 153-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-8
1:307
§ 153-8. Interference with public officials and employees.
It shall be unlawful for any person to resist, hinder, obstruct, vilify or abuse
any officer or employee of the City in the lawful discharge of his duties.
§ 153-9. Obstruction of watercourses.
The owner of any property through which a stream flows in the City shall
keep such watercourse free of weeds or other obstruction.
§ 153-10. Operation of vehicles on City property. [Added 5-2-1977;
9-15-1980]
It shall be unlawful for any person, with the exception of City employees or
their agents or assigns in the performance of their duties, to operate any
snowmobile, municipally owned golf cart, motorcycle, all-terrain vehicle or
motor vehicle on any City-owned property within or outside the territorial
limits of the City of Meriden, except in parks on trails or routes as
designated by the Department of Parks and Recreation of the City of
Meriden.
§ 153-8 MERIDEN CODE § 153-10
1:308
ARTICLE II
Flying Kites Near Airport
[Adopted 10-7-1963 as § 3-2 of the 1963 Code]
§ 153-11. Prohibited acts.
No person shall fly a kite within an area of 2,000 feet from the boundary of
the municipal airport.
§ 153-12. Penalties for offenses. [Added 9-16-1996]
Any person violating the provisions of this article may be fined $50 to $90
for each violation.
§ 153-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-12
1:309

ARTICLE III
Lighter and Lighter Fluid Sales
[Adopted 6-2-1997]
§ 153-13. Sale to minors.
No person shall sell, give or barter any lighter or lighter fluid to any person
under 18 years of age. It is the obligation of the transferor to establish the
age of the transferee by photo identification or other reliable means prior to
completion of the transaction.
§ 153-14. Penalties for offenses.
The penalty for violation of this article shall be $77. Each instance of selling,
giving or bartering in violation of this article shall be considered a separate
offense.
§ 153-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-14
1:311

ARTICLE IV
Smoking and Use of Tobacco Products Around Municipal Buildings
[Adopted 7-17-2017]
§ 153-15. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MUNICIPAL BUILDING — Any building or structure owned or leased by the
City of Meriden.
SMOKING — Inhaling, exhaling, burning, or carrying any lighted or heated
cigar, cigarette, or pipe, or any other lighted or heated tobacco or plant
product intended for inhalation, including hookahs and marijuana, whether
natural or synthetic, in any manner or in any form. Smoking also includes
the use of an electronic smoking device which creates an aerosol or vapor,
in any manner or in any form.
TOBACCO PRODUCT —
§ 153-16. Use of tobacco products prohibited surrounding
municipal buildings; exceptions.
A. No person shall smoke or use any tobacco product within 25 feet of
doors, windows, and air intakes surrounding municipal buildings.
B. The Hunter Memorial Golf Course and Augusta Curtis Cultural Center
are excluded from this article.
§ 153-17. Posting of signs.
Every municipal building shall have at least one conspicuously displayed
sign stating that smoking and the use of tobacco products are prohibited.
Such signs must have appropriate text and/or graphics to clearly indicate
that smoking and the use of tobacco products are prohibited and include the
appropriate City of Meriden ordinance citation. Such signs shall be posted
in a quantity and manner reasonably likely to inform individuals occupying
the area that tobacco use is prohibited within the area.
Any product containing, made, or derived from tobacco or nicotine that
is intended for human consumption, whether smoked, heated, chewed,
dissolved, inhaled, snorted, sniffed, or ingested by any other means,
including, but not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, little cigars, chewing
tobacco, pipe tobacco, snuff, snus; and
A.
Any electronic device that delivers nicotine or other substances to
the person inhaling from the device, including, but not limited to, an
electronic cigarette, cigar, pipe, or hookah.
B.
Notwithstanding any provision of Subsections A and B to the contrary,
tobacco product includes any component, part, or accessory of a
tobacco product, whether or not sold separately.
C.
§ 153-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-18
1:313
§ 153-18. Designation of smoking/tobacco use areas.
A designated smoking/tobacco use area may be identified surrounding the
municipal building for employees, volunteers, customers, vendors, clients,
consultants, contractors and all other visitors. A person smoking or using
tobacco products in the designated area shall not be subject to a penalty.
§ 153-19. Enforcement.
The provisions of this article shall be enforced by citation. The following
persons have authority to issue citations for violations pursuant to this
article: City of Meriden Police Officers.
§ 153-20. Violations and penalties.
A warning shall be issued for a first offense. The citation amount for a
second offense shall be $25. The citation amount for a third offense shall be
$50. The citation amount for the fourth or more offenses shall be $99. Such
citation shall be on a form as prescribed by the City of Meriden.
§ 153-18 MERIDEN CODE § 153-20
1:314
ARTICLE V
Sale of Tobacco, Vaping, and Nicotine Products
[Adopted 4-15-2019]
§ 153-21. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
RETAILER — Any person or business than owns, operates, or manages any
place which tobacco products are sold. The retailer also includes any person
or business that is required to purchase a dealer's license under C.G.S.
§ 12-287. "Retailer" also includes a person whose actions fall within the
definition of "sale or sell."
SALE or SELL — Selling, giving, bartering, exchanging, delivering, or
otherwise distributing tobacco products, unless the person is delivering or
accepting delivery in such person's capacity as an employee. "Sale or sell"
also includes offers to sell, barter, or exchange.
SMOKING — Inhaling, exhaling, burning, or carrying any lighted or heated
cigar, cigarette, pipe, or any other lighted or heated tobacco or plant
product intended for inhalation, including hookahs and marijuana, whether
natural or synthetic, in any manner or in any form. "Smoking" also includes
the use of an electronic smoking device which creates an aerosol or vapor,
in any manner or in any form.
TOBACCO PRODUCT —
§ 153-22. Minimum legal sales age.
A. No retailer or retailer's agent or employee shall give, sell, or otherwise
distribute any tobacco product to any person under 21 years of age.
B. The person selling any tobacco product shall examine the identification
card issued in accordance with the provisions of C.G.S. § 1-1h for anyone
who appears to be under the age of 27 and verify proof of age
demonstrating the recipient is at least 21 years of age before selling any
tobacco product.
Any product containing, made, or derived from tobacco or nicotine that
is intended for human consumption, whether smoked, heated, chewed,
dissolved, inhaled, snorted, sniffed, or ingested by any other means,
including, but not limited to cigarettes, cigars, little cigars, chewing
tobacco, pipe tobacco, snuff, snus; and
A.
Any electronic smoking device that delivers nicotine or other
substances to the person inhaling from the device, including, but not
limited to, an electronic cigarette, cigar, pipe, or hookah.
B.
Notwithstanding any provision of Subsections A and B to the contrary,
"tobacco product" includes any component, part, or accessory of a
tobacco product, whether or not sold separately.
C.
§ 153-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-22
1:315
(1) That a person appeared to be over the age of 21 shall not constitute
a defense to a violation of this section. If a person fails to provide
such proof of age, such retailer or retailer's agent or employee shall
not sell any tobacco product to the person.
§ 153-23. Signage.
A. "The Sale of Tobacco or Nicotine Products or Devices to Persons Under
21 is Prohibited" signs shall be legibly printed in letters at least one
inch high and shall be posted clearly and conspicuously in every location
where the products are available for purchase. Signage shall be in
multiple languages as needed to be consistent with other facility
postings.
B. Selling tobacco products in any place that does not have a sign posted in
a conspicuous place to a person under 21 years of age is prohibited by
this article and a violation consistent with this article.
§ 153-24. Enforcement.
A. This article shall be enforced by the Meriden Police Department.
B. Any City of Meriden agency, or their respective designees, while an
establishment is undergoing otherwise mandated inspections, that
observes a violation of this article shall forward their complaint to the
Meriden Police Department for investigation.
C. An owner, manager, operator, or employee of an establishment regulated
by this article the responsibility to understand and follow the provision
herein.
D. Any citizen who desires to register a complaint under this article may
initiate enforcement by contacting the Meriden Police Department.
E. The Meriden Police Department shall be responsible for conducting
or have conducted on its behalf random under-age youth-based,
unannounced compliance checks as needed.
§ 153-25. Violation and penalties.
The provisions of this Article shall be enforced by citation. The Meriden
Police Department shall have the authority to issue warnings and citations
for violations pursuant to this article.
A. Sign violations. A person who violates the sign requirements of this
article shall first be issued a written warning of the violation and have
five days to come in to compliance. After receiving a written warning, a
violation of the sign requirement shall result in a fine, as follows:
(1) $50 for the first offense after notice;
(2) $100 for the second offense;
(3) $250 for each offense thereafter.
B. Sale violation. A person who violates the sale restriction by selling to a
person under the age of 21 shall first be issued a written warning. Once
a written warning has been issued, subsequent violations shall result in
a fine as follows:
(1) $100 for the first offense after notice;
(2) $250 for the second offense.
§ 153-22 MERIDEN CODE § 153-26
1:316
§ 153-26. Public education.
The Meriden Department of Health and Human Services shall engage in
continuing public health education program to explain and clarify the
purposes and requirements of this article to citizens affected by it, and
to guide retailers, owners, operators, and managers in their compliance.
The program may include publication of a brochure for affected retailers
explaining the provisions of article and signage mandated by this article.
§ 153-27. Rulemaking authority.
The Meriden Police Department is hereby authorized to promulgate rules
and regulations to carry out the purpose and intent of this article in order
to protect the public health, safety, and welfare.
§ 153-28. Liberal construction.
This article shall be liberally construed so as to further its purposes.
§ 153-29. Severability.
The provisions of this article are hereby declared severable, and if any
provision, clause, sentence, or paragraph of this section or the application
thereof to any person or circumstances held by a court of competent
jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, such a ruling shall
not affect the other parts of this article that can be given effect.
§ 153-30. Effective date.
This article shall take effect upon adoption by the Meriden City Council,
with an effective date no later than 180 days from the date of City Council
adoption.
§ 153-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-30
1:317
Chapter 156
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Jewelry auctions — See Ch. 129.
Milk and milk products — See Ch. 139.
Health nuisances — See Ch. 144.
Signs and posters — See Ch. 174.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 180.
STATUTORY REFERENCES
Junk dealers — See C.G.S. § 21-9 et seq.
Itinerant vendors — See C.G.S. § 21-27 et seq.
Hawkers and peddlers — See C.G.S. § 21-36 et
seq.
§ 156-1. Definitions; license required; exceptions. [Amended
4-6-1981; 5-18-1987]
A. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PEDDLER — Any person who shall sell, offer for sale, vend, hawk,
peddle or barter, or assist in selling, offering for sale, vending, hawking,
peddling or bartering, upon the streets, sidewalks or public places or
from house to house in the City, goods, wares, or other merchandise.
SOLICITOR — Any person, whether individually or on behalf of any trust,
foundation, group, association, partnership, corporation, society or any
combination of them, whether principal or agent, who shall go from
place to place within the City soliciting orders for future delivery of any
goods, wares or merchandise, including magazines and other printed
matter and any other services.
B. No person shall act as a peddler or solicitor, as defined herein, in the
City of Meriden unless he has first obtained a license to do so from the
Chief of Police.
C. This section shall not apply to newspaper carriers, to sales by farmers
and gardeners of the produce of their farms and gardens or to the
sale, distribution and delivery of milk, tea, coffee, spices, groceries, and
bakery goods, to sales on approval, to conditional sales of merchandise,
or the taking of orders for merchandise for future delivery when
payment is not required at the time of solicitation, nor shall it apply
to persons conducting business in a store or shop. This section shall
also not apply to representatives of any nonprofit organization operated
exclusively for religious, charitable, scientific, literary, historic or
educational purposes and exempt from taxation pursuant to federal and
state law, provided that such representatives register with the Police
Department with the current tax-exempt numbers of the organization.
§ 153-30 MERIDEN CODE § 156-1
1:318
D. This section shall not apply to persons who have or have had a regular
place of business in the City in the preceding 12 months.
§ 156-2. Application; issuance and term of license; fees. [Amended
4-6-1981; 5-18-1987]
A. Application for the license required by the preceding section shall be
made, under oath, to the Chief of Police, on a form provided by the
Police Department. The application shall include, but not be limited to,
the following information:
(1) Proof of compliance with all state requirements;
(2) Place of residence;
(3) A physical description, including the submission of two photographs
taken within 60 days of the date of application;
(4) A certified copy of the applicant's State of Connecticut sales tax
permit;
(5) The nature of the applicant's business;
(6) Whether such applicant has been convicted of any crime(s); and
(7) A certificate of adequate insurance.
B. The Chief of Police may issue the license to qualified applicants within
10 days of the date of application therefor.
C. The fee for licenses under this chapter shall be $150. [Amended
9-6-1994]
D. Such licenses shall expire one year after the date of issuance.
§ 156-3. License not transferable.
A. Every license issued as provided in the preceding section shall be a
personal license to the licensee and shall not be transferable.
B. No itinerant vendor shall be relieved or exempted from the provisions or
requirements of this chapter by reason of associating himself or herself
temporarily with any local dealer, auctioneer, trader or merchant or by
conducting any temporary or transient business in connection with or in
the name of any local dealer, auctioneer, trader or merchant.
C. All licenses, with accompanying photograph affixed, shall be displayed
in a conspicuous place where business is transacted. [Amended
4-6-1981]
§ 156-4. Display of license number on vehicle.
Every person licensed under § 156-1 shall have the number of his license
plainly inscribed on any vehicle which he uses under such license.
§ 156-5. Bond required. [Amended 9-15-1980; 4-6-1981; 9-6-1995]
Before any license, as provided by this chapter, shall be issued for engaging
in a transient or itinerant business, as defined in this chapter, in the City
of Meriden, such applicant shall file with the City Clerk a bond running
to the City of Meriden in the sum of $3,000, executed by the applicant,
as principal, and two sureties upon which service of process may be made
in the State of Connecticut, said bond to be approved by the Corporation
Counsel, conditioned that said applicant shall comply fully with all the
§ 156-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 156-5
1:319
provisions of the ordinances of the City of Meriden and the statutes of the
State of Connecticut regulating and concerning the sale of goods, wares and
merchandise and will pay all judgments rendered against said applicant for
any violation of said ordinances or statutes, or any of them, together with
all judgments and costs that may be recovered against him by any person
or persons for damage growing out of any misrepresentation or deception
practiced on any person transacting such business with such applicant,
whether said representations or deceptions were made or practiced by the
owners or by their servants, agents or employees either at the time of
making the sale or through any advertisement of any character whatsoever
printed or circulated with reference to the goods, wares and merchandise
sold or any part thereof. Action on the bond may be brought in the name of
the City to the use of the aggrieved person. Such bond must be approved by
the Corporation Counsel both as to form and as to the responsibility of the
sureties thereon.
§ 156-6. Junk dealer's license required.
No junk dealer, as defined by § 21-9 of the General Statutes, shall engage
in business in the City without having obtained a license so to do from the
Chief of Police. The fee for such license shall be $10 per year for each team
or vehicle used in connection with such business. The Chief of Police may
issue a junk dealer's license upon application made therefor in writing and
the payment of the license fee. All such licenses shall expire one year after
the date of issuance, and no such license shall be transferable.
§ 156-7. Obstruction of streets and sidewalks prohibited; sales
within school zones. [Added 1-18-2000]
A. No vendor shall hold or make any sale upon or near any street or
sidewalk in the City in such manner as to obstruct or prevent the free
and convenient use thereof by pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
B. No vendor shall hold or make any sale upon any portion of any street
or sidewalk located within 500 feet of any school during the period from
one hour prior to the beginning of a school day session to the period one
hour after the close of a school day session.
§ 156-8. Records of licenses.
The Chief of Police shall keep a record of all licenses issued by him under
the provisions of this chapter in a book maintained for the purpose
containing the number and date of each license, the name, age and
residence of the person licensed and the amount of license fee paid.
§ 156-9. Enforcement; penalties for offenses. [Added 9-16-1996]
A. A licensed peddler, solicitor or vendor shall comply with all applicable
laws, regulations and ordinances relating to activities for which a license
is required under this chapter.
B. Suspension or revocation of license.
(1) The Chief of Police may suspend or revoke a license for failure to
comply with any applicable laws, regulations and ordinances relating
§ 156-5 MERIDEN CODE § 156-9
1:320
to activities for which a license is required under this chapter. Such
revocation shall occur following a hearing with respect to which
notice in writing, specifying the time and place of such hearing and
requiring the licensee to show cause why such license should not
be revoked, is mailed or delivered to such licensee, at the address
provided on the application for a license, not less than 10 days
preceding the date of such hearing. Such notice may be served
personally or by first-class mail.
(2) If the Chief of Police finds, after a hearing as provided in Subsection
B(1) of this section, that a licensee has violated any applicable laws,
regulations and ordinances relating to activities for which a license
is required under this chapter, the Chief of Police shall revoke said
license. Notice of the decision shall be made within 10 business days
after the hearing, and notice of the decision shall be mailed to the
licensee at the address provided on the license application.
(3) The Chief of Police shall not issue a new license to a former licensee
whose license was revoked unless the Chief of Police is satisfied that
such former licensee will comply with all applicable laws, regulations
and ordinances relating to activities for which a license is required
under this chapter.
C. Any person violating the provisions of this chapter may be fined $50 to
$90 for each violation.
Chapter 158
POLICE ALARMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarms — See Ch. 60. Noise — See Ch. 141.
§ 158-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide uniform minimum standards and
regulations applicable to the users of an alarm or emergency signaling
device within the City of Meriden which results in the dispatch and/or
response of municipal emergency vehicles, including police and/or
personnel and to promote the responsible use of alarm systems in the City
of Meriden.
§ 158-2. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
ALARM COMPANY — A person or a company engaged in the selling,
leasing, installing, servicing or monitoring alarm systems. The alarm
company shall be licensed in compliance with Connecticut law.
§ 156-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-2
1:321
ALARM PERMIT — A permit issued by the City allowing the operation of an
alarm system within the City at commercial and residential properties.
ALARM SIGNAL — An audible or visual signal generated by an alarm
system to which law enforcement is requested to respond.
ALARM SYSTEM — Any single device or assembly of equipment designed
to signal the occurrence of an illegal or unauthorized entry or other activity
requiring law enforcement response. For purposes of this chapter, an alarm
system does not include motor vehicle or boat alarms, fire alarms, domestic
violence alarms, or alarms solely requesting a medical response.
ALARM USER — Any person, corporation, partnership, proprietorship,
governmental or educational entity or any other entity owning, leasing
or operating an alarm system, or on whose premises an alarm system is
maintained for the protection of such premises.
ALARM USER AWARENESS CLASS — A class conducted for the purpose
of educating alarm users about the responsible use, operation, and
maintenance of alarm systems and the problems created by false alarms.
CANCELLATION — The process whereby the alarm company notifies the
City that there is no need for a police response after an alarm signal is
activated. If a cancellation occurs prior to police arriving at the scene of the
alarm signal, it is not considered a false alarm.
CITY — The City of Meriden, the City of Meriden Police Department or its
authorized agent.
FALSE ALARM — The activation of an alarm system through mechanical or
electronic failure, malfunction, improper installation, or the negligence of
the alarm user, its employees or agents, as well as alarm signals activated
to summon law enforcement personnel, unless law enforcement response
was cancelled by the alarm user before law enforcement personnel arrive
at the alarm location. An alarm is a false alarm when, upon inspection by
the Meriden Police Department, evidence indicates that no unauthorized
entry, robbery, or other such crime was committed or attempted in or on the
premises which would have activated a properly functioning alarm system.
LOCAL ALARM — An alarm system that emits a signal at an alarm site that
is audible or visible from the exterior of a structure and is not monitored by
a remote monitoring facility, whether installed by an alarm company or an
alarm user.
PERMIT YEAR — A twelve-month period beginning on the day and month
on which an alarm permit is issued.
RUNAWAY ALARM — An alarm system that produces repeated alarm
signals that do not appear to be caused by separate human action. The
Meriden Police Department may, in its sole discretion, discontinue police
responses to alarm signals from what appears to be a runaway alarm.
SIA CONTROL PANEL STANDARD CP-01 — The American National
Standard Institute (ANSI) approved Security Industry Association (SIA)
CP-01 Control Panel Standard, as may be updated from time to time, that
§ 158-2 MERIDEN CODE § 158-2
1:322
details recommended design features for security system control panels
and their associated arming and disarming devices to reduce false alarms.
Control panels built and tested to this standard by a nationally recognized
testing organization, will be marked to state: "Design evaluated in
accordance with SIA CP-01 Control Panel Standard features for false alarm
reduction."
VERIFY — An attempt by the monitoring company or its representative to
contact the alarm site and/or alarm user, whether or not actual contact
is made, to determine whether an alarm signal is valid before requesting
police response to the alarm signal. For the purpose of this chapter,
telephone verification shall require, at a minimum, that a second call be
made to a different number if the first call fails to reach an alarm user who
can properly identify themselves to determine whether an alarm signal is
valid before requesting law enforcement dispatch.
§ 158-3. Alarm permit.
A. Permit required. No person shall use an alarm system, including a local
alarm, without first obtaining a permit for the alarm system from the
City. For purposes of this chapter, an alarm system does not include:
motor vehicle or boat alarms; fire alarms; domestic violence alarms; or
alarms solely requesting a medical response. Each alarm permit shall be
assigned a permit number and the alarm user shall provide the permit
number to the alarm company. Alarm permits are not transferable.
B. Application. An alarm user has the duty to obtain an application from the
City. A failure to obtain a permit for an alarm system is a violation of this
chapter.
C. Transfer of possession. When the possession of the premises is
transferred, the alarm user obtaining possession of the property shall file
an application for an alarm permit within 30 days of obtaining possession
of the property. Alarm permits are not transferable.
D. Reporting updated information. Renewal of alarm permit. Whenever the
information provided on the alarm permit application changes, the alarm
user shall provide the updated information to the City within 30 days.
The alarm user shall apply for a permit renewal every 12 months. A
failure to comply with the provisions of this section is a violation of this
chapter.
E. Multiple alarm systems. If an alarm user has one or more alarm systems
protecting two or more separate structures having different addresses
and/or tenants, a separate permit shall be required for each structure
and/or tenant.
F. Change in address or ownership. An alarm uses must obtain a new
permit if there is a change in address or ownership of a business or
residence.
§ 158-4. Duties of alarm user.
The alarm user shall have the following duties and responsibilities:
A. Maintain the premises and the alarm system to reduce or eliminate false
alarms.
§ 158-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-4
1:323
B. Ensure the alarm system has an auxiliary power supply with a minimum
of a four hour power reserve.
C. Provide the alarm company with the permit number of the alarm.
D. Respond or cause a representative to respond to the alarm system's
location and/or to deactivate a malfunctioning alarm within 30 minutes
after notification by the Police Department of a malfunctioning alarm.
E. Not manually activate an alarm for any reason other than an occurrence
of an event that the alarm system was intended to report or to perform
routine maintenance as prescribed by the alarm system provider.
§ 158-5. Duties of the alarm company.
A. The alarm company shall have the following duties and responsibilities:
(1) Obtain and maintain any required Connecticut State license(s).
(2) Provide the name, address, and telephone number of the alarm user
or designee who can be called in an emergency or to effect repairs
24 hours a day seven days a week.
(3) Provide the most current contact information for the alarm user.
(4) Ninety days after enactment of this chapter, the alarm installation
companies shall on all new installations use alarm control panel(s)
which meet SIA Control Panel Standard CP-01.
(5) Prior to activation of an alarm system, the alarm company shall
provide instructions explaining the proper operation of the alarm
system to the alarm user.
(6) Provide written information to the alarm user regarding how to
obtain service from the alarm company for the alarm system.
B. An alarm company performing monitoring services shall:
(1) Attempt to verify whether an alarm signal is valid before requesting
dispatch. Telephone verification shall require, at a minimum, that
a second call be made to a different number if the first attempt
fails to reach an alarm user who can properly identify themselves
to determine whether an alarm signal is valid. An exception to this
requirement is in the case an emergency, such as a panic or robberyin-
progress alarm, or in cases where a crime-in-progress has been
verified by video and/or audible means.
(2) Provide the alarm permit number to the City to facilitate dispatch
and/or cancellations.
(3) Communicate any available information about the alarm to the City
upon its activation.
(4) Communicate a cancellation to the City as soon as possible following
a determination that response is unnecessary.
§ 158-6. Prohibited acts.
A. It is prohibited to activate an alarm system for the purpose of
summoning law enforcement when no burglary, robbery, or other crime
dangerous to life or property is being committed or attempted on the
premises, or otherwise to cause a false alarm.
B. It is prohibited to install, maintain, or use an audible alarm system which
can sound continually for more than 10 minutes.
§ 158-4 MERIDEN CODE § 158-7
1:324
§ 158-7. Enforcement of provisions.
A. Excessive false alarms/failure to register. It is hereby found and
determined that more than four false alarms within a year is excessive,
constitutes a public nuisance, is a drain on police resources and is
hereby prohibited. Penalties for excessive false alarms within a rolling
twelve-month period shall be assessed by Meriden Police Department
against an alarm user as follows:
(1) First four alarms are free, and any subsequent alarms would be $25
for residential.
(2) First four alarms are free and any subsequent alarms would be $100
for businesses.
B. Cancellation. If cancellation occurs prior to law enforcement arriving
at the scene, it is not considered a false alarm and no penalty will be
assessed.
C. Multiple activations. Multiple activations of the alarm within a twentyfour-
hour period may, at the discretion of the City, be considered as one
false alarm.
D. Other fees. Any other violations of this chapter will be enforced through
a citation issued by the Meriden Police Department in the amount of
$100 per violation.
E. Payment of fees. Fees shall be paid within 30 days from the date of the
invoice. For failure to pay within 30 days of the invoice, there would be
an additional fee of $25 added for residential and an additional $100
added for commercial.
F. Discontinuance of law enforcement response. The failure to register and
obtain a permit, the failure to provide the City with updated information,
and/or the failure to renew the alarm permit annually may result in no
law enforcement response to an unregistered alarm. The Meriden Police
Department may, in its sole discretion, discontinue law enforcement
response to an alarm signal from what appears to be a runaway alarm.
§ 158-8. Alarm user awareness class.
The City may create and implement an alarm user awareness class and may
request the assistance of the alarm companies to assist in developing and
implementing the class. The class shall inform alarm users of the problems
created by false alarms and instruct alarm users how to help reduce false
alarms. The City, at its discretion, may allow the option of attending an
alarm user awareness class in lieu of paying one penalty.
§ 158-9. Appeals process.
Assessments of a penalty or penalties and other enforcement decisions
made under this chapter may be appealed by filing a written notice of
appeal with the Meriden Police Department within 10 days after the date
of notification of the assessment of civil fees or other enforcement decision.
The failure to give notice of appeal within this time period shall constitute
a waiver of the right to contest the assessment of penalty or other
enforcement decision. Appeals shall be heard through the citation hearing
§ 158-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-9
1:325
process established by the City under the authority of Section 7-152c of the
Connecticut General Statutes.
§ 158-10. Governmental immunity.
By applying for an alarm permit, the alarm user acknowledges that the
Meriden Police Department response may be influenced by factors such as
the availability of police units, priority of calls, weather conditions, traffic
conditions, emergency conditions, staffing levels, prior response history and
other factors at the sole discretion of the Meriden Police Department.
§ 158-11. Severability.
The provisions of this chapter are severable. If a court of competent
jurisdiction determines that a word, phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph,
subsection, section, or other provision is invalid or that the application of
any part of the chapter is invalid, the remaining provisions of this chapter
and the application of those provisions of this chapter are not affected by
that decision.
Chapter 159
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 77.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 107.
Housing standards — See Ch. 125.
Health nuisances — See Ch. 144.
Solid waste, recycling and littering — See Ch.
176.
Trees — See Ch. 196.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 198.
§ 159-1. Title; authority; findings; intent.
A. This chapter is to be known as the "Anti-Blight Ordinance" and is
enacted pursuant to the authority granted to the City of Meriden under
Connecticut General Statutes § 7-148(c)(7)(H)(xv)
B. It is found that there exist within the City of Meriden a number of real
properties that are in blighted condition, and the continued existence
of these properties contributes to the decline of neighborhoods. It is
further found that the existence of such properties adversely affects the
economic well-being of the City and is adverse to the health, safety and
welfare of its residents. It is further found that many of the properties
can be rehabilitated, reconstructed, demolished and/or reused so as to
provide decent, safe and sanitary housing and commercial facilities and
that such rehabilitation, reconstruction, demolition and/or reuse would
eliminate, remedy and prevent the adverse conditions described above.
C. This chapter is intended to enhance the minimum standards governing
the condition and maintenance of occupied and unoccupied premises
§ 158-9 MERIDEN CODE § 159-1
1:326
and to establish reasonable safeguards for the health, safety and welfare
of the occupants and users of said premises, the community, and the
general public. Further, this chapter is intended to maintain and
preserve the integrity of City neighborhoods, to preserve and protect
property values, and to control visual blight.
D. To encourage voluntary compliance with the objective of this chapter,
no citations will be issued for anti-blight violations for a period of six
months after adoption of this chapter.
E. The intent of this chapter is to provide additional leverage to code
enforcement personnel in an effort to bring properties into compliance,
especially those properties where violations are repeatedly found and
compliance could not be obtained through other code enforcement
efforts. Those who are responsible for the blighted conditions of
properties and who have failed to comply with other codes or orders will
be subject to the strict enforcement of this chapter.
§ 159-2. Creation or maintenance of blighted premises prohibited.
No owner, agent, tenant, firm, corporation, or person in control of real
property, taxable or tax exempt, located in the City of Meriden shall create,
allow, maintain or cause to be maintained, continue, or suffer to exist a
blighted premises.
§ 159-3. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words, terms and phrases
shall have the following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates
otherwise:
BLIGHT — Any building or structure or any parcel of land in which at least
one of the following conditions exists shall be considered blighted:
A. It is becoming dilapidated as defined herein.
B. It is not being maintained as defined herein.
It is a fire hazard as determined by the Fire Marshal or documented by
the Fire Department or the Building Department.
C.
It is unsanitary as determined by report of the Department of Health
that existing conditions constitute a life-threatening hazard or a hazard
that puts at risk the health or safety of the citizens of the City.
D.
It is a factor creating a substantial and unreasonable interference with
the reasonable and lawful use and enjoyment of other space within the
neighborhood.
E.
It is a substantial factor causing serious depreciation of the property
values in the neighborhood.
F.
There exist at the property conditions promoting rodent harborage and/
or infestation.
G.
§ 159-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 159-3
1:327
BUILDING OFFICIAL — The building official as defined in Connecticut
General Statutes § 29-260.
CITATION — A written statement of the relevant conditions and facts giving
rise to the specified violation, including a reference to the specific section
of the ordinance which has been violated and the amount prescribed as a
fine for the violation(s).
DEBRIS — Material which is incapable of immediately performing the
function for which it was designed, including but not limited to abandoned,
discarded, or unused objects; junk or collections of equipment such as
automobiles, boats and recreation vehicles which are missing parts, not
complete in appearance and in an obvious state of disrepair; and parts
of automobiles, furniture, appliances, cans, boxes, scrap metal, tires,
batteries, containers, and garbage.
H. There exist at the property overgrown shrubs, brush or weeds.
Parking lots/areas are left in a state of disrepair or abandonment and/
or are used to store abandoned or unregistered vehicles.
I.
J. Chimneys and similar appurtenances are in a state of disrepair.
Overhanging extensions, including but not limited to canopies,
marquees, signs, awnings, stairways, fire escapes, standpipes, and
exhaust ducts, contain rust or other decay.
K.
It is a factor creating the cancellation of insurance on proximate
properties.
L.
M. Graffiti exists at the premises.
Garbage on the property is not stored in standard containers and/or is
scattered throughout the yard.
N.
The property contains dead, decayed, diseased or damaged trees that
constitute a hazard or danger or are objectionable to adjacent premises
or the occupants thereof or to public property or persons lawfully
therein.
O.
Noxious plants such as poison ivy, poison sumac, poison oak, or
ragweed are allowed to grow unchecked on the property.
P.
There exists on the property stagnant or unsanitary water in which
mosquitoes may breed; garbage, sewage, excrement, manure or other
foul, decayed, putrid, unwholesome, deleterious or offensive thing or
substance; animal carcasses or parts thereof; or trash, rubbish, rubble,
tires, brush, used materials or discarded items of little or no value.
Q.
Refuse or filth is discharged from the property into a stream, well,
spring, brook, ditch, pond, river, or other inland waters within the City,
or such substances are placed on the property in such position that high
water or natural seepage will carry the same into such waters.
R.
§ 159-3 MERIDEN CODE § 159-3
1:328
DECAY — A wasting or wearing away; a gradual decline in strength,
soundness or quality; to become decomposed or rotten.
DILAPIDATED — A building is considered dilapidated if any of the following
conditions exist:
EXEMPT PROPERTY — Land dedicated as public or semipublic open space,
land preserved in its natural state through conservation easements, or
areas designated as inland wetlands and watercourses shall be exempted
from this chapter. Properties acquired by the City of Meriden through
foreclosure, etc., shall be exempted from this chapter for a period of nine
months post acquisition.
LITTER — Any discarded, used, or unconsumed substance or waste
material, whether made of aluminum, glass, plastic, rubber, paper, or other
natural or synthetic material, or any combination thereof, including but
not limited to any bottle, jar, or can or any top, cap or detachable tab of
any bottle, jar, or can; any unlighted cigarette, cigar, match or any flaming
or glowing material; or any garbage, trash, refuse, debris, rubbish, grass
clippings or other lawn or garden waste, newspaper, magazine, glass, metal,
plastic, or paper containers or other packaging or construction material,
which has not been deposited in a receptacle.
NEIGHBORHOOD — An area of the City comprised of premises or parcels
of land any part of which is within a contiguous radius of 1,000 feet of any
other parcel within the City of Meriden.
NOT BEING MAINTAINED — A structure is not being maintained if any of
the following conditions apply:
The structure is unable to provide shelter or to serve the purpose for
which it was constructed due to poor conditions.
A.
Any walls, supports, floors or foundations appear to be poorly
maintained or in disrepair to the extent that presents a safety concern.
B.
Damage exists from fire, wind, or other causes so that the building is
unsightly and no longer provides shelter from the elements and has
become dangerous to the life, safety, or general health and welfare of
the occupants or the residents of the City.
C.
D. There are missing, broken, or improperly boarded windows or doors.
Stairs, porches, railings, handrails, and/or basement hatchways are
unsafe or unsightly.
E.
Conditions exist that are likely to cause sickness or disease or injury to
the health, safety or general welfare of the persons living therein or of
the people at large.
F.
Siding, roofing, or gutters are damaged, missing, or show signs of
disrepair.
A.
B. Windows or doors are missing or improperly boarded over.
§ 159-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 159-3
1:329
PARCEL — A unit of land.
PREMISES — Any parcel of land or plot of land, either occupied or
unoccupied by any dwelling or nondwelling structure, and includes any
such building, accessory structure or other structure thereon, or any part
thereof. The term "premises," where the context requires, shall be deemed
to include any buildings, dwellings, parcels of land or structures contained
within the scope of this chapter.
PUBLIC VIEW — Visible from any public right-of-way or neighboring
property.
RUBBISH — Any nonputrescible waste materials, except ashes, including
but not limited to paper, cardboard, tin cans, wood, glass, bedding,
furniture, crockery, appliances, junk automobiles, demolition material, tree
limbs, and industrial wastes.
STRUCTURE — Any building, dwelling, fence, swimming pool, or similarly
constructed object.
UNIT — Any space within a building that is or can be rented by or to a single
person or entity for his or its sole use and is intended to be a single and
distinct space.
VACANT PARCEL — A parcel of land with no structure(s) thereon.
§ 159-4. Responsibility for enforcement.
The Director of Development and Enforcement and his/her designee shall
be responsible for enforcement of this chapter. The Director of Health and
Human Services and the City Manager or his designee shall assist, in an
advisory capacity, with the administration of this chapter.
§ 159-5. Violations.
A. Any individual, civic organization, or appropriate municipal agency
affected by the action or inaction of anyone responsible for the
maintenance of property under this chapter may file, in writing, a
complaint of violation of any section of this chapter with the Department
of Development and Enforcement.
B. Violations observed during inspections by City employees, housing
inspectors, health inspectors, police officers, firefighters, welfare
workers, or building inspectors shall be reported to the Department of
Development and Enforcement.
C. Garbage, trash, litter, rubbish, or debris are situated on the premises.
Abandoned, wrecked, or junked motor vehicles are stored on the
premises.
D.
E. Lawns, landscaping, or driveways are deteriorating or unkempt.
Trees, shrubs, hedges, grass or plants block or interfere with any road
sign or obstruct any walkway, driveway, or street.
F.
§ 159-3 MERIDEN CODE § 159-5
1:330
C. All properties/premises that have active blight citations per this chapter
shall be noted on a "Blight List." Said list shall include the property
address, the violation, and the name of the person responsible for the
property. This list is to be considered public information and may be
viewed by any citizen, copied, or published. Upon correction of the
violation, the property shall be removed from the list.
§ 159-6. Penalties for offenses.
Violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine of
$100 for each day a violation exists and continues.
§ 159-7. Citation; lien on property.
A. The provisions of this chapter may be enforced by citation, in addition to
other remedies, in accordance with § 7-152c of the Connecticut General
Statutes. City of Meriden code enforcement officials shall have authority
to issue citations.
B. Unpaid fine to constitute lien. Any unpaid fine imposed pursuant to the
foregoing anti-blight citation hearing procedure shall constitute a lien
upon the real property against which the fine was imposed from the date
of such fine in accordance with § 7-148aa of the Connecticut General
Statutes. Said lien shall be continued, recorded, released and enforced
as provided for in § 7-148aa of said statutes.
Chapter 165
SALES, SPECIAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Jewelry auctions — See Ch. 129.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 156.
Signs and posters — See Ch. 174.
STATUTORY REFERENCES
Closing-out sales — See C.G.S. § 21-35a et
seq.
§ 159-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 159-7
1:331

ARTICLE I
Going-Out-of-Business Sales
[Adopted 10-7-1963 as Ch. 12 of the 1963 Code]
§ 165-1. License required; exceptions.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to advertise or conduct any sale
of goods, wares or merchandise, hereinafter referred to as "goods," at
retail that is represented as a bankrupt, insolvent, assignee's, adjuster's,
trustee's, executor's, administrator's, insurance, receiver's, wholesaler's,
jobber's, manufacturer's closing-out, closing stock, going-out-ofbusiness,
retiring from business, liquidation, mortgage or salvage sale,
or a sale of goods damaged by fire, smoke, water or windstorm, or any
other sale which by representation or advertisement tends to lead the
public to believe that the person conducting such sale is selling out or
closing out the goods of any business for less than the current or regular
retail price thereof in the City, without first filing with the City Clerk,
upon written approval filed with the City Clerk by the Chief of Police,
the application, surety bond and inventory hereinafter provided for and
obtaining from the City Clerk a license, to be known as a "closing-outsale
license," to advertise or conduct such a sale.
B. This article is not intended to apply wherein a business or going concern
advertises an item or several items on sale wherein the ultimate
objective is not for the purpose of terminating the business but merely
to close out a particular line or lines of merchandise.
§ 165-2. Eligibility for license.
No person who has not been the owner of a business advertised or
described in the application for a license required by § 165-3 for a period of
at least six months prior to the date of the proposed sale shall be granted a
license, except that upon the death of a person doing business in this City,
his heirs, devisees or legatees shall have the right to apply at any time for a
license.
§ 165-3. Application procedure; submission of inventory.
The applicant for any license required by this article shall make to the
City Clerk an application therefor in writing and under oath, giving all
the facts in regard to such sale and particularly the place and manner of
advertising and conducting the sale and the proposed period of time during
which such sale will be conducted, and, at the time such application is
made, shall submit to the City Clerk an inventory containing a complete and
accurate list of the stock of goods to be offered for sale or to be sold at
any sale for which a license is hereby required, together with a good and
sufficient bond, payable to the City, in the penal sum of $1,000 with sureties
approved by the City Treasurer or his duly authorized agent, conditioned
upon compliance with the provisions of this article. Such inventory shall be
signed by the person applying for the license, and by affidavit at the foot
§ 165-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 165-3
1:333
thereof he shall swear or affirm that the information therein given is full,
complete and true and known by such affiant to be full, complete and true.
§ 165-4. Fee.
The fee for a license required by this article shall be as follows: for a period
not exceeding 30 days, $25; for a period not exceeding 60 days, $50; and
for a period not exceeding 90 days, $75; plus $1 for each $1,000 or fraction
thereof of submitted inventory as hereinafter provided for.
§ 165-5. License not transferable or renewable.
The license provided for in this article shall not be assignable or
transferable, nor shall such license be renewable.
§ 165-6. License conditions.
The license required by this article shall be valid only for a sale of goods
in the manner and at the time and place set forth and described in the
application or inventory submitted.
§ 165-7. Posting of license required.
The license required by this article shall be kept by the person to whom
issued in public view at all times at the place of business where the sale
regulated by this article is being conducted.
§ 165-8. Records to be maintained by licensee.
It shall be unlawful for any person to whom a license is issued as provided in
this article to fail, neglect or refuse to keep accurate records of the articles
or goods sold, from which the City Clerk or any person designated by the
City Clerk for that purpose may ascertain the kind and quantity of goods
and the number of the same sold, their wholesale cost and prices at which
sold in such sale.
§ 165-9. Records to be maintained by City Clerk.
All applications for any license required by this article shall be kept on file
by the City Clerk, and a record shall be kept by him of all licenses issued
upon such applications. All files and records, including the applications,
inventory and other pertinent information, shall be kept by the City Clerk in
convenient form and shall be available for public inspection for a period of
two years, after which the same may be destroyed by the Clerk.
§ 165-10. Verification of inventory.
The Chief of Police or any officer designated by him shall verify the details
of any inventory files, for the purpose of determining the correctness of the
same, before issuing a closing-out-sale license or shall check and verify the
items of merchandise sold during the sale, and it shall be unlawful for any
§ 165-3 MERIDEN CODE § 165-10
1:334
person to whom such license has been issued to fail or refuse to give the
Chief of Police or any officer designated by him for that purpose all the
facts connected with the stock on hand or the proper information respecting
goods sold or any other information that the Chief of Police or any officer
designated by him may require in order to make a thorough investigation of
all phases connected with the sale.
§ 165-11. Unauthorized sales or advertisements.
No goods other than those listed in the inventory provided for in this article
shall be advertised or sold at any sale for which a license is required by this
article, and it shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer or expose for
sale or advertise for such sale or to list on such inventory any goods which
are not the regular stock on hand at the store, the goods of which are to be
closed out or disposed of through such sale, or to supplement or to make
any replenishments or additions from any manufacturer, jobber, wholesaler,
warehouse, storage building or from any other premises or from any source
whatsoever and during the time thereof to advertise or represent the sale
as being of the character for which a license is hereby required.
§ 165-12. Excepted sales.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to trustees selling under deeds
of assignment or to sheriffs, constables or other public or court officers or
to any person acting under the direction or authority of any state, federal or
City probate court selling goods in the course of their official duties.
§ 165-13. Advertisement and conduct of sales. [Amended
9-16-1996]
A. No person shall advertise, represent, hold out, conduct, hold or carry
on any sale of the character regulated by the provisions of this article
without having first obtained a license as herein provided for, or violate
any of the provisions hereof or make any false statement in the
application and inventory. Each day's business conducted in violation of
the provisions of this article shall constitute a separate offense.
B. No person who, under the provisions of this article, conducts a sale
by the designation "going-out-of-business," "selling out" or by any other
designation specified in this article, or of similar meaning, shall hold
such sale beyond the date specified for such sale or continue that
business which had been represented as "going-out-of-business" or
"selling-out" or by similar designation, upon conclusion of such sale,
under the same name or under a different name at the same location or
elsewhere in the City, or continue business contrary to the designation
of such sale, upon conclusion of such sale.
§ 165-14. Enforcement; penalties for offenses. [Added 9-16-1996]
The provisions of this article may be enforced by citation, in addition
to other remedies, including but not limited to criminal prosecution. The
citation fine amount shall be $77. The following persons have authority to
§ 165-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 165-14
1:335
issue citations for violations pursuant to this article: City of Meriden police
officer.
§ 165-14 MERIDEN CODE § 165-14
1:336
Chapter 170
SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 77.
Housing standards — See Ch. 125.
Health nuisances — See Ch. 144.
Solid waste, recycling and littering — See Ch.
176.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 180.
Trailers and trailer camps — See Ch. 194.
Water — See Ch. 207.
STATUTORY REFERENCES
Municipal sewerage systems — See C.G.S.
§ 7-245 et seq.
§ 165-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 165-14
1:337

ARTICLE I
General Regulations
§ 170-1. Legislative intent; applicability; enforcement.
A. This chapter establishes the procedures for making connections to the
public sewer in the City sanitary sewer system. It also establishes
specific limits for pollutant discharges which, by their nature or by their
interaction with sewage, will be detrimental to the public health, cause
damage to the public sewer or the water pollution control facility, pollute
the waters of the state or otherwise create a public nuisance.
(1) As part of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
(NPDES), federal and state agencies [Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA) and State Department of Energy and Environmental
Protection (DEEP)] impose discharge limitations on the Meriden
Water Pollution Control Facility. The discharge limitations are
monitored via a prescribed (usually standard methods) testing/
analysis and reporting program.
(2) It is the nature of the program that the limitations imposed may be
modified and/or increased by mandate of the above agencies.
(3) Therefore, any and all commercial and industrial (nondomestic)
sanitary sewer users may be required to meet any and all discharge
requirements imposed upon the Meriden Water Pollution Control
Facility. This would be in addition to the customer's existing
discharge permit requirements.
(4) Analysis verifying compliance with the above will be forwarded to
the Director of Public Utilities or designee.
(5) Restaurants and commercial and industrial buildings shall be
required to complete a conceptual approval form and submit it for
review and approval to the Engineering Division. The Engineering
Division staff shall review the conceptual approval form and forward
it to the Director of Public Utilities or designee for review and
approval. The form is then sent to the Director of Public Works
for final review and approval. The completed conceptual approval
form is then provided to the DEEP by the applicant. The DEEP may
or may not require a state permit for the discharge. The applicant
shall supply a copy of the DEEP permit, if applicable, or a written
confirmation from the DEEP that no permit is required to the
Director of Public Utilities or designee. The Director of Public
Utilities or designee may at his discretion require additional or
stricter requirements of the applicant.
(6) The City shall maintain a fee structure to compensate cost incurred
to the WPCF due to the industrial monitoring and fats, oils, and
grease discharge programs. Fees will be levied for application and
permit review, permit revisions, review of records and reports, and
on-site compliance inspections of pretreatment facilities. The fees
may be adjusted annually as part of the WPCF budget and rate
setting process.
(7) The PUC may impose fines against any discharger who violates
City and/or state regulations and codes. If, in the opinion of the
§ 170-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-1
1:339
PUC, the violation was flagrant or a reoccurring act of negligence,
which resulted in a substantial negative effect on the water pollution
control facility, the violator may be held financially liable for the
biological recovery and operation of the Meriden Water Pollution
Control Facility.
B. This chapter is intended to:
(1) Inform the public as to the technical and administrative procedures
to be followed in obtaining connection to the City's sanitary sewer
system.
(2) Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the sanitary sewer system
which will interfere with the collection and/or treatment system.
(3) Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the treatment system
which will pass through the system, inadequately treated, into the
waters of the state or the atmosphere or otherwise be incompatible
with the system.
(4) Improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewaters and
sludges from the system.
(5) Prevent clogging or blockage of the public sewer system due to
grease build-up causing sewage to backup and flood streets,
residences, and commercial buildings, resulting in potential liability
to the PUC.
(6) Implement a procedure to recover costs incurred from cleaning and
maintaining the sewer and any liability incurred by the PUC for
damage caused by grease blockages resulting in flooding of streets,
residences, or commercial buildings.
C. This chapter shall apply to the City and to persons outside the City
who are users of the public sewer. Except as otherwise provided herein,
the Director of Public Utilities or designee for the City shall otherwise
implement and enforce the provisions of this chapter.
§ 170-2. Definitions; word usage.
A. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACT or THE ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known
as the "Clean Water Act," as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.
ACUTE TOXICITY TEST —
Involves two separate but simultaneously performed static, acute
screening tests. In each test* organisms basic to the aquatic food
chain are exposed to an aliquot of effluent/discharge to determine
the effect(s) of an effluent/discharge on the receiving stream and/
or microbial activity within the water pollution control facility. [*Test
performed on Daphnia pulex (larvae) and Pimephales promelas
(fathead minnows).]
(1)
The acute toxicity test will be a prime factor used in determining
the extent of pretreatment required of industrial/commercial users.
Sample collection, handling, and analytical techniques used to
determine the acute toxicity of the discharge shall be as prescribed
(2)
§ 170-1 MERIDEN CODE § 170-2
1:340
AUTOMATED GREASE RECOVERY UNIT (AGRU) — An indoor grease
trap used to separate grease from wastewater by active mechanical or
electrical means. See definition of "grease trap."
BACKWATER VALVE — A backwater valve is a one-way flow control valve
installed in a drainage system, that under normal conditions allows the
wastewater to drain out of the system; however, if a reversed flow of
drainage water should occur, the valve will be forced closed and protect
the interior of the building from sewage backup.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMP) — The practices and
procedures of a user of the public sewer that are designed to prevent or
minimize obstruction, damage, or excessive maintenance of the sanitary
sewer.
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD) — The amount of oxygen
required by microorganisms while stabilizing decomposable organic
matter under aerobic conditions for five days. The determination of BOD
shall be performed in accordance with the procedures prescribed in the
latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and
Wastewater.
BUILDING DRAIN — That part of the lowest horizontal piping of building
plumbing which receives the discharge from water fixtures and other
sanitary pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the
building sewer lateral beginning five feet (1.5 meters) outside the inner
face of the building wall.
BUILDING SEWER LATERAL — The extension from the building drain to
the public sewer or other place of disposal; it may also be called a "house
connection."
CATEGORICAL STANDARDS — National categorical pretreatment
standards or pretreatment standards.
CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (COD) — The oxygen equivalent of the
organic matter that can be oxidized as measured by using a strong
chemical oxidizing agent in an acidic medium.
CITY — The City of Meriden.
COMPATIBLE POLLUTANT — Biochemical oxygen demand, suspended
solids, pH and fecal coliform bacteria, plus any additional pollutants
identified in the water pollution control facility's NPDES permit, where
the water pollution control facility is designed to treat such pollutants
and, in fact, does treat such pollutants to the degree required by the
NPDES permit.
COMPOSITE SAMPLE — A mixture of aliquot samples obtained at
regular intervals over a time period. The volume of each aliquot is
in "Methods for Measuring the Acute Toxicity of Effluents to
Freshwater and Marine Organisms" (EPA/600/4-85/013), unless
otherwise specified in writing by the DEEP or in the regulations of
Connecticut state agencies.
§ 170-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-2
1:341
proportional to the discharge flow rate for the sampling interval. The
minimum time period for composite sampling shall be four hours.
COOLING WATER — Process water in general used for cooling purposes
to which the only pollutant added is heat and which has such
characteristics that it may be discharged to a natural outlet in
accordance with federal and state laws and regulations.
DEEP — The Department of Energy and Environmental Protection of the
State of Connecticut.
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC UTILITIES OR DESIGNEE — The authorized
agent or representative of the Water Pollution Control Authority who is
responsible for the operation and management of the sewer collection
system and/or the associated water pollution control facility.
DOMESTIC SEWAGE — Sewage that consists of water and human
excretions or other waterborne wastes incidental to the occupancy of a
residential building, including residential water softening equipment, or
a nonresidential building but not including manufacturing process water,
cooling water, wastewater from water-softening equipment, commercial
laundry wastewater, blowdown from heating or cooling equipment,
water from cellar or floor drains, or surface water from roofs, paved
surfaces or yard drains.
FATS, OILS, AND GREASE (FOG) — Any fats, oils, and grease generated
from the food preparation process. All are sometimes referred to as
"grease."
FLOATABLE OIL — Oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that
it will separate by gravity from sewage by treatment in an approved
pretreatment facility.
FOG PROGRAM ADMINISTRATOR — The authorized agent or
representative of the Water Pollution Control Authority who is
responsible for the operation and management of the sewer collection
system and/or the associated water pollution control facility.
FOOD PREPARATION ESTABLISHMENT (FPE) — Facilities who are
required to obtain a FOG discharge permit including those who are: a)
regulated by the Meriden Health Department and classified as a Class
3 or Class 4 food service establishment, as defined by the State Health
Code; or b) engaged in similar cooking methods that have the potential
to produce fats, oils, and grease. A Class 3 food service establishment
may be exempt from obtaining a FOG discharge permit if it does not
employ frying, sauteing, baking, or roasting of meats, use of rotisseries,
grills, smokers, or other methods that have the potential to generate
fats, oils, or grease.
GARBAGE — The animal or vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking or serving of foods.
§ 170-2 MERIDEN CODE § 170-2
1:342
GRAB SAMPLE — A sample which is taken from a waste stream on a onetime
basis with no regard to the flow in the waste stream and without
consideration of time.
GREASE DISPOSAL FACILITY — A regional collection/transfer/disposal
site approved in accordance with the law for the disposal of FOG. This
means a Department of Energy and Environmental Protection (DEEP)
approved publicly/privately owned treatment works that is for the
separation and disposal of FOG by incineration or other methods.
Pursuant to § 22a-174-33 of the Regulations of Connecticut State
Agencies related to Title V source, an in-state regional incinerator must
have an operating permit that lists FOG as a source of fuel.
GREASE TRAP — The term "grease trap" is used collectively in this
chapter to mean both AGRUs and outdoor grease traps.
HAULER — Any person who collects the contents of a grease trap and
transports it to a grease disposal facility. A hauler may also provide other
services related to grease trap maintenance.
HOLDING TANK WASTE — Any waste from holding tanks such as
vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers and septage hauling trucks.
INCOMPATIBLE POLLUTANT — All pollutants other than compatible
pollutants as previously defined. See "compatible pollutants."
INDOOR TRAP — An AGRU. See definition of "grease trap."
INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER — All wastewater from industrial
processes, trade or business and is distinct from domestic sewage.
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES)
PERMIT — A permit issued pursuant to § 402 of the Act (33 U.S.C.
§ 1342).
NONRENDERABLE GREASE — Fats, oils, and grease generated from
food preparation or serving that has come in contact with water or
other contaminants shall prevent this FOG from being rendered. See
"renderable grease."
OUTDOOR GREASE TRAP — A structure or device designed for the
purpose of removing and preventing FOG from entering the public
sanitary sewer system. These devices are often below-ground units built
as two- or three-chamber baffled tanks.
PERMITTEE — The permittee represents the FPE and is authorized by
the issuance of a FOG discharge permit to initiate, create, originate, or
maintain a wastewater discharge from the FPE. Where applicable, the
permittee shall be the owner or the owner's local designee.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint-stock company, trust, estate,
governmental entity or any other legal entity or its legal representatives,
agents or assigns. The masculine gender shall include the feminine; the
singular shall include the plural where indicated by the context.
§ 170-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-2
1:343
pH — The logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen-ion concentration.
The concentration is the weight of hydrogen ions, in grams, per liter of
solution.
PRETREATMENT or TREATMENT — The reduction of the amount of
pollutants, the elimination of pollutants or the alteration of the nature of
pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in
lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into a water
pollution control facility. The reduction or alteration can be obtained by
physical, chemical or biological processes, except as prohibited by 40
CFR 403.6(d) and provisions in this chapter.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE — The wastes from the preparation,
cooking and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree
that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally
prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than 1/2 inch (1
.27 centimeters) in any dimension. Properly shredded garbage shall not
include wastes from food preparation establishments.
PUBLIC SEWER — A common sanitary sewer controlled by a
governmental agency or public utility.
PUC — The Public Utilities Commission of the City of Meriden as it is
constituted by its Charter, with the powers and duties granted it by the
Charter and ordinances of said City.68
RENDERABLE GREASE — The uncontaminated FOG from the food
preparation process that can be used as a source of material that is free
of impurities and can be recycled into products such as, but not limited
to, animal feed or cosmetics.
RESTAURANT — A business or place which prepares foods for sale in
other than its original unopened container.
SANITARY SEWER — A sewer which collects and conveys domestic
sewage from residences, public buildings, commercial establishments,
industries and institutions. A sanitary sewer may also collect and convey
permitted industrial wastewater and unintentionally admitted
groundwater, stormwater and surface water.
SEPTAGE — The liquids and solids which are removed from a tank used
to treat domestic sewage.
SEWAGE — Human and animal excretions and all domestic and such
manufacturing wastes as may tend to be detrimental to the public health
or otherwise contravene stream standards as established by the DEEP.
SEWAGE COLLECTION SYSTEM — The structures and equipment
required to collect and convey sewage to the WPCF.
SLUG — Any sudden or excessive discharge which exceeds permitted
levels either in terms of pollutant concentration or instantaneous flow
rate in such a manner as to adversely affect the sewage collection system
and/or the water pollution control facility.
§ 170-2 MERIDEN CODE § 170-2
1:344
SOLUBLE OIL — Oil which is of either mineral or vegetable origin and
disperses in water or sewage at temperatures between 0° C. and 65° C.
For the purposes of this chapter, emulsified oil shall be considered as
soluble oil.
STORM SEWER — A sewer which collects and conveys stormwater or
groundwater.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — The solid matter, measured in milligrams per
liter, which may be in suspension, floatable or settleable and is
removable by laboratory filtering as prescribed in the latest edition of
Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater.
TOXIC POLLUTANT — Any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed
as toxic in regulations promulgated by the Administrator of the EPA
under the provisions of § 307(a) of the Act or other acts.
UOD — Ultimate oxygen demand. Equivalent of 1.5 times the
biochemical oxygen demand plus 4.6 times the ammonia (NH3). Used as
control parameter for WPCF effluent, as established in NPDES permit.
USER — Any person who contributes, causes or permits the contribution
of sewage into the City's sewer system.
WATER POLLUTION CONTROL FACILITY (WPCF) — An arrangement of
devices for the treatment of sewage and sludge.
WATERCOURSE — A natural or artificial channel for the passage of
water, either continuously or intermittently.
B. "May" is permissive; "shall" is mandatory.
§ 170-3. Use of public sewers.
A. The owner(s) of all houses, buildings or properties used for human
occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes situated within
the City and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there
is now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary sewer
of the City may, at the option of the City and at the expense of the
owner(s), be required to install a building sewer to connect his (their)
building drain to the public sewer in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter within 90 days after the date of official notice to do so.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to construct or repair any privy, privy
vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended for the disposal of
sewage if public sewers are available.
§ 170-4. Building sewers and connections.
A. No unauthorized person(s) shall uncover, make any connections with
or opening into, use, alter, repair or disturb any public sewer or
appurtenance thereof.
B. Any person proposing a new discharge into the public sewer system or
a substantial change in the volume or character of pollutants that are
being discharged into the public sewer system shall notify the Director
68.Editor's Note: See Ch. 6, Art. XV, Public Utilities Commission.
§ 170-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-4
1:345
of Public Utilities or designee at least 45 days prior to the proposed
change or connection.
C. A person intending to connect a building drain from his property to the
public sewer shall first obtain a permit to connect from the Engineering
Division. The application shall be made on forms provided by the
Engineering Division and it shall be accompanied by a sketch or plan
showing the proposed installation in sufficient detail to enable the
Engineering Division to determine that the proposed installation meets
the requirements of this regulation and other applicable specifications,
codes and laws. The application shall be signed by the qualified
contractor (see Subsection P of this section) who has been chosen to
perform the work of installing and connecting the building drain to
the public sewer. Upon approval of the application and plan, a permit
shall be issued to have the work performed by the stated contractor.
In the event that the premises changes ownership before the work
is completed, or if another contractor is chosen to perform or finish
the work, the original permit becomes void and a new permit must
be obtained by the parties in interest. The PUC may, in its discretion,
allow service pipes or sewer service to consumers other than the owners
of the premises served, upon the filing by such consumers of the
application required by this subsection.
D. Prior to obtaining a permit to connect, the applicant or his authorized
representative shall provide adequate documentation to the
Engineering Division to indicate how the connection is proposed. The
Engineering Division and/or the PUC shall review the application to
determine if the proposal is acceptable or if changes are required. It
shall be unlawful for any person who has received such a permit to do
any acts in a manner other than that prescribed in such permit or to
connect with any such sewer at any hub or slant pipe other than the one
approved in such permit.
E. A connection to the public sewer will be made only after the building's
plumbing has been approved by the City Building Inspector in order to
ensure the minimum standards are met for the installation. A fresh air
vent shall be required for the building, and all plumbing shall be in good
working order. No trench containing a building drain or connection to
the sanitary sewer shall be backfilled until the Engineering Division has
completed an inspection of and approved the work. The water level in
the trench shall be maintained at a level below the sewer connection
before the cap is removed and while the connection is being made and
until such time as it has been inspected, approved and backfilled. The
contractor shall notify the Engineering Division 48 hours before starting
any work authorized under this permit.
F. Permits to connect to the public sewer may be revoked and annulled
by the Director of Public Utilities or designee for such case and at
such times as he may deem sufficient and the City held harmless as a
consequence of said revocation or the cause thereof. All other parties in
interest shall be held to have waived the right to claim damages from
the City or its agents on account of such revocation.
§ 170-4 MERIDEN CODE § 170-4
1:346
G. All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and connection
of the building sewer from the building to the sanitary sewer main,
including the wye connection, shall be borne by the owner(s). The
owner(s) shall indemnify the City from any loss or damage that may
directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building
sewer.
H. A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building, except that where one building stands at the rear of another
on an interior lot and no public sewer is available or can be constructed
to the rear building through an adjoining alley, courtyard or driveway,
the building sewer that provides service for the building which fronts
on the public sewer may be extended to the rear building and the
whole considered as one building sewer, but the City does not and
will not assume any obligation or responsibility for damage caused by
or resulting from any such aforementioned connection. Whenever a
lateral is shared between two or more properties and/or buildings, a
maintenance agreement must be written and filed on the public land
records via the City Clerk's office for all properties involved with said
maintenance agreement.
I. Where outdoor grease traps are in use, separate wastewater lines shall
be provided to convey the sanitary wastewater directly to the public
sanitary collection system. Wastewater from the kitchen and clean-up
areas shall be conveyed to the grease trap and then to the public
sanitary collection system.. In no case shall sanitary wastewater be
allowed to enter a grease trap.
J. Existing building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings
only when the proposal is approved by the Engineering Division.
K. The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer
and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing,
testing and backfilling and trenching and connection of the building
sewer to the public sewer shall all conform to the requirements of the
building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of
the City. In the absence of Code provisions or in amplification thereof,
the materials and procedures set forth in the appropriate specification
of the American Society for Testing and Materials and WPCF Manual
of Practice No. 9 shall apply. No connections shall be made with any
public sanitary or stormwater sewer otherwise than by drainpipe, which
shall be six inches in diameter. Every drain connecting premises with
the City sanitary sewer shall be laid to a uniform grade and line, with a
fall throughout its length toward the public sewer of not less than one
foot per 100 feet.
L. Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building
at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any
building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer,
sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an
approved means and discharged to the building sewer. Duplex lift
systems shall be provided for commercial and industrial buildings.
M. No person(s) shall make connection of roof downspouts, foundation
drains, areaway drains or other sources of surface runoff or
§ 170-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-4
1:347
groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is
connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
N. All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately
guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from
hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property
disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner
satisfactory to the City.
O. No building sewer shall be constructed within 25 feet of a water supply
well. If a building sewer is constructed within 25 to 75 feet of a water
supply well, it shall be constructed in accordance with all applicable
guidelines and regulations.
P. Any sanitary sewer lateral to be laid to connect a building to a City
sanitary sewer main shall not extend beyond the projected side property
lines of the parcel unless otherwise approved by the Public Utilities
Commission and shall not exceed 100 feet without a cleanout. A
cleanout is also required at a change of piping direction.
Q. All building sewers shall be installed by a drainlayer who possesses
a valid license issued under Chapter 393 of the Connecticut General
Statutes, as amended. In addition thereto, no person shall make any
connection with any public sanitary or stormwater sewer in the City
unless he is licensed and obtained all necessary permits, and no person
shall employ any unlicensed person to do such work.
R. Every person so licensed shall file with the Engineering Division a surety
bond, payable to the City, in the sum of $4,000, conditioned that the
licensee will indemnify and save harmless the City from all loss, cost or
damage arising out of or in connection with any work done under such
license.
S. All building sewers from the sewer main to the building shall be, in
general, installed and maintained by and at the expense of the property
owner(s) whose property is being serviced. Whenever the Director of
Public Utilities or designee is informed or learns that a cavity,
depression or other abnormality in the public street is or may be caused
by disrepair in the public sewer or building sewer, the Director of Public
Utilities or designee will ascertain if the public sewer or building sewer
is the cause. If it is determined that such cavity or other abnormality is
caused or contributed to by disrepair of the public sewer, the Director
of Public Utilities or designee shall proceed to make the necessary
repairs. However, if it is determined by the Director of Public Utilities
or designee that such cavity, depression or other abnormality is caused
by the building sewer, the property owner(s) shall be notified of such
finding and shall engage a licensed drainlayer to make the necessary
repairs under the supervision of the Director of Public Utilities or
designee and at no expense to the City.
T. Whenever the Director of Public Utilities or designee is informed or
learns of a sewer stoppage, the Director of Public Utilities or designee
shall ascertain if the public sewer is clear. Any stoppages found therein
will be relieved as quickly as possible. If the public sewer is found to be
clear, the property owner(s) having made a complaint of sewer stoppage
shall be so notified and shall then engage a licensed plumber, reputable
§ 170-4 MERIDEN CODE § 170-4
1:348
cleaner or licensed drainlayer to clear any stoppages in the building
sewer.
U. The PUC may at any time order a water meter for sewer service placed
on any water service connection if it deems it in the best interest of
the City to do so, and any property owner, upon notification by the
PUC, shall allow a representative of the Water Division to enter upon
his premises to install such a meter. Upon application by the consumer,
a meter shall be placed on any service previously unmetered. The
consumer shall provide a proper place for the installation of a meter
immediately inside the building wall, which shall be of easy access
at all times for reading and repair. The Director of Public Works, or
his representatives, shall determine the size of the meter installed on
any service and may determine when any meter shall be repaired or
replaced.
(1) Water meters for sewer service shall not be supplied to a new
account until a proper and adequate water meter setter has been
provided by the owner immediately inside the building wall which
shall be of easy access at all times for meter reading and repair, the
required fee for the proper size meter has been paid to the Water
Division by the owner, and the Water Division has installed and
sealed the required meter. The PUC shall act as an appeals board
to determine when and if a frost-proof meter pit shall be required
rather than a meter location within the building.
(2) The fee for the installation of new meters shall be determined
through the Water Division.
V. Backwater valves must be installed on all plumbing fixtures (including
washing machines, toilets, sinks, showers, bathtubs, etc.) that are below
the elevation of the nearest upstream sanitary sewer manhole cover.
§ 170-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-4
1:349

ARTICLE II
Water Pollution Control Authority
§ 170-5. Designation of authority.
Pursuant to § 7-246 of the General Statutes, the PUC is designated the
Water Pollution Control Authority for the City.
§ 170-6. Powers and duties.
The Water Pollution Control Authority shall have all the powers conferred
on such authority under the provisions of §§ 7-245 and 7-273 of the General
Statutes and all the powers and duties granted it by the Charter and
ordinances of the City. It shall exercise such powers in such manner as it
shall deem for the best interest of the City.
§ 170-7. Sewer charges and fees.
A. Establishment of sewer charges.
(1) The Water Pollution Control Authority may establish and revise fair
and reasonable charges for connection with and for the use of a
sewerage system pursuant to § 7-255 of the General Statutes.
(2) The Water Pollution Control Authority shall secure the approval of
the City Council of the proposed charges.
B. Sewer rates for metered service:
(1) The sanitary sewer rents and rates for metered service and fixed
user charges for the City shall consist of a flat basic service charge
based on water meter size plus a commodity charge based on
consumption.
(2) Commodity charge (local service customers):
(a) Sanitary sewer rate: See Fee Schedule online at
www.meridenct.gov.
(b) Public use charge: municipal use charge shall be the same as
other local service customers.
(3) Basic service charge (local service customers): See Fee Schedule
online at www.meridenct.gov.
(4) Customers outside City limits. The rates and charges for users of
property located outside the territorial limits of the City shall be
50% higher than the rates and charges above for the users located
within the City except where specifically prohibited by prior contract
agreement or as legally amended by the PUC.
(5) Private wellwater discharges into City sanitary sewers. The type
and location of meters shall be determined by the City. Metering
of the supply sources is generally preferred due to the improved
meter accuracy over discharge meters. However, at the discretion
of the City, discharge meters may be required in certain situations.
Generally, for new construction projects served by private wells
only or private wells and water supplied by City water mains, a
water meter shall be provided according to City standards for each
supply to ensure proper billing for discharge into City sewers. The
requirements for a water meter may be waived by the Engineering
§ 170-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-7
1:351
Division. For existing buildings or facilities served by private wells
only or private wells and water supplied from City water mains,
alternatives, including but not limited to the following, may be
required at the discretion of the City.
(a) The Director of Public Utilities, the PUC, or authorized agent
may order that a water meter be required according to City
standards for each supply to ensure proper billing for discharge
into City sanitary sewers. This is the preferred alternative for all
existing and proposed facilities.
(b) An estimate of usage will be made based on industry standards
for the type of use and other applicable factors. The City may
require that the customer provide an estimate of use, supported
by detailed calculations, or the City may provide the estimate.
If the customer disagrees with the estimate of usage, the City
billing review officer shall be contacted. In the event that there
is still a dispute over the estimated usage, the matter may be
referred to the PUC.
(6) Determination of charges when meter is defective.
(a) Where a water meter is operating incorrectly and a test of the
meter results in an accurate determination of the percentages of
error exceeding 2%, the consumer shall be allowed a credit for
the amount overpaid.
(b) Where a water meter is operating incorrectly and it is not
possible to accurately determine consumption during any billing
period, the sewer use charge for that period shall be in
proportion to previous charges for similar periods when the
meter was operating correctly.
(7) When rents are due; penalty. Sanitary sewer rents shall be due and
payable at the office of the Tax Collector quarterly on the first day
of March, June, September, and December. Interest charges at a
rate prescribed by the City Tax Collector and not exceeding the
maximum amount allowed by Connecticut General Statues shall be
added as a penalty to all sewer rates, fees, and fines remaining
unpaid one month after their due date. The charges, if applicable,
shall be calculated from the payment date.
(8) Abatements for vacancy. Any consumer to whom water is furnished
through an unmetered service may claim a sewer bill abatement
for partial or complete vacancy of his premises by filing the proper
notice at the office of the Water Division at the beginning and
termination of such vacancy, provided that no abatement shall be
allowed for a vacancy of less than two months' duration, and
provided further that no abatement may be claimed for any period
prior to the date of filing such notice. The right to claim an
abatement shall be forfeited if the consumer fails to give proper
notice of the termination of the vacancy.
C. Septic waste discharge fees.
(1) A fee (see Fee Schedule online at www.meridenct.gov) shall be levied
against private septic waste haulers who discharge septic waste
§ 170-7 MERIDEN CODE § 170-7
1:352
at the WPCF. This fee shall be paid in full to the WPCF prior to
acceptance of septic waste.
(2) The Director of Public Utilities or designee may prohibit a private
septic waste hauler from discharging at the WPCF if it is deemed
that the septic waste may be harmful to the plant.
D. FOG fees and billing.
(1) The PUC shall set separate fees and fines for unauthorized discharge
of wastewater from a FPE and the discharge of FOG or failure
to follow best management practices as included in this chapter.
Fines shall fall into two classifications; BMP violation, and equipment
installation violation.
(2) A copy of the FOG Program fees applicable to FOG applications,
permits, and notice-of-violation fines pursuant to this section are on
file at the WPCF.
E. Special connection charges.
(1) A special connection charge shall be paid for each connection made
to the municipal sanitary sewer system. This special connection
charge shall be used as the basis for assessing properties unassessed
for their share of benefits derived from the construction of local
sewers, and for apportionment of sanitary sewers built by
developers, and for properties previously assessed which have or will
have a greater intensity of use.
(2) Special connection charges shall be paid in full prior to connection
unless otherwise approved by the PUC.
(3) Special connection charge rates are pursuant to the authority
granted in § 7-255 of the General Statutes and are outlined in the
City of Meriden Residential and Nonresidential Special Connection
Charge Policies and the General Policy for Layout and Assessment of
Sanitary Sewers adopted by the PUC.
§ 170-8. Collection of sewer charges.
The Tax Collector shall be the collector of all sewerage system connection
and use charges, betterment charges (assessments), liens and violations
levied by the WPCA under the provisions of this chapter, and such officer
shall collect such charges in accordance with the provisions of the General
Statutes for the collection of property taxes.
§ 170-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-8
1:353

ARTICLE III
Discharge Limitations
§ 170-9. Stormwater and unpolluted drainage.
Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such
sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers in accordance with all
applicable state and federal laws and regulations. No person shall discharge
or cause to be discharged any unpolluted waters, such as stormwater,
groundwater, roof runoff, and subsurface drainage, to any sanitary sewer,
nor shall any person connect any drain or plumbing fixtures or other
sanitary sewer system on his premises to any stormwater sewer.
§ 170-10. Certain discharges prohibited.
No user shall contribute or cause to be contributed, directly or indirectly,
any pollutant or wastewater which will interfere with the operation or
performance of the WPCF. These general prohibitions apply to all such
users of a WPCF whether or not the user is subject to national categorical
pretreatment standards or any other federal or state pretreatment
standards or requirements. A user shall not contribute the following
substances to any WPCF:
A. Any liquids, solids or gases which, by reason of their nature or quantity,
are or may be sufficient, either alone or by interaction with other
substances, to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other
way to the WPCF or to the operation of the WPCF. At no time shall
two successive readings on an explosion hazard meter, at the point of
discharge into the sewage collection system (or at any point in the
system), be more than 5% nor any single reading over 10% of the lower
explosive limit (LEL) of the meter.
B. Solids or viscous substances which may cause obstruction to the flow in
a sewer or other interference with the operation of the WPCF, including
substances such as, but not limited to, grease, garbage with particles
greater than 1/2 inch in any dimension, animal guts or tissues, paunch
manure, bones, hair, hides or fleshings, entrails, whole blood, feathers,
ashes, cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal, glass,
straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags, spent grains, spent hops,
wastepaper, wood, plastics, gas, tar, asphalt residues, residues from
refining or processing of fuel or lubricating oil, mud or glass grinding or
polishing wastes.
C. Any sewage having a corrosive property capable of causing damage or
hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the WPCF. The upper
and lower limits of pH for any industrial wastewater discharge shall be
within the limits imposed on the WPCF permit.
D. Any sewage containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity, either
singly or by interaction with other pollutants, to injure or interfere with
any wastewater treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or
animals or plant life, create a toxic effect in the receiving waters of the
WPCF or exceed the limitation set forth in a categorical pretreatment
standard. A toxic pollutant shall include but not be limited to any
§ 170-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-10
1:355
pollutant identified pursuant to § 307(a) of the Act (i.e., heavy metals
and toxic organics). Note: All metals are to be measured as total metals.
E. Any noxious or malodorous sewage, gases or solids which, either singly
or by interaction with other sewage, are sufficient to prevent entry into
the public sewers for their maintenance and repair.
F. Any sewage which, by interaction with other sewage in the public sewer,
releases obnoxious gases, forms suspended solids which interfere with
the collection system, or creates a condition which may be deleterious
to structures and treatment processes or which may cause the effluent
limitations of the WPCF's NPDES permit to be exceeded.
G. Any substance which may cause the WPCF's effluent, or any other
product of the WPCF, such as residues, sludges or scums, to be
unsuitable for the reclamation process where the WPCF is pursuing a
reuse and reclamation program. In no case shall a substance discharged
to the WPCF cause the facility to be in noncompliance with sludge use
or disposal criteria, guidelines or regulations developed under § 405 of
the Act, any criteria, guidelines or regulations affecting sludge use or
disposal developed pursuant to the Resource Conservation and Recovery
Act, Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act or state criteria
applicable to the sludge management method being used.
H. Any substance which will cause a WPCF to violate its NPDES permit or
the receiving water quality standards. The Director of Public Utilities
or designee with the concurrence of the Director may modify the limits
which are acceptable for discharge into the WPCF if deemed appropriate
and in the best interest of the WPCF. Correspondence of such changes
shall be sent to the PUC.
I. Sewage containing substances which are not amenable to treatment
or reduction by the wastewater treatment process employed or are
amenable to treatment only to such degree that the WPCF effluent
cannot meet the limits stipulated in the (municipality's) NPDES permit.
§ 170-11. Certain discharges limited.
The following described substances, materials, waters or waste shall be
limited in discharges to public sewers to concentrations or quantities which
will not harm either the sewers or the WPCF, will not have an adverse effect
on the receiving stream, or will not otherwise endanger public property or
constitute a nuisance. The Director of Public Utilities or designee may set
lower limitations if more severe limitations are necessary to meet the water
quality standards of the receiving stream. The limitations or restrictions on
materials or characteristics of sewage discharged to the public sewer are as
follows:
A. Sewage having a temperature higher than 150° F. (65° C.).
B. Sewage containing fat, wax, grease, petroleum or mineral oil, whether
emulsified or not, in excess of 100 milligrams per liter with floatable oil
not to exceed 20 milligrams per liter or containing substances which may
solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32° F. and 150° F. (0°
C. and 65° C.). Restaurants shall have grease traps of 1,000-gallon capacity
minimum, or 1/3 the daily discharge, and/or a professionally engineered
system that meets all applicable sanitary sewer requirements noted in
§ 170-10 MERIDEN CODE § 170-11
1:356
the City Code, accompanied by a certification statement signed by a
professional engineer. All analyses shall be conducted according to the
current method as listed in Title 40 CFR 136 or as approved in writing by
the Director of Public Utilities or designee.
C. Any residential garbage that has not been properly shredded (see § 170-2).
Garbage grinders may be connected to sanitary sewers from homes, hotels,
institutions, restaurants, hospitals, catering establishments or similar
places where garbage originates from the preparation of food in kitchens
for the purpose of consumption on the premises or when served by caterers.
Solids separators may be required for commercial or industrial
establishments if deemed required by the Director of Public Utilities or
designee. Shredded garbage from food preparation establishments shall be
prohibited. Solid separators may be required for establishments if deemed
required by the Director of Public Utilities or designee.
D. Any sewage containing odor-producing substances exceeding limits which
may be established by the PUC and/or the DEEP.
E. Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may
exceed limits established by the PUC and/or the DEEP in compliance with
all applicable state, federal and municipal regulations.
F. Materials which exert or cause:
(1) Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not
limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate).
(2) Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and
vegetable tanning solutions).
(3) Unusual BOD, COD, or chlorine demand in such quantities as to
constitute a significant load on the water pollution control facility.
(4) Unusual volume of flow or concentrations of wastes constituting a slug
as defined in § 170-2.
G. Overflow from holding tanks or other receptacles storing organic wastes.
H. Sewage with a concentration of pollutants, including but not limited to the
following items and limits. The Director, with the concurrence of the PUC,
may require more stringent limits if it is determined in the best interest of
the WPCF.
Pollutant
Concentration
[parts/million (mg/l)]
Arsenic as As 0.05
Barium as BA 5.0
Boron as B 5.0
Cyanides as CN (amenable) 0.1
Fluoride as F 20
Chromium (Total) 1.0
Chromium (CR +6) 0.1
Magnesium as Mg 100
Manganese as MN 5.0
§ 170-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-11
1:357
Pollutant
Concentration
[parts/million (mg/l)]
Copper as Cu 1.0
Zinc as Zn 1.0
Cadmium 0.1
Lead 0.1
Tin 2.0
Silver 0.1
Mercury 0.01
Nickle 1.0
Phosphorus TP 5.0
Note: All metals are to be measured as total metals.
I. The limitations of wastewater discharged to the sewer system through
grease traps and AGRUs shall be as follows:
(1) Wastewater having a temperature in excess 140° F. shall not be
discharged into any AGRU.
(2) Use of enzymes, solvents, emulsifiers, biological agents, and similar
materials for cleaning or maintaining sewer lines or grease traps, shall
be prohibited.
(3) No food grinder or food pulper shall discharge into an outdoor grease
trap or AGRU.
(4) All wastewater flows shall be screened to prevent solids from entering
the sewer system. Screened solids shall be disposed of in accordance
with applicable solids waste regulations.
§ 170-12. Certain discharges subject to review and approval.
The admission into the public sewers of any waters or wastes having a fiveday
BOD greater than 500 parts per million by weight, or containing more
than 600 parts per million by weight of suspended solids, or containing
more than 15 parts per million by weight of chlorine demand, or containing
any quantity of substance described in § 170-11B, or having an average
daily flow greater than 2% of the average daily sewage flow of the City shall
be subject to the review and approval of the Director of Public Utilities or
designee. Where necessary, in the opinion of the Director of Public Utilities
or designee, the person discharging or causing the discharge of any such
waters or wastes into the public sewers shall provide, at his own expense,
such preliminary treatment as may be necessary to reduce the BOD to not
more than 500 parts per million by weight, the suspended solids to not more
than 600 parts per million by weight and the chlorine demand to not more
than 15 parts per million by weight; reduce objectionable characteristics or
constituents of the substances described in § 170-11 to the limits permitted
§ 170-11 MERIDEN CODE § 170-12
1:358
thereunder; and control the quantities and rates of discharge of such waters
and wastes.
§ 170-13. Permit required for certain discharges.
A. In accordance with § 22a-430 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as
amended, a permit from the DEEP is required prior to PUC approval
and the initiation of a discharge of any of the following wastewaters to a
public sewer:
(1) Industrial wastewater of any quantity.
(2) Domestic sewage in excess of 5,000 gallons per day through any
individual building sewer to a public sewer.
B. A potential discharger must obtain a conceptual approval form from the
Engineering Division. The form must be properly filled out and returned
to the Engineering Division for review and approval. The potential
discharger must then submit an approved copy of the conceptual
approval form with the permit application to the Department of Energy
and Environmental Protection and the PUC not later than 90 days prior
to the anticipated date of the initiation of the proposed discharge. See
§ 170-1.
C. Fog program.
(1) All food preparation establishments shall be required to apply for
and obtain a FOG discharge permit or variance from the FOG
Program Administrator. The requirements of this section are in
addition to the requirements of the Department of Energy and
Environmental Protections' General Permit for the Discharge of
Wastewater Associated with Food Preparation Establishments, The
International Plumbing Code and the Plumbing and Drainage
Institute standards as adopted by the Office of the State Building
Inspector.
(2) The FOG Program Administrator shall provide an application form
for a FOG discharge permit to all FPEs. All existing FPEs shall
submit a completed application form within 30 days of receipt of the
application. New FPEs shall obtain a FOG discharge permit prior
to issuance of a food service license. All renovations of an existing
FPE's kitchen or cleanup area shall require the application for an
issuance of a new FOG discharge permit.
(a) Each application form submitted shall include, but not be limited
to, the following: application form; variance form where
applicable; conceptual approval form; hours of facility operation;
a current copy of the FPE's menu; the FPE's engineer's design
report for outdoor grease traps or AGRUs including unit
specifications, cut sheet, and sizing calculations; the application
fee and any outstanding fees or fines payable to the PUC. No
installation or modification shall be undertaken prior to receiving
approval.
(3) The FOG Program Administrator shall approve or deny all
applications for the FOG discharge permits in accordance with the
policies and regulations established in this article. The fog discharge
permit shall be in addition to any other permits, registrations, or
§ 170-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-13
1:359
occupational licenses, which may be required by federal, state, or
local law. It shall be a violation of this article for any FPE identified
by the FOG Program Administrator to discharge wastewater
containing fats, oils, and grease to the public sanitary sewer system
without a FOG discharge permit.
(4) The permit shall not be transferred or sold to a new owner. A new
owner is required to apply to the FOG Program Administrator for a
new FOG discharge permit. The FOG discharge permit or variance
shall be displayed in a prominent location where it can be seen by
staff.
§ 170-14. Discharge of deleterious substances.
A. If any sewage is discharged or is proposed to be discharged to the public
sewers which contains the substances or possesses the characteristics
enumerated in § 170-11 of this chapter and which, in the judgment of
the PUC, may have a deleterious effect upon the wastewater facilities,
processes, equipment or receiving waters or which otherwise may create
a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the PUC may, in
accordance with § 22a-430(b) of the Connecticut General Statutes, as
amended:
(1) Reject the discharge of the wastes.
(2) Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the
public sewers (i.e., swimming pools).
(3) Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge (i.e.,
swimming pools).
B. If the DEEP permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the
design and installation of the equipment shall be subject to the review
and approval of the PUC, subject to the requirements of all applicable
codes, ordinances and laws.
§ 170-15. Right to reject or restrict discharges.
The Director of Public Utilities or designee shall have the right to reject
the discharge of any wastes or require more stringent effluent limitations
than required by the user's § 22a-430 permit, the decisions of the DEEP
notwithstanding.
§ 170-16. Separators to be provided when necessary.
Grease, oil and gross particle separators shall be provided when, in the
opinion of the DEEP and/or PUC, they are necessary for the proper handling
of sewage containing floatable grease in excessive amounts, as specified
in § 170-11B, or any flammable wastes, and or other harmful substances,
except that such separators shall not be required for private living quarters
or dwelling units. All separators shall be of a type and capacity approved
by the DEEP and/or PUC and shall be located as to be readily and easily
accessible for cleaning and inspection. In the maintaining of these
separators, the owner(s) shall be responsible for the proper removal and
disposal by appropriate means of the captured material and shall maintain
§ 170-13 MERIDEN CODE § 170-16
1:360
records of the dates and means of disposal which are subject to review by
the Director of Public Utilities or designee.
§ 170-17. Maintenance of pretreatment or flow-equalizing facilities.
Where pretreatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided or required
for any sewage, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and
effective operation by the owner at his expense.
§ 170-18. Installation of sampling structure.
When required by the PUC, the owner of any property serviced by a building
sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable structure together
with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer
to facilitate observations, sampling and measurement of the wastes. Such
structure, when required, shall be accessible and safely located and shall be
constructed in accordance with plans approved by the PUC. The sampling
structure shall be located at a point along the industrial waste stream where
a representative sample of the industrial wastewater may be obtained prior
to its being diluted by domestic sewage in the building sewer. The structure
shall be installed by the owner at his expense and shall be maintained by
him so as to be safe and accessible at all times.
§ 170-19. Monitoring of industrial discharges.
A. All industries discharging into a public sewer shall perform such
monitoring of their discharge as required by the DEEP in any state
discharge permit issued pursuant to § 22a-430 of the Connecticut
General Statutes, as amended, including but not limited to installation,
use and maintenance of monitoring equipment, keeping records and
reporting the results to the DEEP and the Director of Public Utilities or
designee.
B. All present and future DEEP/EPA treatment and testing parameters
required of the WPCF may be assumed by industrial/commercial sanitary
sewer users/dischargers as determined by the Director of Public Utilities
or designee.
C. The PUC may at any time order a water meter placed on any service
connection if it deems it in the best interest of the City to do so,
and any property owner, upon notification by the PUC, shall allow a
representative of the Water Division to enter upon his premises to install
such a meter. Upon application by the consumer, a meter shall be placed
on any service previously unmetered. The consumer shall provide a
proper place for the installation of a meter immediately inside the
building wall which shall be of easy access at all times for reading
and repair. The Director of Public Works, or his representatives, shall
determine the size of the meter installed on any service and may
determine when any meter shall be repaired or replaced.
(1) Water meters for sewer service shall not be supplied to a new
account until a proper and adequate water meter setters has been
provided by the owner immediately inside the building wall which
shall be of easy access at all times for meter reading and repair,
§ 170-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-19
1:361
the required fee for the proper size meter has been paid to the
Water Division by the owner, and the Water Division has installed and
sealed the required meter. The Public Utilities Commission shall act
as an appeals board to determine when and if a frost-proof meter pit
shall be required rather than a meter location within the building.
(2) The fee for the installation of new meters shall be determined
through the Water Division.
§ 170-20. Measurements, tests and analyses.
All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of sewage to
which reference is made in this chapter shall be determined in accordance
with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water
and Wastewater published by the American Health Association. Sampling
methods, location, times, durations and frequencies are to be determined
on an individual basis subject to the stipulations and general conditions of
the discharger's state discharge permit and the Director of Public Utilities
or designee.
§ 170-21. Special agreements.
No statement contained in this chapter shall be construed as preventing
any special agreement or arrangement between the City and any industrial
concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may
be accepted by the City for treatment, provided that such agreements do
not contravene any requirements of existing state or federal regulations and
are compatible with any user charge and industrial cost recovery system in
effect.
§ 170-22. Effect of federal standard.
Upon the promulgation of the federal categorical pretreatment standard for
a particular industrial subcategory, the federal standard, if more stringent
than limitations imposed under this chapter for sources in that subcategory,
shall supersede the limitations imposed under this chapter.
§ 170-23. Increased use of process water prohibited.
No user shall increase the use of process water in an attempt to dilute
a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to
achieve compliance with the limitations contained in the federal categorical
pretreatment standards or in any specific pollutant limitations which may
be developed by the DEEP.
§ 170-24. Protection from accidental discharge required.
Each user shall provide protection from accidental discharge of prohibited
materials or other substances regulated by this chapter. Facilities to prevent
accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided and
maintained at the owner's or user's own cost and expense. The Director may
§ 170-19 MERIDEN CODE § 170-24
1:362
require that plans showing facilities and operating procedures be submitted
for review and approval prior to construction of the facilities.
§ 170-25. Report of accidental discharge required.
A. The Director of Public Utilities or designee shall be immediately notified
of all accidental discharges.
B. Within five days following an accidental discharge, the user shall submit
to the Director of Public Utilities or designee and the DEEP a detailed
written report describing the cause of the discharge and the measures
to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such
notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage or
other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the WPCF,
fish kills, aquatic plants or any other damage to persons or property,
nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties or
other liability which may be imposed by this chapter or other applicable
law.
C. A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or
other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of
a dangerous discharge. Employers shall ensure that all employees are
advised of the emergency notification procedure.
§ 170-26. Tampering with system prohibited.
No person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy,
uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment
which is a part of the sewage collection system or WPCF.
§ 170-27. Right of entry.
The Director of Public Utilities or designee and other duly authorized
employees of the City bearing proper credentials and identification shall be
permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation,
measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter.
§ 170-28. Liability for damages.
While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to
in § 170-27 above, the Director of Public Utilities or designee or duly
authorized employees of the City shall observe all safety rules applicable
to the premises established by the user. The user shall be held harmless
for injury or death to the City employees, and the City shall indemnify
the user against loss or damage to its property by City employees and
against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage
asserted against the user and growing out of the gauging and sampling
operation, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the user
to maintain safe conditions as required in § 170-4.
§ 170-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-29
1:363
§ 170-29. Sewage works lying within easements.
The Director of Public Utilities or designee and other duly authorized
employees of the City bearing proper credentials and identification shall
be permitted to enter all private properties through which the City holds
an easement or any other claim for access for the purposes of repair and
maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying within said easement.
All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement shall be done in full
accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to
the private property.
§ 170-30. Notice of violation.
A. Any person found to be in violation of any provisions of this chapter,
except § 170-26, shall be served by the City with written notice stating
the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the
satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of
time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations and shall be
liable to the City for any and all expense, loss or damage which may be
caused to the public sewer, treatment works or appurtenances by reason
of such violation.
B. Upon learning or having reason to believe that an accidental discharge
may cause a sewer blockage or adversely affect the public sanitary sewer
system, a user shall immediately notify the WPCF by telephone and
initiate corrective action to prevent further violations. The user shall
report, in writing, such violation and corrective actions taken to the
WPCF within five days of the user learning of such violation. Failure to
report may result in a fine pursuant to § 170-25.
§ 170-31. Failure to comply.
A. Sanitary sewer service shall be furnished to consumers subject to the
provisions of this chapter and any rules or regulations of the PUC made
in connection with such service.
B. If any person, after the time and proper order or direction from the
Director of Public Utilities or designee, fails to take the remedial steps
or perform the acts required by the sections of this chapter or fails
thereafter to use, operate and maintain a connection with the public
sewers of the City or appurtenances thereof, as required by this chapter,
the PUC, by such agents and/or facilities as it may choose, may
disconnect the building sewer or connection or drain which was
wrongfully connected, altered, repaired or used or through which
improper wastes were discharged into the public sewer or drainage
system of the City and may, if necessary, interfere with or cut off
drainage from other portions of the property whereon such violation of
the chapter has occurred or of any adjacent property which is served by
such building sewer, connection or drain. If the Water Pollution Control
Authority shall have disconnected a building sewer, connection or drain
from the public sewer system, as above provided, the City may collect
the cost of making such disconnection from any person responsible for
or who profited by such violation of the requirements of this chapter.
§ 170-29 MERIDEN CODE § 170-31
1:364
C. Failure to comply with the FOG Program may result in fines, revocation
of FOG Discharge permit, inability to renew a food service license as
issued by the Meriden Department of Health, and other penalties
provided for in this chapter.
§ 170-32. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who continues any violation beyond the time limit provided for
in § 170-30 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, on conviction thereof,
shall be fined in accordance with the Fee Schedule online at
www.meridenct.gov for each violation. Each day in which any such violation
shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense.
A. Any person who continues any violation beyond the time limit provided
for in § 170-30 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, on conviction
thereof, shall be fined in accordance with the Fee Schedule online at
www.meridenct.gov for each violation. Each day in which any such
violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense.
B. For initial violations the Director of Public Utilities or designee may take
enforcement actions against FPEs including:
(1) Judicially enforceable documents including but not limited to
consent agreements, compliance agreements, assurances of
voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing an
agreement with any user, or other person responsible for
noncompliance. Such documents will include specific actions to be
taken to correct the noncompliance including but not limited to:
(a) Payment of the notice of violation fine as on file with the Director
of Public Utilities or designee.
(b) Time period for correction.
(c) Required corrective actions including, but not limited to,
submittal of records for trap maintenance, immediate pump-out
of the trap, or establishment of an ongoing contract with a hauler
or renderer.
(d) Requirements for submittal of plans or upgrade of grease traps,
including time frames for preparation of plans, acquisitions of
necessary equipment, initiation of construction (including time
for permit approval, where required), completion of
construction, and date for achievement of final compliance
within the provisions of the notice of violation and this article.
(2) Continued violation penalties. If a user violates or continues to
violate the provisions set forth in this article or fails to initiate/
complete corrective action in response to a notice of violation, the
Director of Public Utilities or designee may pursue one or more of
the following options:
(a) Referral to other appropriate enforcement agencies for further
action, i.e., the Health Department and the CT DEEP.
(b) Where applicable, refer the violation to the Health Department
recommending closure of the facility and/or denial of food
service license renewal.
(3) FOG discharge permit revocation. Any FOG discharge permit issued
under the provisions of this article is subject to be modified,
§ 170-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-32
1:365
suspended, or revoked in whole or in part for failure to comply with
the terms of this article. Any FPE whose FOG discharge permit has
been revoked must, on correction of the violation, apply for a new
FOG discharge permit including all applicable fees.
§ 170-33. Liability for expenses caused by violation.
Any person who is found to be in violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter shall become liable to the City for any expense, loss or damage
occasioned by the City by reason of such violation.
§ 170-34. Violation of statute.
A. Any person who is found to be in violation of § 22a-430 of the
Connecticut General Statutes, as amended, shall be subject to a
monetary penalty or forfeiture under § 22a-438 of the statutes.
B. Administrative enforcement and abatement.
(1) If the Director of Public Utilities or designee records any deficiencies
during an inspection, he will provide written notice to the FPE with
instructions to correct the deficiency within 30 days of such notice
for BMP violations or 60 days for equipment violations. A notice of
violation shall be issued to a FPE for any one or more of the following
violations.
(a) Failure to properly maintain the grease trap in accordance with
the provisions of the FOG article.
(b) Failure to report changes in operations per § 170-42C(2).69
(c) Failure to report an unauthorized grease discharge per
§ 170-25B.
(d) Failure to maintain grease records including documentation of:
pumping activities; grease disposal facility; or receipts on site at
all times.
(e) Failure to provide access for trap cleaning, inspection, or
monitoring activities.
(f) Failure to store grease in a proper container or dispose of grease
at an approved facility.
(g) Any other failure to comply with the requirements of this article
or conditions of any permit issued pursuant to this article.
§ 170-35. Appeals.
Any person who may be aggrieved by any interpretation of any provision of
this chapter, or by an order under authority conferred by this chapter, or by
a requirement of this chapter, or by any classification of any sewer, drain or
any wastewater proposed to be discharged into any sewer or drain made,
may appeal within 21 days from such interpretation, order, classification or
requirement to the PUC. Any such appeal shall be in writing and forwarded
to the PUC by certified mail, setting out the matter in reasonable detail and
completeness. The PUC shall consider any such appeal made to it within 90
days of receipt and, if so requested by any such person interested therein,
69.Editor's Note: So in original.
§ 170-32 MERIDEN CODE § 170-35
1:366
shall afford all interested parties an opportunity to be heard by it or by
a committee thereof. The PUC shall take such action deemed appropriate
and, in its discretion, may alter any interpretation, order or requirement
under its authority. Until such time as the PUC shall have received and
considered an appeal and shall have voted to change the interpretation,
order or requirement, such interpretation, order or requirement shall be
observed and remain in full force and effect.
§ 170-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-35
1:367

ARTICLE IV
Subsurface Sewage Disposal Systems (Septic Systems)
§ 170-36. Permit required.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to install, repair or alter any
subsurface sewage disposal system in the City without a permit issued
by the Division of Health. Applications for such permits shall be made on
forms to be provided by the Division of Health and shall be approved by
the Director of Health and Human Services or his agent before any such
work is started.
B. Construction shall not be commenced upon any dwelling or other
residential, commercial or industrial structure or any buildings that are
used for human occupancy or that are to be served by on-site subsurface
sewage disposal facilities until they are approved by the Director of
Health and Human Services or his duly appointed agent.
§ 170-37. Criteria for issuance of permit.
Applications for the permits required by § 170-36 shall be approved on the
basis of conformance with requirements for subsurface sewage disposal
systems as specified under the provisions of the Public Health Code of the
State of Connecticut and under any subsequent regulations that may be
adopted in conformity with such state code.
§ 170-38. Fees.
A. The Division of Health is authorized to charge the applicant a fee per lot
or, in the case of multiple dwellings, a fee per unit for the performance
of necessary soil tests and review of the applicable plans.
B. Upon approval of soil tests and plans, a permit fee per lot or, in the case
of multiple dwellings, a fee per system shall be charged in addition to the
fees for soil testing and plan review. A fee shall be charged for permits
issued for repair or minor alterations.
§ 170-39. Establishment of additional requirements.
The City Council is authorized to approve additional requirements and/
or modifications of the regulation of subsurface sewage disposal systems
as may be proposed from time to time by the Division of Health. Such
additions and/or modifications, once approved by the City Council, shall
be published in a newspaper having general circulation in the City prior
to their becoming effective. Copies of any such adopted additions and/or
modifications shall be made available to applicants during the application
process.
§ 170-40. Inspections.
A. Inspections of the sewage disposal systems shall be made by the Director
of Health and Human Services or his agent as often as may be necessary
during the construction or repair process. However, in no case shall any
new, repaired or altered system be covered by backfilling before such
system, repair or alteration is approved by the Director of Health and
§ 170-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-40
1:369
Human Services or his agent; such approval shall be given in writing
prior to the system's being backfilled.
B. The Director of Public Utilities or designee, bearing proper
identification, shall have the authority to inspect any pretreatment
facility on an unscheduled basis to confirm compliance with the
requirements of this chapter and any additional requirements of a
permit, variance, or agreement. Inspections may include all
pretreatment equipment, wastewater generation areas, waste storage
areas, and records pertaining to storage and disposal or maintenance of
pretreatment equipment.
§ 170-40 MERIDEN CODE § 170-40
1:370
ARTICLE V
Regulation of Fats, Oils, and Grease (FOG)
§ 170-41. FOG discharge permits required.
A. All FPEs discharging to the City of Meriden's public sanitary sewer
system prior to the effective date of this article shall submit an
application and obtain a FOG discharge permit to operate and maintain
an outdoor grease trap meeting the criteria of this article, a variance
for an AGRU, or a variance from the requirements of this article. The
requirements of this section are in addition to the requirements of the
Department of Energy and Environmental Protections' General Permit
for the Discharge of Wastewater Associated with Food Preparation
Establishments, The International Plumbing Code and the Plumbing
and Drainage Institute standards as adopted by the Office of the State
Building Inspector.
(1) All existing FPEs shall come into compliance with the requirements
of this article no later than July 1, 2011.
(2) Prior to July 1, 2011, a change in ownership of an existing facility
shall require compliance with all conditions of this article within 60
days of change in ownership.
(3) All FPE facilities undergoing renovations that require permits from
their local building official shall concurrently apply for the required
building permits and a FOG discharge permit.
(4) A new FPE proposing to discharging to the Meriden sewer system
shall comply with all conditions of this article before initiating a
discharge.
B. Following the initial enactment of the FOG amendments any modification
to the FOG article shall become effective immediately and be complied
with within seven months of the modification. The FOG Program
Administrator shall notify all FPEs of the modification within 30 days of
adoption of the amendments.
§ 170-42. General introduction:
In an effort to curb sanitary sewer overflows from grease accumulation in
its public sanitary sewer system, the PUC adopted, at its public meeting
on February 15, 2011, a Fats, Oils, and Grease (FOG) Program. Facilities,
excluding residential and industrial facilities, connected to the public
sanitary sewer system that are involved in the preparing or serving of
food will be subject to the conditions of this article and must come into
compliance prior to July 1, 2011.
§ 170-43. Purpose:
The purpose of this article (also referred to herein as the "FOG article") is to
protect the environment by preventing sewage overflows and backups into
basements caused by grease hardening in sewer lines causing blockages.
The objectives of this article are:
A. To prevent the introduction of excessive amounts of grease into the City
of Meriden's public sanitary sewer system.
§ 170-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-43
1:371
B. To prevent clogging or blockage of the City of Meriden's public sanitary
sewer system due to grease build-up causing sewage to backup and
flood streets, residences and commercial buildings, resulting in
potential liability to the PUC, residences, commercial buildings, and
others.
C. To implement a procedure to recover the cost incurred from cleaning
and maintaining sewer lines due to improper grease removal.
D. To implement a procedure to recover costs for any liability incurred
by the PUC for damage caused by grease blockages resulting in the
flooding of streets, residences, or commercial buildings.
E. To issue FOG discharge permits to food preparation establishments
(FPEs) and establish maintenance and monitoring requirements, and
enforcement activities.
F. To establish administrative procedures and reporting requirements.
G. To establish permit fees for the recovery of costs resulting from this FOG
Article.
H. To establish enforcement procedures for violations of any part or
requirement of this article.
§ 170-44. Definitions:
A. The following definitions shall apply to this article:
AUTOMATIC GREASE RECOVERY UNIT (AGRU) — An indoor grease
trap (a trap may also be referred to as an interceptor) that separates
grease from wastewater by active mechanical or electrical means. Such
traps are typically compact under-the-sink units and should be as far
away as possible from grease bearing (cleaning) equipment like sinks,
before exiting the building. See definition of "grease trap."
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (BMP) — The practices and
procedures of a facility designed to prevent or minimize environmental
damage. BMPs include, but are not limited to; treatment requirements,
operating procedures, practices to control spillage or leaks, and grease
disposal.
FATS, OILS, AND GREASE (FOG) — Any fats, oils, and grease generated
from the food preparation process. All are sometimes referred to as
"grease."
FOG DISCHARGE PERMIT — A permit issued by the Program
Administrator authorizing the discharge of wastewater to the public
sanitary sewer system from a FPE.
FOOD PREPARATION ESTABLISHMENTS (FPE) — Food preparation
establishments are: a) facilities that are regulated by the Meriden Health
Department and are classified as a Class 3 or Class 4 food service
establishment, as defined by the State Health Code; or b) other facilities
that engage in similar cooking methods that have the potential to
produce fats, oils, and grease. A Class 3 food service establishment shall
be exempt from this article if it does not employ frying, sauteing, baking
or roasting of meats, use of rotisseries, grills, smokers, or other methods
that have the potential to generate fats, oils, or grease.
§ 170-43 MERIDEN CODE § 170-44
1:372
GREASE DISPOSAL FACILITY (GDF) — A regional collection/transfer/
disposal site approved in accordance with the law for the disposal of
FOG. This means a Department of Energy and Environmental Protection
(DEEP) approved publicly/privately owned treatment works that is for
the separation and disposal of FOG by incineration or other methods.
Pursuant to Section 22a-174-33 of the Regulations of Connecticut State
Agencies related to Title V source, an in-state regional incinerator must
have an operating permit that lists FOG as a source of fuel.
GREASE TRAP — The term "grease trap" is used collectively to mean
both AGRUs and outdoor grease traps.
HAULER — Any person who collects the contents of a grease trap and
transports it to a grease disposal facility. A hauler may also provide other
services to food preparation establishments related to trap maintenance.
MERIDEN PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION (PUC) — The PUC of the
City of Meriden with all the powers, purposes and objectives as set forth
in Chapter 103 of the General Statutes of Connecticut, Revision of 1958
and amendments thereto or their designee.
NONRENDERABLE GREASE — Fats, oils, and grease generated from
food preparation or serving that has come in contact with water or
other contaminants shall prevent this FOG from being rendered. See
"renderable grease."
OUTDOOR GREASE TRAP — A structure or device designed for the
purpose of removing and preventing FOG from entering the public
sanitary sewer system. These devices are often below-ground units built
as two or three chamber baffled tanks. Traps shall have at least one
inspection hatch at grade per chamber to facilitate inspection, cleaning
and maintenance by a Hauler. See definition of "grease trap."
PERMITTEE — The permittee represents the FPE and is authorized by
the issuance of a FOG discharge permit to initiate, create, originate, or
maintain a wastewater discharge from the FPE. The permittee shall be
the owner or his local designee.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, association, society, corporation, or
group.
PROGRAM ADMINISTRATOR (PA) — The PUC, or persons authorized
by the PUC to conduct activities related to this article including but
not limited to: approve discharge permits, approve variances, conduct
facility inspections, and conduct enforcement procedures.
PUBLIC SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM — A sewer in which all owners
of abutting properties have equal rights and which is controlled by a
public authority. Includes the main pipe, manholes, other structures, and
equipment appurtenant thereto controlled and maintained by the PUC
for the conveyance of sanitary sewage.
RENDERABLE GREASE — The uncontaminated FOG from the food
preparation process that is free of impurities and has not come in contact
§ 170-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-44
1:373
with water and can be recycled into products such as, but not limited to,
animal feed or cosmetics.
§ 170-45. Food preparation establishment (FPE) permitting
program:
A. All FPEs discharging wastewater to the public sanitary sewer system are
subject to the following requirements.
(1) Permitting: All FPE's shall be required to apply for and obtain a
FOG discharge permit from the PA. The PA shall approve or deny
all applications for the FOG discharge permits in accordance with
the policies and regulations established in this article. The FOG
discharge permit shall be in addition to any other permits,
registrations, or occupational licenses, which may be required by
federal, state, or local law. It shall be a violation of this article for
any FPE identified by the PA to discharge wastewater containing
fats, oils, and grease to the public sanitary sewer system without a
current FOG discharge permit.
Following the initial enactment of this FOG article, any modification
to this FOG article shall become effective immediately and be
complied with within seven months of the modification. Upon
modification to this article, existing FPE's may be required to reapply
and submit the required fee.
(2) Application form: The PA shall provide an application form for a
FOG discharge permit to all FPEs. All existing FPEs shall submit
a completed application form within 30 days of: a) receipt of the
application, or b) prior to the expiration of their valid FOG discharge
permit. New FPEs shall obtain a FOG discharge permit prior to
issuance of a food service license. Each application form submitted
shall include, but not be limited to, the following information.
(a) Conceptual approval form.
(b) The FPE's engineer's design report for outdoor grease traps
or AGRUs including unit specifications, cut sheet, and sizing
calculations.
(c) Hours of facility operation.
(d) A copy of the FPE's menu.
(e) A statement signed by the permittee as follows: "I have
personally examined and am familiar with the information
submitted in this document and all attachments thereto, and
I certify that, based on reasonable investigation, including my
inquiry of those individuals responsible for obtaining the
information, the submitted information is true, accurate, and
complete to the best of my knowledge and belief. I understand
that a false statement made in the submitted information may
be punishable as a criminal offense, in accordance with § 22a-6
of the General Statutes, pursuant to § 53a-157b of the General
Statutes, and in accordance with any other applicable statute."
(3) Application procedure: Upon filing of a completed FOG discharge
permit application form with fee, and variance application if
§ 170-44 MERIDEN CODE § 170-45
1:374
applicable, the PA shall review and approve or deny a FOG discharge
permit. No system modification shall be initiated until approval is
obtained.
(4) FOG discharge permit:
(a) The FOG discharge permit must be displayed in a prominent
location where it can be seen by staff.
(b) A FOG discharge permit shall not be transferred or sold to a new
owner. A new owner is required to apply to the PA for a new FOG
discharge permit.
(c) A new FOG discharge permit must be applied for when
renovations are completed at an existing FPE, or on making
significant changes to the menu.
(d) The terms and conditions of the permit are subject to
modification by the PUC during the term of the permit. If due to
changes in this article, modifications to a facility are required in
order to remain in compliance, the permittee shall be informed
at least six months prior to the compliance date of the new
requirement or six months prior to the expiration date of the
existing permit.
(5) Entry: Each FPE shall allow the Inspector, bearing proper
identification, access at all reasonable times to all parts of the
premises for the purpose of inspection, observation, records
examination, measurements, sampling and testing in accordance
with the provisions of this article. The refusal of any FPE to allow the
Inspector official entry for purposes of inspection or performing such
other duties as shall be required shall constitute a violation of this
article. The PUC may pursue legal action as provided for in § 170-49
as may be advisable and reasonably necessary for Inspectors to carry
out their duties.
(6) Inspection: The Inspector shall inspect the FPE on an unscheduled
basis after a FOG discharge permit has been issued to confirm
compliance with the requirements of this article. All FPEs with a
current FOG discharge permit shall be inspected. Inspections shall
include, but not be limited to, all equipment, food processing, cleanup,
and storage areas and shall include any area that produces
wastewater discharge to the grease trap. The Inspector shall also
inspect the grease trap maintenance logbook and/or file, other
pertinent data to the grease trap, and may check the level of the
trap contents and/or take samples/measurements as necessary. The
Inspector shall record all observations in a written report. Any
deficiencies as provided in § 170-49 of this article shall be noted.
(7) Violation reporting: A permittee shall immediately notify the PA by
telephone upon learning or having reason to believe that a discharge
may cause a sewer blockage or adversely affect the public sanitary
sewer system and initiate corrective action to prevent further
violations.
B. The permittee shall report, in writing, such violation and corrective
actions taken, to the PA within five days of the permittee learning of such
violation. Failure to report may result in a fine pursuant to § 170-49.
§ 170-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-46
1:375
§ 170-46. Wastewater discharge limitations:
A. No user shall allow wastewater discharge concentrations from a grease
trap or alternative pretreatment technology to exceed 100 milligrams
per liter. All analyses shall be conducted according to the current
method as listed in Title 40 CFR 136 or as approved in writing by the PA.
All costs associated with testing are the responsibility of the FPE.
B. Where outdoor grease traps are used, separate wastewater lines shall
be provided to convey the sanitary and kitchen wastewater outside the
facility. Only wastewater from the kitchen and cleanup areas shall be
directed to the grease trap. In no case shall sanitary wastewater be
allowed to enter a grease trap.
C. Wastewater having a temperature in excess 140° F. shall not be
discharged into any AGRU.
D. Any use of enzymes, solvents, emulsifiers, biological agents, and similar
material for maintaining or cleaning grease traps is prohibited.
E. No food grinder or food pulper shall discharge into a grease trap.
F. All wastewater flows connected to grease traps shall be screened to
prevent solids from entering the grease trap. Screened solids shall be
disposed of in accordance with applicable solid waste regulations.
§ 170-47. Outdoor grease trap requirements:
A. Requirements: All FPEs are required to have an outdoor grease trap
or variance. The requirements in this article are in addition to any
applicable requirements of the Connecticut Department of Energy and
Environmental Protection's (DEEP) General Permit for the Discharge
of Wastewater Associated with Food Preparation Establishments, The
International Plumbing Code, and the Plumbing and Drainage Institute
standards as adopted by the Office of the State Building Inspector.
B. Equipment requirements: On or after the effective date of this article, all
FPEs discharging to or proposing to discharge to the City of Meriden's
public sanitary sewer system shall submit an application and obtain
a permit to operate and maintain an outdoor grease trap, a variance
for an AGRU, or a variance from the requirements of this article as
established by § 170-47F(1). All outdoor grease traps and shall meet the
requirements of this article.
C. On or after the effective date of this article, the PA shall require an
existing FPE to install, operate, and maintain a new grease trap that
complies with the requirements of this article or to modify any
noncompliant plumbing or existing grease trap within 60 days of written
notification by the PA when any of the following conditions exist.
(1) The establishment is found to be contributing grease in quantities to
cause pipe blockages or increase maintenance on the public sanitary
sewer system.
(2) The establishment does not have a grease trap.
(3) The establishment has an undersized, irreparable, or defective
grease trap.
(4) Existing establishment is sold or undergoes a change of ownership.
(5) Remodeling of a kitchen, which requires a plumbing permit to be
issued by the City of Meriden.
§ 170-46 MERIDEN CODE § 170-47
1:376
(6) The menu of an establishment changes so that it meets the
requirements of a FPE.
D. Variance from outdoor grease trap requirements: An AGRU may only be
installed after authorization by the PA. The FPE shall request a variance
in writing, which shall consist of a completed Program Application and
Variance Application.
E. Outdoor grease trap: Outdoor grease traps shall be installed in all FPEs
as described in § 170-47B and C. All outdoor grease traps shall meet the
following criteria.
(1) Trap design and location: Outdoor grease traps shall have a
minimum of two compartments and shall be capable of separation
and retention of grease and storage of settled solids. Access
manholes with a minimum diameter of 17 inches shall be provided
over each trap chamber and sanitary tee. The manhole shall also
have readily removable covers to facilitate inspection, grease
removal, and wastewater sampling activities. The invert elevation
of the inlet shall be between three inches and six inches above the
invert elevation of the outlet.
(2) The trap shall be designed, constructed, and installed for adequate
load-bearing capacity.
(3) Trap capacity: The minimum capacity of any one unit shall be 1,000
gallons. Where sufficient capacity cannot be achieved with a single
unit, installation of grease traps in series is required.
(4) Trap sizing: At a minimum, the trap shall hold kitchen discharges
equivalent to the maximum flows over a twenty-four-hour period.
The maximum flow over a twenty-four-hour period shall be
calculated by the method published by the City of Meriden
Engineering Department.
(5) Pumping and maintenance: Each FPE shall be responsible for the
cost of installing, inspecting, pumping, cleaning, and maintaining
its outdoor grease trap. Outdoor grease trap cleaning shall include
complete removal of all contents including scraping of excessive
solids from the walls, floors, baffles, and all pipe work. It shall be
the responsibility of each FPE to inspect its outdoor grease trap
during the pumping operation to ensure proper cleaning and that
all fittings and fixtures are functioning properly.
(6) Outdoor trap pumping frequency: Each FPE shall have its outdoor
grease trap(s) pumped whenever 25% of the operating depth of the
outdoor grease trap is occupied by grease and settled solids or a
minimum of once every three months, whichever is more frequent.
(7) Inspections: The Inspector shall inspect grease traps as necessary
to ensure compliance with this article.
(8) Disposal: Renderable grease shall not be disposed of in any sewer,
septic tank, or grease trap. All renderable grease shall be stored
in a separate, covered, leak-proof, labeled, renderable grease
container, stored out of reach of vermin and collected by a
renderer.
(9) Grease removed from outdoor grease traps shall be disposed of at
a grease disposal facility permitted by DEEP.
§ 170-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-47
1:377
(10) Recordkeeping: Each FPE shall maintain a logbook in which a
record of all grease trap maintenance is entered, including the date
and time of the maintenance, repairs, records of inspection, log of
pumping activities, and grease disposal facility. The file shall be
available at all times for inspection and review by the Inspector.
F. Variance procedure: Two types of variances may be granted, program
variances and equipment/bmp variances, as follows.
(1) Program variances: The PA may, at his sole discretion, exempt from
this FOG Program facilities that meet the definition of FPE but
whose wastewater discharge contributes negligible FOG to the
sanitary sewer. This may include:
(a) FPEs which are itinerant vendors, either truck or cart, with no
fixed sewer connection.
(b) Facility's generating a low volume of wastewater that meets the
requirements of a de minimis discharge as provided in § 170-47I.
(2) Equipment/BMP variances: At the request of the permittee, the PA
at his sole discretion may grant a variance from the equipment or
BMP requirements of this article. Any change to the conditions of
the variance must be reported to the PA for review within 30 days.
(3) A FPE that has been granted a variance shall have 30 days to report
to the PA and Meriden Health Department any changes that cause
a violation in the terms of the variance. Changes that may cause a
violation to the terms of the variance may include but are not limited
to hours of operation, food preparation techniques, or changes to the
menu.
G. Alternative grease removal devices: The PA, at his sole discretion, may
approve these types of devices depending on manufacturer's
specifications and verified operations on a case-by-case basis.
Alternative devices shall be subject to written approval based on a
demonstration prior to installation.
(1) AGRU: AGRUs shall be prohibited at new FPEs, except as granted by
variance at the discretion of the PA per § 170-47B.
(2) AGRU size: The AGRU design flow shall be sized by a licensed
engineer according to the PUC's guidelines including all connected
fixtures and drains.
(3) Traps shall have a removable lid on the top surface to facilitate
inspection, cleaning, and maintenance.
(4) Flow control device: AGRUs shall be equipped with a device to
control the rate of flow through the unit and shall not exceed the
design flow capacity.
(5) Cleaning and maintenance: Each FPE shall be solely responsible for
the cost of the AGRU installation, cleaning, and maintenance. The
AGRU shall include a skimming device, automatic draw-off, or other
mechanical means to automatically separate fats and oils from the
wastewater, using a timer or level controller. The AGRU shall be
connected to the electrical circuit by either hardwire, or cord and
plug. The AGRU shall operate no less than once per day.
H. Other approved unit: If the permittee requests the use of a unit other
than an outdoor grease trap or an AGRU, the permittee must
§ 170-47 MERIDEN CODE § 170-47
1:378
demonstrate to the PA that the proposed unit can reliably meet the
effluent limitations established in this article. Only after receiving
approval from the PA will the permittee be authorized to install the
proposed unit.
I. De minimis discharges: At the request of the permittee, the PA may
grant a program variance from the treatment requirements of this
article. Any change to the conditions of the variance must be reported to
the PA and the Meriden Health Department for review within 30 days.
§ 170-48. Fees and billing:
A. The fees provided for in this article are separate and distinct from all
other fees chargeable by the PUC. All invoiced fees, pursuant to this
article, shall become immediately due and owed upon receipt of invoice,
and shall become delinquent if not fully paid within 30 days after receipt.
Any delinquent amount shall be subject to the late fee.
B. Fines shall fall into two classifications; BMP violation, and equipment
installation violation.
C. A copy of the WPCF's current fees applicable to all applications, permits,
and notice-of-violation fines pursuant to this article are shown on the Fee
Schedule online at www.meridenct.gov.
D. Food preparation establishments shall be responsible for any processing
fees on payments made through third parties. Processing fees include
but are not limited to: credit card fees, online payment fees, and
collection fees.
§ 170-49. Administrative enforcement and abatement.
A. Violations: If the PA records any deficiencies during an inspection, they
will provide written or electronic notice to the FPE with instructions to
correct the deficiency within 30 days of such notice for BMP violations
or 60 days for equipment violations. A notice of violation (NOV) shall be
issued to a FPE for any one or more of the following violations.
(1) Failure to properly maintain the grease trap in accordance with the
provisions of the FOG Article.
(2) Failure to report changes in operations per § 170-47G(2).70
(3) Failure to report an unauthorized grease discharge per § 170-45A(7).
(4) Failure to maintain grease records including documentation of:
pumping activities; grease disposal facility; or receipts on site at all
times.
(5) Failure to provide access for trap cleaning, inspection, or monitoring
activities.
(6) Failure to obtain or renew a discharge permit in a timely manner.
(7) Failure to store grease in a proper container or dispose of grease at
an approved facility.
(8) Any other failure to comply with the requirements of this article or
conditions of any permit issued pursuant to this article.
B. Enforcement actions: Enforcement actions against FPEs in violation of
this article shall be according to the following provisions.
70.Editor's Note: So in original.
§ 170-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-49
1:379
(1) Initial violation penalties: The PA may take enforcement actions
against FPEs including consent agreements, compliance
agreements, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar
documents establishing an agreement with any user, or other person
responsible for noncompliance. Such documents will include specific
actions to be taken to correct the noncompliance within a time
period specified by the document. Such documents shall be judicially
enforceable, including but not limited to:
(a) Payment of the notice of violation fine as on file with the PA.
(b) Required corrective actions including, but not limited to,
submittal of records for trap maintenance, immediate pump-out
of the trap, or establishment of an ongoing contract with a hauler
or renderer.
(c) Requirements for submittal of plans or upgrade of grease traps,
including time frames for preparation of plans, acquisitions of
necessary equipment, initiation of construction (including time
for permit approval, where required), completion of
construction, and date for achievement of final compliance
within the provisions of the notice of violation and this article.
(2) Continued violation penalties: If a FPE violates or continues to
violate the provisions set forth in this article or fails to initiate/
complete corrective action in response to a NOV, the PA may pursue
one or more of the following options:
(a) Referral to other appropriate enforcement agencies for further
action, i.e., the Heath Department and the CT DEEP.
(b) Refer the NOV to the Health Department recommending closure
of the facility and/ or denial of food service license renewal.
(3) Discharge permit revocation: Any discharge permit issued under the
provisions of this article is subject to be modified, suspended, or
revoked in whole or in part during its term for failure to comply
with the terms of this article. Any denial or revocation of a permit
pursuant to this article may be appealed to the PUC. The permittee
shall have 15 days from date of notification of the permit denial or
revocation to submit a written request for a hearing before the PUC.
Failure to file an appeal constitutes acceptance of the decision to
deny or revoke the permit and any conditions thereof. The PUC shall
conduct a public hearing and decide within 60 days from receipt
of appeal, whether or not to grant the permit. The decision of the
PUC shall be final. Cause for FOG discharge permit modification,
suspension, or revocation shall include but not be limited to any one
of the following:
(a) Falsification of any information submitted as part of the
application for the discharge permit.
(b) Failure to comply with the requirements or regulations
concerning discharges to the public sanitary sewer system.
(c) Failure to comply with the requirements or regulations
concerning grease traps in this article.
(d) Failure to pay required fees or penalties in a timely manner.
§ 170-49 MERIDEN CODE § 170-49
1:380
(e) Failure to attend required BMP training courses if required by
PA.
(f) When necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare
of the City of Meriden.
(4) Recovery of costs: When a discharge causes any obstruction, damage
or any other impairment to the public sanitary sewer system,
damage to public or private property, or any expense of whatever
character or nature to the PUC, the PUC shall assess the expenses
incurred to clear the obstruction, repair damage to the system, and
any other expenses or damage of any kind or nature suffered by
the City as a result thereof including reimbursement for damage to
private property. The PUC may file a claim with the user or other
person that caused the obstruction, damage or other impairment for
recovery of such cost including any collection costs. If the claim is
ignored or denied, the PUC shall notify the City Attorney to take
such measures as shall be appropriate to recover any expense or to
correct other damages suffered by the City.
(5) Remedies nonexclusive: The remedies for this article are not
exclusive. The PUC may take any, all, or any combination of these
actions against any person violating this FOG article.
(6) Search warrant: The PUC, through the City's Attorney, may seek
to obtain a search warrant from the appropriate authority to gain
access to a FPE's facility for the purposes of verification of
compliance inspection and monitoring as provided for under
§ 170-45A(5) if such lawful entry has previously been denied by the
FPE.
(7) Citation to superior court: Notwithstanding any of the above, the
PUC may cite any user to Superior Court for violation of any
provision of this article. A violation of any condition or requirement
of a discharge permit, or failure to obtain such a permit shall be
deemed to be in violation of this article.
(8) Injunction and other relief: The City, through the City's Attorney, may
file a petition in the name of the City in Superior Court or such other
courts as may have jurisdiction seeking the issuance of an injunction,
damages, or other applicable law or regulation. Suit may be brought
to recover any and all damages suffered by the City as a result of
any action or inaction of any person that causes or suffers damage to
occur to the PUC's public sanitary sewer system.
C. Any person found to have violated any provision of this article, or any
condition of a permit issued pursuant to this article, may be liable for
civil fine as shown on Fee Schedule online at www.meridenct.gov. Each
separate violation shall constitute a separate offense, and for violations
continuing longer than 60 days, each day's continuance of a violation
shall constitute a separate and distinct violation. In addition to the
penalties provided herein, the City may recover attorney's fees, court
costs, court reporter's fees and other expenses of litigation by
appropriate suit at law against the person found to have violated this
article or the orders, rules, regulations, and permits issued hereunder.
§ 170-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-49
1:381
Chapter 174
SIGNS AND POSTERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 156.
Special sales — See Ch. 165.
Solid waste, recycling and littering — See Ch.
176.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 180.
Zoning — See Ch. 213.
STATUTORY REFERENCES
Defacing trees — See C.G.S. § 23-65.
§ 174-1. Posting advertising materials.
No person shall place or maintain any poster, placard, sign or advertising
device of any kind upon any private premises, pole or tree or in any public
place, without obtaining the written consent of the owner of such property.
If such property is owned by the City, written consent of the head of the
department having charge of such property shall be obtained. In no case
shall matter of an offensive nature be displayed.
§ 174-2. Distribution of advertising materials.
No person shall distribute or cause to be distributed handbills or
commercial advertising matter at buildings, houses, dwellings, stores or
other structures other than by placing the same inside screen or storm
doors, under doors or in the jambs of doors.
§ 174-3. Distribution on streets and sidewalks.
It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute or cause to be distributed
upon any street or sidewalk in the City advertisements in the form of
posters, handbills or advertising cards or other devices or articles used
for the purpose of commercial advertising. This section shall not be so
construed as to prevent the distribution upon the streets and sidewalks
of any leaflets, pamphlets, circulars or dodgers which express or present
the opinions, views or beliefs of any individual or group or which solicit
membership in any group or organization.
§ 174-4. Enforcement; penalties for offenses. [Added 9-16-1996]
The provisions of this chapter may be enforced by citation, in addition
to other remedies. The citation fine amount shall be $77. The following
persons have authority to issue citations for violations pursuant to this
section: City of Meriden police officer.
§ 170-49 MERIDEN CODE § 174-4
1:382
Chapter 175
SILLY STRING
§ 175-1. Definition.
For purposes of this chapter, "silly string" means an aerosol can from which
string-shaped foam-like material may be sprayed.
§ 175-2. Restrictions on sale and use.
No person, business, firm or corporation within the City of Meriden shall:
A. Offer for sale or sell silly string or like products to a minor unless said
minor is accompanied by a parent or legal guardian at the time of the
sale.
B. Store or display silly string or like products for sale unless such items
are contained within a locked case or located behind a sale counter or
in some other manner which restricts public access to such products. No
peddler or itinerant or transient business, whether or not licensed, shall
offer silly string or like products for sale.
C. Offer for sale or sell, distribute or cause to be distributed or use or
possess silly string or like products at, upon or within public parks,
buildings, streets, sidewalks, accessways or parking lots, or any other
public property.
§ 175-3. Exemption.
This chapter shall not apply to silly string or like products in transit or
storage in interstate commerce.
§ 175-4. Penalties for offenses; enforcement.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be subject to
a fine of $99. The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by citation,
in addition to such other remedies as may be allowed by law. Any Meriden
police officer shall be authorized to issue citations for violation of this
chapter. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall also
be responsible for the cost of cleaning, repairing, or otherwise restoring
any property damaged by said violation to the condition it was before such
damage.
Chapter 176
SOLID WASTE, RECYCLING AND LITTERING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Citation process — See Ch. 86.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 107.
Housing standards — See Ch. 125.
Health nuisances — See Ch. 144.
§ 174-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 175-4
1:383
§ 176-1. General provisions.
A. Statutory authority. This chapter is authorized pursuant to § 7-148 of the
General Statutes of the State of Connecticut, as amended.
B. Short title. The short title of this chapter shall be "Solid Waste and
Recycling Ordinance."
C. Penalties and emergency corrections.
(1) The provisions of this chapter may be enforced by citation, in
addition to other remedies. Unless otherwise specified, the following
persons have authority to issue citations for violations pursuant
to this chapter: Meriden police officer, Director of Public Works,
sanitarian, Director of Health and Human Services, Associate
Director of Health or the Environmental Health Administrator.
Violation of any provision of this section, unless otherwise specified,
shall result in a citation of up to $250 per violation. Each day a
violation persists shall constitute a separate offense. [Amended
4-21-1997; 4-3-2017]
(2) Whenever the Director of Health and Human Services or his
authorized representative finds that a situation exists involving the
collection, storage or disposal of solid waste, sewage or other highly
diluted water-carried materials or substances that endangers the
public health, he may, as an emergency measure, correct the same
without notice to the owner or occupier of the premises. Upon the
completion of the work, he shall determine the reasonable cost
thereof and bill the owner or tenant therefor. Such cost shall
constitute a lien on the property which necessitated the corrective
action.
D. Power of the City Council. The City Council shall take such measures as
it deems effectual for the removal or collection of solid waste, garbage,
rubbish, recyclable solid waste and waste materials from the City and
may, in such years when a determination and sufficient appropriation for
the same has been made for such purpose, employ or make contracts
with one or more persons or corporations for the removal of garage,
rubbish, solid waste, recyclable solid waste or waste material under the
direction of the Director of Public Works. Before such employment or
contract begins, the City Council shall, by resolution, adopt regulations
concerning collection which shall state the districts from which solid
waste shall be collected, the method and frequency of collection,
bonding requirements and all other regulations required for the health,
welfare and safety of Meriden residents.
E. Power of the Department of Public Works. The Department of Public
Works is hereby given the power and authority to implement a program
of bulky waste pickup and to promulgate regulations consistent
therewith. Said regulations shall specify the items which shall constitute
bulky waste and shall set forth all procedures necessary to effectuate an
orderly and safe collection of items. In no event shall such regulations
conflict with the provisions of this chapter. Compliance with each and
§ 175-4 MERIDEN CODE § 176-1
1:384
every provision of this chapter is required during the bulky waste
pickup.
F. Transportation of garbage, rubbish or litter. The transportation of solid
waste by any person, whether or not a collector, shall be subject to the
provisions of this chapter.
G. Disposal of solid waste and recyclable solid waste. All solid waste and
recyclable solid waste disposed of in the City shall be deposited at such
sites and under such conditions as may be approved by the Director of
Public Works or his authorized representative.
H. Burning of combustible materials. Air quality standards shall be met
by not allowing burning of refuse, demolition or other combustible
materials except by permit obtained from the State of Connecticut
Department of Environmental Protection, Solid Wastes Section, with
the concurrence of the Division of Health of the Department of Human
Services and Fire Department.71
§ 176-2. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement
of this chapter:
APPROVED CONTAINER — Standard containers, dumpster-type containers
and special containers approved by the Director of Public Works.
ASHES — The cold residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke or other
combustible materials.
BUNDLE — Boxes, cartons, paper, trimmings and similar matter bound so
as not to exceed five feet in length and 6 1/2 feet in perimeter and which
shall not weigh over 75 pounds.
CENTER — The Tunxis Regional Processing Center located within the Town
of Berlin.
COLLECTOR — Any person who holds himself out for hire to collect, haul,
transport or dispose of solid waste or recyclable solid waste from
residential, business, commercial or other establishments.
DUMPSTER-TYPE CONTAINER — A large metal or plastic trash bin which
is so constructed that the container can be handled by the equipment used
for collection, which has a tight-fitting cover or closure, and which is of
watertight construction where intended or used for storage of garbage or
liquid wastes.
GARBAGE — All putrescible wastes, except sewage and body wastes,
including vegetable and animal offal and carcasses of dead animals.
LITTER — Construed to have the definition as provided in Connecticut
General Statutes, § 22a-248(4), as amended.
PERMITTEE — The holder for any use or period of time of a permit.
71.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 176-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 176-2
1:385
PERSON — An individual natural person, corporation, trust, estate,
partnership, association, joint venture, government, governmental
subdivision or agency, or any other legal entity.
RECYCLABLE SOLID WASTE — Solid waste which has been designated by
the Commissioner of Environmental Protection to be recycled, including but
not limited to cardboard, glass food and beverage containers, metal food
and beverage containers, newspapers, office paper, scrap metal, waste oil,
leaves and storage batteries, excepting hazardous waste.
RECYCLING — Processing of solid waste to reclaim materials therefrom as
defined in Connecticut General Statutes, § 22a-207.
RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY — Real estate containing one or more dwelling
units but not including hospitals, motels or hotels.
RESIDUE — Solid waste remaining after any authorized recycling facility
has processed the waste, but excluding wastes which are toxic or
hazardous.
RUBBISH — All nonputrescible waste materials except ashes, including but
not limited to nonrecyclable paper, cardboard, wood, bedding, crockery and
industrial wastes.
SOLID WASTE — All discarded materials or substances, including but not
limited to garbage, litter, rubbish, refuse, sludge from air or water pollution
control facilities or water supply treatment facilities, rubbish, ashes,
contained gaseous materials, incinerator residue, demolition and
construction debris, offal and other discarded materials and substances
resulting from industrial, commercial, mining and agricultural operations
and from community activities, but not including sewage and other highly
diluted water-carried materials or substances and those in gaseous form
or solid or dissolved materials in irrigation return flows over industrial
discharges, or source, special nuclear or by-product materials within the
meaning of the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended, and hazardous
waste or toxic waste as regulated in accordance with Connecticut General
Statutes, § 22a-220.
SOLID WASTE PLAN — An administrative and financial plan for an area
which considers solid waste collection, transportation, volume reduction,
recycling, reclamation and disposal practices for a twenty-year period, or
extensions thereof.
SPECIAL CONTAINER — Any storage container other than a standard
container which has been approved by the Director of Public Works or
authorized representative which does not violate any provision of this
chapter.
STANDARD CONTAINER — A watertight, plastic or metal container with
handles or bails, having a tight-fitting cover, not weighing over 35 pounds
when empty, not weighing over 75 pounds when filled and not having more
than 32 gallons capacity.
§ 176-3. Littering and dumping prohibited.
§ 176-2 MERIDEN CODE § 176-3
1:386
A. Pursuant to the provisions of Connecticut General Statutes,
§ 22a-250(a), as amended, no person shall throw, scatter, spill or place
or cause to be blown, scattered, spilled, thrown or placed, or otherwise
dispose of any litter upon any public property in the City of Meriden
or upon private property in the City of Meriden not owned by said
person or in the waters of the City of Meriden, including but not limited
to any public highway, public park, beach, campground, forest land,
recreational area, mobile manufactured home park, highway, road,
street or alley except:
(1) When such property is designated by the state or the City of Meriden
for the disposal of solid waste, recyclable solid waste, garbage or
refuse, and such person is authorized to use such property for such
purpose.
(2) Into a litter receptacle in such a manner that the litter will be
prevented from being carried away or deposited by the elements
upon any part of said private or public properties or waters.
B. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the placing of
approved containers which contain litter at curbside for scheduled
collection, as provided for in this chapter.
C. Pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes, § 22a-226d(a), violation of
this section is punishable by a fine of up to $1,000 per violation. Each
separate activity pursuant to Subsection A shall constitute a separate
offense.
D. Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection C above, any person, other
than a collector, who dumps more than one cubic foot in volume of
solid waste at one time in a solid waste or refuse collection container
without the authorization of the owner of such container or dumps any
material into a recycling collection container used to collect another type
of material for purposes of disposal by a collector shall be subject to
a penalty of up to $1,000, pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes,
§ 22a-226d(a)(4), as amended. Each day a violation persists shall
constitute a separate offense. This penalty shall be in addition to any civil
penalties applicable under Connecticut General Statutes, § 22a-220a(i).
E. Pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes § 22a-226d(b), any police
officer and any other person so authorized by the Chief Executive Officer
may issue a citation to any person who commits a violation under this
section.
§ 176-4. Clean community provisions. [Amended 10-2-2000]
A. The owner, occupant, tenant, lessee, proprietor, person in charge, or
person using or occupying any commercial, multiple-family structure,
institutional or industrial building, establishment or property in the
City of Meriden, jointly and severally, is hereby required to keep the
public walkways and roadways, driveways, yards, parking areas, work
areas, including but not limited to loading and unloading areas, and lots
adjacent thereto and under his or her control reasonably clean at all
times and to place sweepings in a container to prevent rescattering. If
deemed necessary or advisable by the Director of Public Works, said
owner, occupant, tenant, lessee, proprietor, person in charge, or person
§ 176-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 176-4
1:387
using or occupying any commercial, institutional or industrial building,
establishment or property in the City of Meriden shall provide approved
containers of such size, number and type as may be specified by the
Director of Public Works to be reasonably required to hold litter
generated by operations on the premises.
B. Every owner, occupant and lessee of a house or building shall be jointly
and severally required to maintain garbage and recyclable solid waste
storage areas in a clean condition and to ensure that all garbage is kept
in an approved container.
C. Property owners and general contractors in charge of a construction
site are jointly and severally required to furnish approved containers
for construction litter. All litter from construction and related activities
shall be containerized and shall be picked up and placed in the approved
containers at the end of each work day.
D. Owners of any food establishment which sells food for consumption on
premises or off premises is hereby required to keep the public walkways
and roadways, driveways, yards, parking areas, work areas, including
but not limited to loading and unloading areas, and lots adjacent thereto
clean at all times and to place sweepings in a container to prevent
rescattering within a radius of 200 feet.
E. Pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes, § 22a-226d(b), any police
officer and any other person so authorized by the Chief Executive Officer
may issue a citation to any person who commits a violation under this
section. Each day a violation persists shall constitute a separate offense.
This penalty shall be in addition to any civil penalties applicable under
Connecticut General Statutes, Section 22a-220a(i). Three citations in
one year may result in the revocation of any permits, certificates and/or
licenses issued by the City.
§ 176-5. Scavenging of solid waste or recyclable solid waste.
A. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person, other than the
generator of the solid waste or recyclable solid waste or a registered
collector acting under the provisions of this chapter, to scavenge solid
waste or recyclable solid waste for pecuniary or personal gain.
Scavenging shall include collecting, recovering, hauling, storing or
disposing of solid waste or recyclable solid waste other than as
authorized by this chapter.
B. Each occurrence of scavenging in violation of this chapter shall
constitute a separate offense.
§ 176-6. Storage of solid waste and recyclable solid waste.
A. All garbage shall be stored on the premises and shall be kept in approved
containers which shall be maintained in good condition and which shall
be kept closed at all times. Said containers shall not be placed at
curbside for the scheduled collection more than 24 hours prior to said
collection. Garbage shall not be stored by a person for more than seven
days, exclusive of holidays. If special circumstances require it, the
Director of Health and Human Services may order a shorter time period
for storage of garbage.
§ 176-4 MERIDEN CODE § 176-6
1:388
B. All rubbish and ashes shall be stored on the premises and shall be kept in
bags, bundles or approved containers, which shall be maintained in good
condition and which shall be kept closed at all times. Rubbish and ashes
shall not be stored by any person for more than 30 days. The Director
of Health and Human Services or his authorized representative may, for
cause shown, extend this period.
C. Unauthorized accumulation of garbage, rubbish, solid waste, recyclable
solid waste or waste material on any premises is hereby declared to be a
nuisance and shall be deemed a violation of this chapter.
D. No person shall cast, place, or sweep or deposit anywhere within the
City any garbage, rubbish, solid waste or recyclable solid waste or waste
material in such a manner that it may be carried or deposited by the
elements on any street, sidewalk, alley, sewer, parkway or other public
place or into or onto any occupied place in the City.
E. Any person residing in the outer district or having a place of business
or rental units using dumpster service or tenements containing more
than four units in the City shall be responsible for the removal of his
solid waste and recyclable solid waste to a lawful place either by himself
or by a lawful collector. Solid waste and recyclable solid waste shall
be disposed of at regular and frequent intervals, but in no event less
frequently than prescribed in this chapter. After containers have been
emptied, they shall be removed from the street by the property owner or
occupant within 24 hours of the day of collection and placed and stored
in any area not readily visible from the public street.
§ 176-7. Residential recycling.
A. Any person who generates solid waste from residential property,
specifically including but not limited to condominiums and residential
rental units, shall separate from the other solid waste items designated
for recycling by the Commissioner of Environmental Protection. This
residential recyclable solid waste shall be further separated by the
generator and placed in containers or packaged for collection at the curb
or designated location for solid waste pickup in a manner required by
this chapter.
B. All recyclable solid waste shall be prepared and disposed of by the
occupants of the dwelling unit in a safe and sanitary manner.
C. Notwithstanding Subsection A, the following residential recyclable solid
waste items shall be segregated and placed out for collection according
to collection schedules designated and published by the City or shall be
disposed of at sites designated and published by the City:
(1) Clear glass food and beverage containers shall be placed in a
separate recycling container and shall not be commingled with any
other recyclable product or solid waste.
(2) All other glass food and beverage containers and all metal food and
beverage containers shall be in a separate recycling container and
shall not be commingled with any other recyclable product or solid
waste.
§ 176-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 176-7
1:389
(3) Newspapers, cardboard, and office paper (fiber products) shall be
placed in paper bags and shall not be commingled with any other
recyclable product or solid waste.
(4) Leaves, storage batteries, waste oil, and scrap metal shall be
disposed of at disposal sites designated by the City.
D. The City shall supply one initial set of recycling containers to each
dwelling unit. Upon receipt of a set, the occupant of the dwelling unit
shall immediately label the recycling containers with the address of
the dwelling unit where the containers shall be used. All recycling
containers shall be so labeled the first time they are set out for
collection.
E. The initial set of recycling containers shall be the property of the City.
Upon moving or vacating the dwelling unit, the occupant shall leave the
containers with and for the use for the new occupants of the dwelling
unit. When a container is lost or damaged, the occupant of a dwelling
unit shall replace the container with a like type of container which shall
be purchased from the City's Department of Public Works or suppliers
designated by the Director of Public Works.
F. Collectors of residential recyclable products shall handle the recycling
containers in a manner which shall minimize any damage to them and
assure that the containers are available for reuse by the occupants of the
dwelling unit to which they are assigned.
G. Pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes, § 22a-226d(a), violation of
Subsections A through C is punishable by a fine of up to $1,000 per
violation. Each separate activity shall constitute a separate offense.
Pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes, § 22a-226d(b), any police
officer and any other person so authorized by the Chief Executive Officer
may issue a citation to any person who commits a violation under this
section.
§ 176-8. Other recycling.
A. On and after January 1, 1991, any person who generates solid waste
from other than residential property shall make provisions for the
separation from other solid waste of the items designated for recycling
by the Commissioner of Environmental Protection.
B. Notwithstanding Subsection A, the following items shall be separated
from other solid waste and recycled:
(1) Cardboard;
(2) Glass foods and beverage containers;
(3) Leaves;
(4) Metal food and beverage containers;
(5) Newspaper;
(6) Storage batteries;
(7) Waste oil;
(8) Scrap metal; and
(9) Office paper.
C. Any person who generates recyclable solid waste from commercial,
industrial, business or nonresidential property shall dispose of such
§ 176-7 MERIDEN CODE § 176-8
1:390
items in a safe and sanitary manner in designated receptacles for
recyclable products.
D. Owners of commercial, industrial, business, or nonresidential property
where recyclable solid waste is generated shall provide sufficient and
adequate areas and/or receptacles on the premises for the separation
and storage of recyclable products. All recycling receptacles shall be
clearly labeled as to type of recyclable product to be deposited in the
receptacle and the address of the property.
E. Owners of commercial, industrial, business or nonresidential property
shall make sure that all receptacles are maintained in a safe and sanitary
manner.
F. Pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes, § 22a-226d(a), violation of
this section is punishable by a fine of up to $1,000 per violation. Each
separate activity shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 176-9. Disposal of recyclable waste.
A. Recyclable solid waste shall be segregated and packaged as required by
the collector so as to be accepted for processing at a site determined by
the collector, or any other site or recycling solid waste facility as may be
designated by the Director of the Department of Public Works.
B. Every collector and every other person disposing of recyclable solid
waste generated within the City shall dispose of recyclable solid waste as
dictated herein. The City shall from time to time designate and publish
which items of recyclable solid waste shall be disposed of at the Center
and which items shall be disposed of at other sites. Barring instructions
to the contrary, the following rules shall apply to the disposal of
recyclable solid waste:
(1) All designated, presorted recyclable solid waste generated from
residential property shall be taken directly to the Center.
(2) All other presorted recyclable solid waste generated from residential
property shall be taken to disposal sites designated by the City.
(3) The collector shall keep and maintain records of the quantity and
type of recyclable waste delivered to each disposal site, the location
and date of delivery of such items to the site.
(4) No recyclable solid waste from any other municipality shall be
disposed of at any City disposal site, unless express, advance written
permission is first obtained from the City. The collector shall comply
with all requirements pertaining to such alternate disposal.
(5) All other solid waste generated within the City and collected from
any other source shall be separated by the collector into recyclable
solid waste and other solid waste. The recyclable solid waste shall
be further segregated and packaged to be disposable at the Center
or at such other designated disposal sites for the particular type and
category of recyclable solid waste, as designated and published by
the City.
C. Any collector who is requested or contracted to transport residue
remaining after the Center or other recyclable solid waste disposal area
has processed any portion of the City's recyclable solid waste shall
transport such solid waste to a solid waste disposal facility designated by
§ 176-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 176-9
1:391
the City. The collector shall comply with all reporting and recordkeeping
requirements of the Center or of the recyclable solid waste disposal
facility designated by the City.
D. Until one or more disposal sites have been designated for disposal of
the City's recyclable solid waste in accordance with the procedures of
Connecticut General Statutes, § 22a-220a, and until notice has been
given under Connecticut General Statutes, § 22a-220a(b), requiring the
use of any such disposal site, all recyclable solid waste shall be disposed
of in accordance with the City's existing solid waste plan and existing
agreements, as those plans and agreements may be modified from time
to time.
E. After a disposal site for the City's recyclable solid waste has been
designated, and after the City has been notified in accordance with its
contracts that the site is available for use, the City shall give notice of
the requirements for solid waste disposal. After the notice is published,
all persons collecting, transporting or disposing of recyclable solid waste
in the City shall comply with the requirements of that notice not later
than the date specified for compliance in the notice.
F. Notice that a designated disposal site for recyclable solid waste is
available for either partial or full use shall be published in the same
manner as is required for hearings before ordinances are adopted by
the City. In addition, individual notice of those requirements shall be
mailed to every person who is registered in the City as a collector.
The notice shall specify the date after which all persons disposing of
recyclable solid waste in the City must use that disposal site, and shall
generally state any other necessary requirements for that disposal, such
as limitations on the amount of recyclable solid waste which may or must
be delivered or times at which delivery must be made.
G. In addition to designating a disposal site for recyclable solid waste, the
City may from time to time designate or identify additional sites for
disposal of unacceptable waste, hazardous waste, or recyclable solid
waste in excess of the amount to be disposed of at the primary
designated site. Those sites may include transfer stations or dropoff sites
for the convenience of residents, landfills, or any other type of facility
deemed appropriate by the City. If any person will be required to use a
particular site, that site shall be designated in the manner provided for
in Connecticut General Statutes, § 22a-220a.
§ 176-10. Inspection of recyclable solid waste; violations.
A. All recyclable solid waste, from whatever source derived, is subject to
inspection at curbside or designated pickup locations by the collector
and/or the City to determine proper separation of recyclable solid waste
and solid waste as set forth in this chapter.
B. The collector shall notify the Director of Public Works of any violation of
the recycling provisions of this chapter within 24 hours of its discovery.
Notification shall be in a manner and fashion prescribed by the Director
of Public Works.
C. The Director of Public Works, upon receipt of notice of a violation from a
collector, shall give written notice to the generator of the solid waste that
§ 176-9 MERIDEN CODE § 176-10
1:392
a violation has occurred. Upon receipt of a second notice of violation as
to the same generator, the Director of Public Works shall issue a second
notice of violation which shall advise the generator that subsequent
violations shall be cause for penalties in accordance with this chapter,
and that future recyclable solid waste from said dwelling unit shall not
be collected at the sole option of the City.
D. Pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes, § 22a-226d(a), a collector's
failure to comply with the requirements of this section is punishable by a
fine of up to $1,000 per violation. Each separate violation shall constitute
a separate offense.
§ 176-11. Solid waste and recyclable solid waste collectors.
A. Any person intending to operate as a collector within the City of Meriden
is required to secure a valid permit from the Department of Public
Works prior to performing any work within the City of Meriden. Each
person must apply for the permit by utilizing the forms provided by the
Department of Public Works. These forms shall require the applicant to
furnish all information requested, including but not limited to:
(1) The name of the business and whether a corporation, partnership or
sole proprietorship;
(2) The names of all stockholders (if corporation not publicly held),
directors, partners, officers or proprietors of the business;
(3) A listing and description of the vehicles to be used for hauling solid
waste or recyclable solid waste;
(4) The names and addresses of all customers presently served, if any,
within the City;
(5) The approximate tonnage of solid waste and recyclable solid waste
expected to be collected each week;
(6) The names of all other communities served by the applicant;
(7) Evidence of insurance in an amount of at least $1,000,000 or such
other amounts and form as the City of Meriden shall determine; and
(8) Whether the applicant plans to collect recyclable solid waste
generated from residential property or from commercial, business,
municipal and other sources within the City, or both.
B. The Director of Public Works or designee shall mail written notice of
the approval or denial of an application for a permit as a collector
to the applicant within 60 days after the submission of the completed
application. The permit is effective only upon approval and issuance of
the notice of approval.
C. An approved permit is effective until the following June 30 and, unless
properly renewed, shall lapse.
D. Once the permit is approved, the collector is required to comply with the
following terms:
(1) Each collector shall update the information contained on the
application form at least once a year at the time of permit renewal;
(2) The initial permit fee shall be $50 per vehicle, and each annual
renewal fee shall $50 per vehicle. Permit fees shall not be prorated;
(3) All vehicles to be used in collecting must be approved by the
Director of Public Works;
§ 176-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 176-11
1:393
(4) Collectors must reimburse the City of Meriden for their share of any
charges levied by the Center for disposal of recyclable solid waste;
(5) Collectors must comply with all other applicable provisions of this
chapter;
(6) Every collector shall obtain and utilize reporting forms provided by
the Director of Public Works and shall keep and maintain accurate
records of all information requested, including but not limited to the
following:
(a) The amount of recyclable solid waste derived from each
municipality recorded by truckload;
(b) The disposal facility to which the waste is taken and the total
tonnage disposed of at such facility(ies).
E. The Director of Public Works may refuse to grant a permit to any
applicant, or may suspend the permit of any registered collector, if
that person has violated or does violate any provision of state statute
pertaining to solid waste or recyclable solid waste; violates any provision
of this chapter; is not insurable in accordance with this chapter; or is
otherwise deemed unsuitable as a collector. A suspension of a permit
may not exceed a period of 180 days for any one violation, provided
that repeated or willful violation of this chapter may result in permanent
revocation of the permit without right to reapply.
F. No denial, suspension or revocation notice will be effective until the
person adversely affected has been notified in writing of that decision
and the reasons for it and has been afforded a reasonable opportunity
to appear at an informal hearing before the Director of Public Works to
respond. Mailing a notice to the address listed on the application shall
be deemed adequate notice.
G. Notice of revocation of a permit shall be delivered by certified mail to
the last known address of the permittee. Any person aggrieved by a
decision to revoke a permit may appeal such decision within 10 days of
receipt of notice of revocation upon a form provided by the Director of
Public Works. A hearing shall be scheduled no later than five days after
receipt of the notice of appeal.
H. The Public Utilities Commission shall conduct the hearings on the appeal
of a revocation of a permit unless waived by permittee. Such hearing
shall be heard within 40 days of the Director's decision. At such hearing,
the permittee shall have the opportunity to present evidence to the
Commission relative to the merits of the revocation of the permit. The
permittee shall also have the right to examine any evidence relied upon
by the Director of Public Works in revoking the permit and shall have
the opportunity to cross-examine witnesses. The Commission, upon the
evidence presented, shall make a finding upon the record and shall issue
an order no later than five days from the date of the hearing. Said
order shall either sustain the appeal, whereupon the permit shall be
immediately reinstated, modify the order of the Director of Public Works,
or uphold the order of the said Director.72
72.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 176-11 MERIDEN CODE § 176-11
1:394
I. Violation of any provision of this section shall subject the collector to
permit revocation and/or a penalty of up to $99 per violation. Each day
a violation persists shall constitute a separate offense.
J. Notwithstanding the penalties provided in Subsection I above, any
collector who dumps more than one cubic foot in volume of solid waste
at one time in an area not designated for such disposal by the City
or who knowingly mixes other solid waste with items designated for
recycling pursuant to the provisions of Connecticut General Statutes,
§ 22a-241b, or this chapter, shall be subject to a penalty of up to $1,000,
pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes, § 22a-226d(a)(3), as
amended. Each day a violation persists shall constitute a separate
offense. This penalty shall be in addition to any civil penalties applicable
under Connecticut General Statutes, § 22a-220a(f). Pursuant to
Connecticut General Statutes, § 22a-226d(b), any police officer and any
other person so authorized by the Chief Executive Officer may issue a
citation to any collector who commits a violation under this section.
§ 176-12. Transportation of solid waste and recyclable solid waste.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to transport any
garbage, trash, solid waste, sewage, filth or other cargo upon the public
thoroughfares in the City if the same is of a character or substance which
is likely to be deposited from the motor vehicle onto the public right-ofway
unless the same is secured by containers, tarpaulin, or other device
in such fashion as to effectively prevent such deposit on the public rightof-
way.
B. The duties and responsibilities herein imposed shall be applicable alike
to the owner of the motor vehicle and the operator thereof.
§ 176-13. Establishment of landfill reclamation account.
A. There is hereby established an interest-bearing account titled "landfill
reclamation." All revenues generated by any permit shall be deposited in
said account.
B. Said moneys in the landfill reclamation account shall be held in reserve
for such time as the existing landfill is required to close. At the time of
said closure, this account shall be used to finance the costs of closing the
landfill and to help defray increased costs then and there existing for the
disposal of trash.
C. The City Council may, by majority vote at any time, fund a necessary
capital expense of the landfill operation from said landfill reclamation
account.
Chapter 177
SPRAY PAINT AND MARKERS
§ 177-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
§ 176-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 177-1
1:395
GRAFFITI — Any letters, numbers, word or words, writing or inscription,
symbols, drawings, carving, etching or any other marking of any nature
whatsoever which defaces, obliterates, covers, alters, damages or destroys
the real or personal property of another. This chapter shall not be construed
to prohibit easily removable chalk markings on the public sidewalks and
streets used in connection with traditional children's games.
INDELIBLE MARKER — Any felt-tip marker, china marker or similar device
that is not water soluble, which has a flat or angled writing surface of 1/2
inch or greater.
MINOR — Any person under the age of 18 years.
PURCHASE — The act of obtaining an item for money from any retail
establishment.
§ 177-2. Sale to minors.
A. No person shall sell or otherwise transfer any spray paint containers
or indelible markers to a minor unless said minor is accompanied by a
parent or legal guardian at the time of purchase or transfer.
B. No minor shall, at the time of purchase of the items specified in the
above subsection, knowingly furnish fraudulent evidence of majority,
including but not limited to a motor vehicle operator's license, a
registration certificate issued by the Selective Service, an identification
card issued to a member of the armed forces or any document issued by
a federal, state or municipal government.
§ 177-3. Graffiti restricted; penalties for offenses; responsibility for
restoration of property. [Amended 9-19-1994]
A. No person shall write, paint or place any paint, chalk or any other
substance or substances or otherwise mark, scratch, carve or etch
graffiti on the real or personal property of another, whether said real or
personal property is publicly or privately owned, unless the owner of the
property has specifically consented to the same prior to the commission
of such act or acts.
B. Any person violating any provision of this chapter, upon conviction
thereof, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $100 or by
imprisonment for not more than 30 days, or both.
C. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall also have the
responsibility for cleaning, repairing, painting or otherwise restoring the
damaged property to the condition it was in prior to being damaged.
§ 177-4. Responsibility of property owner; removal by City.
[Amended 9-19-1994]
A. In the event that the person violating § 177-3 of this chapter is not
identified within 30 days of such violation, the owner, agent or person
in charge of any commercial property, vacant residential property or
roadway shall thereupon remove any and all graffiti located on such
property or roadway within 30 days of notice to remove the same by the
Department of Development and Enforcement.
§ 177-1 MERIDEN CODE § 177-4
1:396
B. In the event of any violation hereof, the City may cause such graffiti to
be removed and enter upon such property for that purpose, upon 48
hours' notice, and the expense therefor shall be charged to the person(s)
whose duty it was to remove such graffiti and the debt therefor shall
be collectible by the City; provided, however, that no such charge shall
be made if such person agrees to allow the City entry to remove such
graffiti, pay the cost of materials necessary therefor, and hold the City
harmless for any liability occasioned thereby.
C. Any person violating Subsection B of this section shall be subject to the
penalties set forth in § 177-3B.
Chapter 180
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 77.
Curfew — See Ch. 91.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 153.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 156.
Sewers — See Ch. 170.
Signs and posters — See Ch. 174.
Solid waste, recycling and littering — See Ch.
176.
Trees — See Ch. 196.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 198.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 200.
Water — See Ch. 207.
§ 177-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 177-4
1:397

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Adopted 10-7-1963 as Ch. 22, Art. I, of the 1963 Code]
§ 180-1. Compliance with direction of Council. [Amended
9-15-1980]
It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to comply with any direction of the
City Council given under the provisions of this chapter in connection with
any permit issued or permission granted by it.
§ 180-2. Consent required to establish streets and lay pipes.
No person shall lay out, order or make any new street in the City except
with the consent of the Council, and no mains or pipes for water or sewer
service shall be laid by any department of the City in any street in the City
until such consent has been obtained.
§ 180-3. Conditional acceptance of streets. [Added 2-5-1973;
amended 9-15-1980]
A. Unaccepted streets that need minor corrections that cannot be
accomplished due to seasonal weather conditions shall be accepted on a
conditional acceptance basis in order to have adequate services supplied
to the residents. The requirements for conditional acceptance are as
follows:
(1) Conditions which must be corrected must be listed in detail and
corrections necessary.
(2) Such conditions shall be corrected by the developer within six
months of conditional acceptance, unless other time limits are so
noted in the original conditional acceptance.
(3) Prior to conditional acceptance a cash bond shall be posted with the
Division of Planning to cover the costs of correcting the conditions
above by the Department of Public Works if this action becomes
necessary. The amount of bond necessary shall be set by the
Engineering Division of the Department of Public Works and the
Division of Planning. The Division of Planning shall notify the City
Council that such bond has been posted prior to submission of a
conditional acceptance recommendation to the Council.
B. Final acceptance of a street by the City Council shall not be made
until all conditions above have been corrected to the satisfaction of the
Planning Commission and the Department of Public Works.
§ 180-4. House numbering system.73
Every space of 20 feet frontage upon the streets of the City shall be a lot for
the purpose of numbering. The numbering shall be done upon the following
plan, the even numbers to be assigned to the left side and the odd numbers
to the right side of every street:
73.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 146, Numbering of Buildings.
§ 180-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-4
1:399
A. Main Street, commencing at Colony Street and running westerly to
the City limits, shall be West Main Street, and the numbering shall
commence from Colony Street. Main Street, commencing at Colony
Street and running easterly to the City limits, shall be East Main Street,
and the numbering shall commence from Colony Street.
B. Broad Street shall be numbered from the south limits of the City
northerly to the north limits thereof.
C. North Colony Street shall be numbered northerly to the City limits.
D. South Colony Street shall be numbered southerly to the City limits.
E. All streets east of North Colony Street and South Colony Street running
easterly shall be so numbered, commencing at the western terminus.
F. All streets west of North Colony Street and South Colony Street running
westerly shall be so numbered, commencing at the eastern terminus.
G. All streets north of East Main Street and West Main Street running
northerly shall be so numbered, commencing at the southern terminus.
H. All streets south of East Main Street and West Main Street running
southerly shall be so numbered, commencing at the northern terminus.
§ 180-5. Permission to plant trees or shrubs required. [Amended
9-15-198074]
No person shall place or set out in any street or sidewalk of the City any
tree, bush or shrub without first obtaining the consent of the Department of
Public Works.
§ 180-6. Maintenance and removal of trees. [Amended 9-15-1980]
Whenever any tree along any street or sidewalk abutting on any premises in
the City becomes diseased or decayed or in any way dangerous to persons
using such street or sidewalk, the owner of such premises shall cause such
tree to be made safe by trimming or removing the same within 48 hours
after notice so to do has been given by the Department of Public Works. If
any person fails or neglects to comply with such an order, the Department
of Public Works shall trim or remove such tree, and the expense thereof
shall be chargeable to the person to whom such order was directed and
collectible by the City in the same manner that other debts due the City are
collected.
§ 180-7. Injury to vegetation.
It shall be unlawful for any person to injure any tree, shrub or other
vegetation planted on the streets or sidewalks of the City.
§ 180-8. Writing on sidewalks.75 [Amended 9-15-1980; 9-16-1996]
A. No person shall write or print upon a sidewalk in the City without the
permission of the City Council. The Council may revoke any permission
given under this section at any time.
74.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 196, Trees.
75.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 177, Spray Paint and Markers.
§ 180-4 MERIDEN CODE § 180-8
1:400
B. The provisions of this section may be enforced by citation, in addition
to other remedies. The citation fine amount shall be $77. The following
persons have authority to issue citations for violations pursuant to this
section: City of Meriden police officer.
§ 180-9. Deposit of injurious substances.
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or cast in or upon any street,
sidewalk or public place in the City any wire, nails, glass, tin or other thing
liable to injure persons or property.
§ 180-10. Making fires on pavement.
It shall be unlawful for any person to make or cause to be made any fire
upon any permanent pavement in the City.
§ 180-11. Causing obstructions by loitering.
It shall be unlawful for three or more persons to stand together or near
one another upon any street or sidewalk in the City in such manner as to
obstruct the free passage of traffic thereon.
§ 180-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-11
1:401

ARTICLE II
Excavations
[Adopted 10-7-1963 as Ch. 22, Art. II, of the 1963 Code]
§ 180-12. Promulgation of rules and regulations. [Amended
9-15-1980]
The City Council may adopt from time to time such rules, regulations and
specifications for the conduct of work incidental to the excavation of streets
and sidewalks in the City as it may deem for the best interest of the City.
§ 180-13. Permit required. [Amended 9-15-1980; 10-21-1996;
6-19-2000]
A. No person shall make any excavation in or dig below the surface of
any street, roadway or sidewalk, do any work in or on, or close any
or obstruct any portion thereof for such purposes unless he has first
obtained a permit to do so issued by the office of the City Engineer.
B. In the event that a street or roadway or any portion thereof is going to
be closed, the permit shall be issued at least 48 hours in advance of said
closure.
C. In the case of an emergency, Subsection B may be waived at the
discretion of the office of the City Engineer.
§ 180-14. Application for permit. [Amended 9-15-1980]
No permit shall be granted to excavate in any paved or macadam-surfaced
roadway in the City until an application signed by the party seeking a permit
therefor has been made in writing to the Department of Public Works,
stating fully the location and purpose for which such excavation is to be
made and agreeing to pay all costs of making and refilling the opening,
to replace the pavement or road surface in a manner satisfactory to the
Department of Public Works, to be responsible for all damage which may
arise from such opening or work connected therewith and to hold the City
harmless therefrom.
§ 180-15. Deposit required.
A. No permit to make any excavation shall be granted unless or until there
has been deposited with the Engineering Division of the Department of
Public Works a bond in the form of a performance bond, certified check,
or cash, or in such other form as may be approved by the Corporation
Counsel, in the amount of $1,000 for a trench of not more than 30 feet
in length. In the event that an excavation is longer than 30 feet an
additional sum at the rate of $25 per foot over 30 feet shall be required.
Said bond shall be held for a period of one year and shall condition the
proper performance of said excavating, backfilling and resurfacing in
accordance with this article and City specifications and shall indemnify
the City for any expenses incurred in refilling the excavations and
restoring the pavements to their former condition. [Amended
9-8-1970; 9-15-1980; 11-16-1987; 6-20-198876]
§ 180-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-15
1:403
B. In the event that more than one permit is issued to an applicant, the
Director of Public Works may waive the posting of more than one bond
to cover the additional permits, provided that the first bond deposited
shall be a continuing bond to cover all work to be done under the initial
permit and under any subsequent permits to be issued to the applicant
during the continuance of said bond.
§ 180-16. Safety precautions. [Amended 9-15-1980; 10-21-1996]
A. Every person who makes any excavation in or digs below the surface of
any street or sidewalk shall protect the public against injury therefrom
by providing barriers and warning lights and taking any other
precautions which may be deemed necessary by the Engineering
Division.
B. The provisions of this section may be enforced by citation, in addition
to other remedies. The citation fine amount shall be $77. The following
persons have authority to issue citations for violations pursuant to this
section: City of Meriden police officer and/or City Engineer.
§ 180-17. Inspection; return of deposit. [Amended 9-8-1970;
9-15-1980]
Immediately following notification by a permit holder that the backfilling
of any excavation and pavement reconstruction or road surfacing has been
completed, an inspection by a duly authorized representative of the City
of Meriden shall be made to determine whether, in his opinion, the repair
has been satisfactorily completed and the reconstructed pavement or road
surfacing is equivalent to that existing before the excavation was made.
If, in his opinion, the repair has been satisfactorily completed and the
reconstructed pavement or road surfacing is equivalent to that existing
before the excavation was made, a report to that effect shall be put in the
file, and, after sufficient time has elapsed to allow for a settling of said
roadway, if the repair still seems to be satisfactorily completed as set forth
above, the deposit required by § 180-15 shall be returned, unless it is a
continuing bond as set forth in said section.
§ 180-18. Repair of unsatisfactory work. [Amended 11-14-1966;
9-8-1970; 9-15-1980]
If the backfilling of an excavation is made in an unsatisfactory manner it
shall be remade in accordance with the directions of the Department of
Public Works. If, after a lapse of 30 days from the first inspection, the
work shall be found upon reinspection by the duly authorized representative
of the City still to have been unsatisfactorily done and the reconstructed
pavement or road surface is declared by such representative not to be
equivalent to that existing before the excavation was made, and if the
permit holder has not furnished the Department with satisfactory reasons
as to why such condition has not been remedied, the Department of Public
76.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 180-15 MERIDEN CODE § 180-18
1:404
Works shall, either with forces under its control or by contract, have the
work properly completed, and the cost of so doing shall be deducted from
the deposit made by the permit holder, and any balance remaining shall be
returned to him. If the cost of repair by the City exceeds $300, the excess
shall be chargeable to such permit holder and shall be collectible by the City
in the same manner that other debts due the City are collected.
§ 180-19. Liability for damage to main and pipes.
All damage to street mains or service pipes caused by careless excavating
or by negligent backfilling of excavations shall be chargeable to the person
causing the damage, and the expense of repairing the same shall be
collectible by the City in the same manner that other debts due the City are
collected.
§ 180-20. Notifications required. [Amended 6-19-2000]
A. Upon issuance of any such permit as provided for in this article, the
office of the City Engineer shall cause to be issued to each business
or commercial establishment located within 750 feet of any street or
sidewalk which is to be closed as provided for in the application for such
permit a letter notifying such businesses or commercial establishments
of the date and time such street or sidewalk is to be closed.
B. In the event that a street or roadway or any portion thereof is going to
be closed, the City Manager's office shall notify each business owner,
commercial establishment or resident located within 750 feet of the
closed portion of street or roadway prior to said closure.
C. In the case of an emergency, Subsection B may be waived at the
discretion of the office of the City Engineer.
§ 180-21. Submission of plans for underground construction.
[Amended 9-15-1980]
Before constructing any part of any underground conduit system, pipeline
or other structure, any person undertaking such underground construction
shall file with the City Engineer for his inspection and approval detailed
plans and specifications showing the kind of material to be used and the
method of construction to be followed. All such construction shall conform
as nearly as is practicable to such plans and specifications and shall be
subject to the supervision and approval of the City. Upon completion of such
work, detailed plans showing the work as actually constructed shall be filed
with the Department of Public Works.
§ 180-22. Permit required for certain construction. [Amended
9-15-1980; 10-21-1996]
A. No person shall construct or maintain any vault, cellarway or areaway,
or any cover, grating or door above the same, in any street or sidewalk
in the City without a permit so to do issued by the Engineering Division.
B. The provisions of this section may be enforced by citation, in addition
to other remedies. The citation fine amount shall be $77. The following
§ 180-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-22
1:405
persons have authority to issue citations for violations pursuant to this
section: City of Meriden police officer and/or City Engineer.
§ 180-23. Liability; bond required.
A. Each permit issued under the preceding section shall be subject to
the conditions that the person to whom it is issued shall be liable to
any person who receives actionable injury through the exercise of such
permit and shall be liable to indemnify and reimburse the City for any
loss sustained by it by reason of the issuance of such permit. Such
conditions shall be obligatory upon any person who shall receive such a
permit, without notice other than that to be implied from this section.
B. Each holder of such a permit shall file a surety bond, public liability
policy or other form of security satisfactory to the Department of Public
Works in a sum sufficient to indemnify the City for any liability incurred
by it as a result of the issuance of such permit. [Amended 9-15-1980]
§ 180-24. Restoration of pavement.
A. Any person constructing and maintaining a vault, cellarway or areaway
in a street or sidewalk in the City shall restore the surrounding surface
of such street or sidewalk to its former condition after the construction
work is completed and shall maintain such surface to the satisfaction of
the Engineering Division for a space of two feet from the outer edges of
the frame of such opening. [Amended 9-15-1980]
B. No permit shall be issued for such vault, cellarway or areaway except on
condition that the holder thereof will comply with the provisions of this
section.
C. The provisions of this section may be enforced by citation, in addition
to other remedies. The citation fine amount shall be $77. The following
persons have authority to issue citations for violations pursuant to this
section: City of Meriden police officer and/or City Engineer. [Amended
10-21-1996]
§ 180-25. Safeguards required.
No person maintaining a vault, cellarway or areaway in any street or
sidewalk in the City shall uncover such opening until a suitable cage or
guard is placed around it.
§ 180-22 MERIDEN CODE § 180-25
1:406
ARTICLE III
Obstructions and Encroachments
[Adopted 10-7-1963 as Ch. 22, Art. III, of the 1963 Code]
§ 180-26. Obstructing streets and sidewalks prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit any act which violates the
provisions of this Code or of any ordinance or rule or regulation
promulgated thereunder relating to the obstruction of the streets and
sidewalks of the City or the interruption of free passage along the same
or to aid, advise, abet or encourage the commission of any such act. Any
such act shall be deemed malicious if repeated or continued after the person
committing such act has been forbidden to repeat or continue the same.
§ 180-27. Authority to issue citation. [Added 9-16-1996]
The provisions of §§ 180-25 and 180-26 may be enforced by citation, in
addition to other remedies. The citation fine amount shall be $77. The
following persons have authority to issue citations for violations pursuant to
this section: City of Meriden police officer.
§ 180-28. Authority to keep streets and sidewalks unobstructed.
Every executive or police officer of the City shall have authority to keep
the streets and sidewalks of the City open and free of obstruction and to
require all persons unlawfully obstructing such streets and sidewalks to
desist therefrom whenever the act of obstruction is done in view of such
officer.
§ 180-29. Removal of obstructions.
Whenever anything unlawfully placed or kept on any street or sidewalk in
the City is removed by any department or officer of the City, the expense
of such removal shall be chargeable to the person causing such obstruction
and shall be collectible by the City in the same manner that other debts due
the City are collected, provided that, where practicable, such person has
been given reasonable notice and a reasonable time within which to remove
such obstruction.
§ 180-30. Restrictions on placing materials on street. [Amended
9-16-1996]
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to place or maintain any article or
merchandise or wares or any case, box or container therefor or any
packing boxes upon any street or sidewalk in the City, except for the
purpose of transit or delivery and for such time and in such manner as
shall be reasonably necessary for such purpose.
B. The provisions of this section may be enforced by citation, in addition
to other remedies. The citation fine amount shall be $77. The following
persons have authority to issue citations for violations pursuant to this
section: City of Meriden police officer.
§ 180-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-31
1:407
§ 180-31. Moving buildings. [Amended 9-15-1980; 10-21-1996]
A. No building or other structure shall be moved through any street in
the City without a permit so to do issued by the Engineering Division.
The Division shall prescribe in writing the terms and manner of moving
buildings through the streets. Any person desiring a permit to move
a building shall sign a written guaranty before receiving such permit
agreeing to pay all expenses that may necessarily be incurred by the City
in protecting the wires or poles of the fire alarm telegraph system from
injury to which they may be exposed by such removal and to pay for all
damage to the pavement of the streets and sidewalks to the satisfaction
of the Engineering Division. Such number and kinds of lights as the
Engineering Division shall direct shall be placed on such building each
night during the process of removal.
B. The provisions of this section may be enforced by citation, in addition
to other remedies. The citation fine amount shall be $77. The following
persons have authority to issue citations for violations pursuant to this
section: City of Meriden police officer and/or City Engineer.
§ 180-32. Buildings under construction. [Amended 9-15-1980]
A. The Department of Public Works shall prescribe in writing the terms and
manner of occupation of streets and sidewalks in front of buildings in
process of construction or repair with building materials or in any other
manner.
B. No person shall place or cause to be placed on any street or sidewalk in
the City any obstruction of earth, stone, lumber, metal or other materials
without a permit from the Department so to do. All such materials, if left
on the streets or sidewalks overnight, shall be lighted as specified by the
Department.
C. The owner of every lot upon which any building is being erected, if
such building is located upon the line of any street or within eight
feet thereof, shall, until the cellarway and doors thereof are completed,
either keep such premises securely fenced from the street or maintain in
front thereof at night such number and kinds of lights as the Department
shall direct.
§ 180-33. Encroachments. [Amended 9-15-1980]
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or maintain or cause to be
erected or maintained upon any street or sidewalk in the City any
permanent building, erection, fence, gate or other obstruction or to erect or
maintain any temporary building or other structure without a permit from
the Department of Public Works so to do.
§ 180-34. Gates and doors opening outward.
No person shall permit any gate or door belonging to premises owned,
occupied or controlled by him to swing into, over or on any street or
sidewalk in the City.
§ 180-31 MERIDEN CODE § 180-35
1:408
§ 180-35. Poles and wires. [Amended 9-15-1980]
All telegraph, telephone and electric light and power wires, together with
the poles and supports upon which the same have been erected, shall be
under the superintendence, regulation and control of the Department of
Public Works, and the City Council may make such rules and regulations
and issue such orders with reference to the manner of locating and erecting
such poles and wires as it shall deem best for public convenience and safety.
Whenever the City Council shall take any action under this section it shall
notify in writing the manager of the corporation owning and controlling the
poles and wires with reference to which such action is taken, and, if any
order or regulation is not promptly complied with, the Council may take
down and remove the poles and wires to which such order or regulation
relates and may refuse to permit the same to be again erected except in
compliance therewith.
§ 180-36. Awnings. [Amended 9-15-1980]
No person shall place or maintain any awning over any part of any street or
sidewalk in the City unless he has obtained a permit from the Department
of Public Works so to do. No such awning shall be erected unless the same
is securely fastened and the lowest part thereof is at least seven feet above
the sidewalk, and no part of any such awning shall extend beyond the outer
sidewalk line. Any permit granted under this section shall be revocable by
the Department.
§ 180-37. Signs.77
No person shall place, suspend or maintain any sign of any type across,
over, on or beside any sidewalk or street in the City without the permission
of the Department of Public Works. The permission authorized by this
section shall be revocable, and it shall be unlawful for any person to fail to
remove any sign for which such permission is given within 24 hours after
receiving written notice from the Department so to do.
§ 180-38. Flags and banners. [Amended 9-15-1980]
No person shall suspend or display any flag or banner made of cloth or
canvas over or on any sidewalk or street in the City without permission from
the Department of Public Works so to do. The Department may revoke such
permission at any time.
77.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 174, Signs and Posters.
§ 180-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-38
1:409

ARTICLE IV
Construction and Maintenance of Sidewalks, Curbs and Gutters
[Adopted 10-7-1963 as Ch. 22, Art. IV, of the 1963 Code]
§ 180-39. General specifications. [Amended 7-6-1965; 9-15-1980]
A. All sidewalks laid or constructed in the City of Meriden shall be of
portland cement concrete, except that sidewalks may be constructed of
bituminous concrete or other material when authorized in writing by the
Planning Commission.
B. All sidewalks shall be not less than five feet in width unless specially
ordered by the Planning Commission to be of less width.
C. All curbs laid upon any street in the City shall be of portland cement
concrete or granite not less than six inches wide and 20 inches deep,
except that outside the Second Taxation District curbs may be of
bluestone material when specially authorized in writing by the Planning
Commission. Curb intersections at street corners shall be curved
curbing with a radius of not less than 10 feet. Combination curbs and
gutters of bituminous concrete or other material may be used only when
specially authorized in writing by the Planning Commission.
§ 180-40. Unauthorized construction prohibited. [Amended
9-15-1980]
It shall be unlawful for any person to lay any sidewalk, curb or gutter in
the City without the authorization or order of the Planning Commission, and
any such work may be removed as an obstruction of the street.
§ 180-41. Repair of sidewalks. [Amended 9-15-1980]
A. After having been notified by the Department of Public Works so to do, it
shall be unlawful for any person not to properly repair any portion of a
sidewalk adjoining his property within the time specified in such notice.
B. Upon the default or neglect of any person to comply with such notice
of the Department of Public Works to repair any portion of a sidewalk
adjoining his property, the Department of Public Works may construct
or repair such sidewalk, and the expense thereof shall be chargeable
to the person whose duty it was to repair said sidewalk and shall be
collectible by the City in the same manner that other debts due the
City are collected, and said expense shall be a lien upon the premises
adjoining such sidewalk, provided that the Department of Public Works
shall cause a certificate of lien to be recorded in the City and Town
Clerk's office within 60 days from the completion of such construction or
repair.
§ 180-42. Removal of grass and weeds.
Whenever a sidewalk has been laid in the City, the occupant or, if there is
no occupant, the owner of any premises abutting upon such sidewalk shall
keep the grass or weeds properly cut or removed in the area between the
property line of such premises and the curbline.
§ 180-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-43
1:411
§ 180-43. Safety sidewalks. [Added 4-1-1968; amended 9-15-1980]
A. Need of safety sidewalks shall be determined by the City Council.
B. Priority shall be determined by the City Council.
C. Wherever possible a buffer strip will be installed at the discretion of the
Director of Public Works.
D. Obstacles such as signs, utility poles and trees shall be moved by order
of the Director of Public Works before installation of safety sidewalks.
E. Safety sidewalks will be installed by the recommendation of the Board
of Education and Director of Public Works with the final approval of the
City Council.
F. Existing and future complaints from property owners of newly installed
safety sidewalks shall be properly disposed of by the Planning
Commission.
§ 180-44. Construction of sidewalks by City or under City contract.
[Added 3-19-1984]
The City assumes the right, during construction of sidewalks by the City or
under City contract, to excavate or fill as necessary back of the street line
and to grade and restore the area as necessary to facilitate said changes
required by the sidewalk installation.
§ 180-43 MERIDEN CODE § 180-44
1:412
ARTICLE V
Snow and Ice Removal
[Adopted 10-7-1963 as Ch. 21 of the 1963 Code]
§ 180-45. Enforcement authority. [Amended 9-16-1996]
A. The Police Department, under the direction of the Chief of Police, shall
be responsible for the enforcement of this article.
B. The provisions of this article may be enforced by citation, in addition to
other remedies. The following persons have authority to issue citations
for violations pursuant to these sections: City of Meriden police officer.
§ 180-46. Removal of snow from sidewalks. [Amended 5-2-1983]
The owner, or the owner's agent, of any premises abutting upon any street
or public place in the City where there is a sidewalk shall cause all snow to
be removed from such sidewalk within 12 hours after sunrise.
§ 180-47. Remedying icy sidewalks. [Amended 5-2-1983]
Whenever any sidewalk mentioned in the preceding section, or any part
thereof, is covered with ice, the owner, or the owner's agent, of the abutting
premises shall, within the space of six hours thereafter, during the daytime,
cause such sidewalk to be made safe and convenient by removing the
ice therefrom or by covering the same with sand or some other suitable
substance and renewing such application as often as may be necessary to
keep such sidewalk safe and convenient.
§ 180-48. Clearing of sidewalks by City. [Amended 5-2-1983;
3-19-200178]
The Director of Public Works, or his designee, shall cause all sidewalks
which the owner, or the owner's agent, of the abutting property neglects
to clean and make safe for travel, by removing the snow and ice thereon
in accordance with this article, to be cleaned and made safe for public
travel by removing snow and ice therefrom, and the cost thereof shall be
chargeable to such owner or owner's agent and a lien on such abutting
property.
§ 180-49. Removal of snow from roofs.
The occupant or, if there is no occupant, the owner or agent of any building
standing upon or so near the line of a street that snowslides from the
roof of such building may endanger public travel shall, within a reasonable
time after the termination or abatement of a snowstorm, cause the snow
to be removed from the roof thereof in such manner as will not endanger
travelers. Whenever the roof of any building so situated shall, for the space
of 24 hours after the termination or abatement of a snowstorm, remain
78.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 180-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-49
1:413
encumbered with snow which endangers public safety, the Chief of Police
shall cause such snow to be removed by the City, and the expense thereof
shall be chargeable to the owner or occupant whose duty it was to remove
such snow and shall be collectible by the City in the same manner that other
debts due the City are collected.
§ 180-50. Depositing snow and ice on streets prohibited.
No person shall throw or put or cause to be thrown or put any snow or
ice from private premises or from any area in the rear or outside of the
sidewalk into any street in the City in such manner or to such an extent as
unreasonably to impede or cause inconvenience to public travel.
§ 180-51. Liability for injury caused by snow or ice on sidewalks.
[Added 5-17-1982]
A. Pursuant to Public Act No. 81-340,79 the City of Meriden shall not be
liable to any person injured in person or property caused by the presence
of ice or snow on a public sidewalk, unless the City of Meriden is the
owner or in possession and control of the land abutting such sidewalk,
other than land used as a highway or street. The City of Meriden shall be
liable for its affirmative acts with respect to such sidewalk.
B. The owner or person in possession and control of land abutting a public
sidewalk shall have the same duty of care with respect to the presence of
ice or snow on such sidewalk toward the portion of the sidewalk abutting
his property as the City of Meriden had prior to the effective date of this
section, and the owner or person in possession and control shall be liable
to persons injured in person or property where a breach of said duty is
the proximate cause of said injury.
C. No action to recover damages for injury to the person or to property
caused by the presence of ice or snow on a public sidewalk against a
person who owns or is in possession and control of land abutting a public
sidewalk shall be brought but within two years from the date when the
injury is first sustained.
79.Editor's Note: See C.G.S. § 7-163a.
§ 180-49 MERIDEN CODE § 180-51
1:414
Chapter 185
SWIMMING POOLS
§ 185-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
AUTHORIZED AGENT — The person designated by the Director of Health
and Human Services to act on the Director's behalf in the performance of
the Director's duties.
DIRECTOR OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES — The local Director of
Health and Human Services or the Director's authorized agent.
HEALTH DIVISION — The Division of Health of the Meriden Department of
Human Services.
NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION — An organization holding tax-exempt status
as defined by the United States Internal Revenue Code, 26 U.S.C. § 501 et
seq., which is operated by an entity which is not associated with a branch of
federal, state, or local government.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company, municipality, political subdivision, community, governmental
agency, club, organization, or other entity owning or operating a public
pool.
PERSON IN CHARGE — The individual present at the public pool who is
the apparent supervisor of the public pool at the time of the inspection. If
no individual claims to be the supervisor, then any employee present at the
public pool shall be deemed to be the person in charge for the purposes of
this chapter.
PUBLIC HEALTH CODE — The Public Health Code of the State of
Connecticut.
PUBLIC POOL — Any artificial basin as defined in Section 19-13-B33b of the
Public Health Code.
SWIMMING POOL OPERATOR — A person over the age of majority who is
responsible for the daily operation of the public pool and who shall be held
responsible for compliance with all the applicable provisions of this chapter
and the Public Health Code.
§ 185-2. Authority.
This chapter is enacted pursuant to C.G.S. §§ 7-148, 19a-206 and 19a-207,
Section 19-13-B33b of the Public Health Code and any other applicable
Connecticut General Statutes.
§ 185-3. Permit required for public pool; application.
§ 180-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-3
1:415
A. No person shall operate, maintain, or permit the operation of any public
pool in the City of Meriden without having a current valid permit from
the Director of Health and Human Services.
B. Any person desiring to operate a public pool in the City of Meriden
shall, at least 10 days before the opening date, make application for such
a permit on the forms provided by the Director of Health and Human
Services.
C. The application shall include, at a minimum, the following information:
(1) The name and address of the public pool.
(2) The name and mailing address of the owner or owners of the public
pool, including the names of the corporate officers, if applicable.
(3) The name of the swimming pool operator who shall be responsible
for the daily operation of the pool.
(4) The name of the swimming pool operator who shall be responsible
for the compliance with all the applicable codes and ordinances, the
Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) regulations
and any other regulations as shall be deemed necessary by the
Director of Health and Human Services.
D. Each public pool at a single location which has its own recirculation and
water treatment system shall be deemed to be a separate public pool
and shall be required to have a separate permit.
E. Only those persons who comply with the requirements of the Meriden
City Code, the Public Health Code and Occupational Safety and Health
Administration (OSHA) regulations shall be entitled to receive and retain
a permit.
F. Prior to the issuance of a permit, the Director of Health and Human
Services or the Director's authorized agent shall inspect the public
pool to determine compliance with the provisions of this chapter, the
requirements of the Meriden City Code, the Public Health Code and
Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) regulations, and
any other applicable statutes, ordinances, rules or regulations.
G. Permits shall be issued annually and shall be valid from the date they are
issued until April 30 of the next year, or until such time as the public pool
changes ownership, closes, or goes out of business, or unless revoked by
the Director of Health and Human Services.
H. Permits shall not be transferable from person to person, nor from
location to location.
I. The valid permit shall be posted in a location easily observed by patrons
of the public pool.
§ 185-4. Permit fees. [Amended 6-6-2005]
A. Annual permit fees shall be charged according to the following schedule:
(1) Indoor swimming pools: $100.
(2) Outdoor swimming pools: $75.
(3) Nonprofit organization swimming pools: $50.
(4) School/government swimming pools: no fee.
B. A fee of $25 will be charged to the permit holder for each additional
inspection required as a result of noncompliance with the applicable
codes.
§ 185-3 MERIDEN CODE § 185-5
1:416
§ 185-5. Revocation or nonrenewal of permit; hearing and appeal.
A. The Director of Health and Human Services may, after providing an
opportunity for a hearing and an appeal, revoke or refuse to renew
the permit for a failure to comply with any of the requirements of this
chapter or the Public Health Code.
B. The Director of Health and Human Services may, after providing an
opportunity for a hearing and an appeal, revoke or refuse to renew the
permit for interference with the Director of Health and Human Services,
or the Director's authorized agent, in the performance of his duties.
C. Prior to the revocation or nonrenewal of the permit, the Director of
Health and Human Services shall notify the permit holder or the person
in charge of the public pool of the reasons for which the permit is subject
to revocation or nonrenewal.
D. The permit holder or person in charge may, within 48 hours of the
notice being served upon the permit holder or the person in charge,
file with the Director of Health and Human Services a written request
for a hearing. If no request for a hearing is filed with the Director of
Health and Human Services within 48 hours following the service of
such notice on the permit holder or the person in charge, the revocation
or nonrenewal of the permit shall become final. The revoked permit shall
be removed from the public pool by the Director of Health and Human
Services or the Director's authorized agent.
E. If a written request for a hearing is received by the Director of Health
and Human Services from the permit holder or the person in charge
within 48 hours following the service of such notice on the permit holder
or the person in charge, the Director of Health and Human Services shall
thereupon examine the merits of such revocation or nonrenewal and
within five business days shall sustain, modify or rescind such revocation
or nonrenewal. The decision of the Director shall be written and sent to
the permit holder or the person in charge.
F. If the permit holder or person in charge is aggrieved by the decision of
the Director of Health and Human Services, the permit holder or person
in charge may, within 48 hours following the service of such decision
on the permit holder or the person in charge, appeal to the Connecticut
Commissioner of Public Health in accordance with the applicable
regulations. The Commissioner of Public Health shall notify the Director
of Health and Human Services that an appeal was taken, examine the
merits of the matter, and sustain, modify or rescind the actions of the
Director of Health and Human Services.80
§ 185-6. Service of notice.
Notice as provided for in this chapter is deemed to have been properly
served when a copy of the inspection report or notice of a revocation or
nonrenewal of the permit has been delivered to the permit holder or the
person in charge in hand or when it is sent by registered or certified mail,
return receipt requested, to the last known address of the permit holder or
80.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 185-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-6
1:417
the person in charge as reported on the permit application. A copy of the
notice shall be kept in the records of the Director of Health and Human
Services.
§ 185-7. Reinstatement of permit.
After a period of 60 days from the date of the notice of revocation or
nonrenewal of the permit, a written application may be made for the
issuance of a new permit as set forth in this chapter, with the payment of
the applicable permit application fee.
§ 185-8. Inspections.
The Director of Health and Human Services or the Director's authorized
agent is authorized to conduct inspections as necessary to ensure
compliance with this chapter and the Public Health Code and shall have
the right of entry at any reasonable hour to inspect the public pool and
appurtenant facilities.
§ 185-9. Swimming pool operator.
A. Every pool shall be under the immediate supervision of a swimming pool
operator who is above the age of majority and who shall be responsible
for the compliance with all the provisions and regulations regarding
equipment, pool operation, maintenance, testing, and the safety of
bathers.
B. The swimming pool operator shall be knowledgeable in the area of pool
operation and in pool water chemistry and testing.
C. A swimming pool operator shall attend and complete a swimming pool
operator training course acceptable to the Director of Health and
Human Services.
D. If the swimming pool operator is not on the premises where the public
pool is located during its time of operation, the swimming pool operator
shall be readily available.
E. The name(s) of the swimming pool operator(s) shall be submitted to
the Director of Health and Human Services at the time of the permit
application and shall be updated by the permit holder whenever there is
a change in the swimming pool operator.
§ 185-10. Operation of public pools.
The Director of Health and Human Services or the Director's authorized
agent may take enforcement action, up to and including ordering the
closure of the pool operation, if it is found that any one or more of the
following operational standards are not met:
A. The amount of residual disinfectant is less than the minimum amount
specified in Section 19-13-B33b(b)(5) of the Public Health Code or this
chapter.
B. The pH of the water does not comply with the provisions of Section
19-13-B33b(b)(6) of the Public Health Code.
§ 185-6 MERIDEN CODE § 185-10
1:418
C. The clarity of the water does not comply with the provisions of Section
19-13-B33b(b)(4) of the Public Health Code.
D. The temperature of the public pool water exceeds 104° F.
E. There is a malfunction or nonfunction of the pool recirculating system.
F. The safety equipment required by Section 19-13-B33b(b)(10), (14), (16)
and (18) and (c)(1), (3) and (4) of the Public Health Code and this
chapter is not provided.
G. The public pool does not have a current, valid permit issued by the
Department of Health.
H. A failure to comply with the requirements of Section 19-13-B33b et seq.
of the Public Health Code and this chapter.
I. If bromine is used as a disinfectant in the public pool, a failure to
maintain the bromine residual at a level of not less than 2.0 parts per
million.
J. The failure to maintain total alkalinity of the pool water at a level of 80
to 150 parts per million. Equipment for measuring the total alkalinity of
the pool water shall be available at each public pool.
K. The failure for the public pool to have available and to employ a DPD
(Diethyl-P-Phenylene-Diamine) type test kit or other testing method
acceptable to the Director of Health and Human Services in order
to measure disinfectant residuals in the pool. The use of OTO
(Orthotolidine) type test kits is prohibited.
L. The failure to perform chemical tests for disinfectant residual and pH at
least three times per day during the operating season of the public pool.
M. The failure to perform tests for total alkalinity and cyanuric acid level,
if applicable, weekly and within three hours of the addition of makeup
water to the pool.
N. The records of chemical tests are not maintained at the pool site or
the records of chemical tests are not kept on forms acceptable to the
Director of Health and Human Services.
O. The use of the public pool by persons suffering from diarrhea or
vomiting or who have skin lesions, inflamed eyes, ear discharges or any
other condition which is infectious.
P. The failure to outfit infants and children who are not fully toilet trained
in tight-fitting rubber or plastic pants when using the pool.
Q. The Director of Health and Human Services or the Director's authorized
agent finds any other condition which constitutes a public health
hazard, a safety hazard or a health nuisance to bathers or pool patrons.
§ 185-11. Closure of public pools.
The procedure for the closure of a public pool shall be as follows:
A. Closure under this chapter shall be effective immediately upon the
service of written notice to the permit holder or the person in charge
of the public pool by the Director of Health and Human Services or the
Director's authorized agent.
B. Public pools closed under the chapter shall remain closed until written
approval to reopen has been issued by the Director of Health and Human
Services or the Director's authorized agent and until service of the
§ 185-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-11
1:419
written notice has been made on the permit holder or the person in
charge.
C. Any person aggrieved by an order to close a public pool may appeal the
order as set forth in this chapter.
D. An appeal of an order to close a public pool issued pursuant to this
section shall not stay the enforcement of the closure unless a stay is
granted in writing by the Director of Health and Human Services.
§ 185-12. Safety.
A. Lifeguards, when provided, shall possess a current lifesaving certificate
from the American Red Cross or another certifying agency which is
acceptable to the Director of Health and Human Services and shall
also posses certification in cardiopulmonary resuscitation as set forth in
Section 19a-113a-1 of the Public Health Code.
B. When provided, one lifeguard shall be provided for each 75 bathers or
a major fraction thereof and shall be on duty whenever the pool is open
for use.
C. Where there is a change in the slope of the pool bottom, a safety line
shall be installed across the pool at the point of the change in slope to
delineate the nonswimmers area from the swimmers area. The safety
line shall be equipped with floats not more than five feet apart and shall
be kept in place at all times.
D. No glass containers or glass objects other than pool testing equipment
or eyeglasses shall be permitted in the pool or on the decks, patio or area
surrounding the pool.
E. All indoor pools shall be equipped with auxiliary lights which shall
function when the main light fixtures fail due to a power failure of any
type.
F. If gaseous chlorine is used as a disinfectant source, all chlorine
containers and proportioning equipment shall be housed in a separate,
locked, well-ventilated enclosure with a minimum of one window. The
enclosure shall have the following requirements:
(1) A vent fan at ground level which terminates out of doors.
(2) An approved floor-level scale for weighing the chlorine cylinders to
determine the amount of chlorine fed over any period of time and
to permit the operator to know when the supply of chlorine in the
cylinder is nearing exhaustion.
(3) An ammonia fume dispenser bottle to be used to check for chlorine
leaks.
(4) Provisions to secure all full and empty chlorine cylinders to the scale
or to the walls to prevent accidental tipping of the cylinders.
(5) An approved chlorine cylinder valve stem wrench. This wrench shall
be kept on the valve stem of the cylinder(s) in use so the chlorine
supply can be shut off quickly in case of an emergency.
(6) Valve protection hoods kept in place on all cylinders except those
attached to the chlorinator.
§ 185-13. Food service.
§ 185-11 MERIDEN CODE § 185-13
1:420
A. Where provisions are made for serving food and/or beverages at the
public pool, no containers of glass or other material which might cause
a hazard to bathers shall be used.
B. The pool facility shall be so arranged and posed to permit the
consumption of food and beverages only in a specified area.
C. Any food service area shall comply with the Public Health Code and the
Meriden City Code.
§ 185-14. Enforcement; penalties for offenses. [Amended 4-3-2017]
The provisions of this chapter may be enforced by citation up to $250 in
addition to other remedies. The following persons have authority to issue
citations for violations pursuant to this chapter: sanitarian, Environmental
Health Administrator, Associate Director of Health, and Director of Health
and Human Services.
§ 185-15. Conflicting regulations.
In any case where a provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict with
a regulation of the State Department of Public Health or any other state
law or regulation on the effective date of this chapter, the provision which
establishes the higher standard for the promotion and protection of the
health and safety of the people shall prevail.
Chapter 187
TAXATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Department of Finance — See Ch. 3, Art. VII.
Board of Assessment Appeals — See Ch. 6,
Art. V.
Economic development — See Ch. 19.
Finances — See Ch. 23.
STATUTORY REFERENCES
Exemptions generally — See C.G.S. § 12-81.
§ 185-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-15
1:421

ARTICLE I
Apportionment Between First and Second Taxation Districts for
Police and Fire Departments
[Adopted 10-7-1963 as § 2-16 of the 1963 Code]
§ 187-1. Apportionment by district. [Amended 2-5-1968; 5-5-1969]
Ninety-five percent of the money required to be expended for care and
maintenance of the Police and Fire Departments of the City shall be raised
by taxation upon the inhabitants and property within the First Taxation
District and 5% of the money so required to be expended shall be raised
by taxation upon the inhabitants and property within the Second Taxation
District.
§ 187-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-1
1:423

ARTICLE II
Exemption for Systems Using Solar Energy
[Adopted 9-6-1977]
§ 187-2. Exemption established.
Any building or addition to a building the construction of which is
commenced on or after October 1, 1976, and before October 1, 1991, which
is equipped with a solar energy heating or cooling system shall be exempt
to the extent of the amount by which the assessed valuation of such real
property equipped with such solar heating or cooling system exceeds the
assessed valuation of such real property equipped with the conventional
portion of the heating or cooling system, exclusive of any portion of such
system related to solar energy, provided that this exemption shall only apply
to the first 15 assessment years following construction of such building or
addition.
§ 187-3. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SOLAR ENERGY HEATING OR COOLING SYSTEM — Equipment, including
windmills and waterwheels, which provides for the collection, transfer,
storage and use of incident solar energy for water heating, space heating
or cooling which, absent such solar energy system, would require a
conventional energy resource, such as petroleum products, natural gas or
electricity, and which meets standards established by regulation by the
Secretary of the Office of Policy and Management.81
§ 187-4. Application for exemption.82
Any person who desires to claim the exemption provided in this article shall
file with the Assessor, within 30 days following the annual assessment date,
written application claiming such exemption on a form as prescribed by the
Commissioner of Revenue Services. Failure to file such application in said
manner and form within the time limit prescribed shall constitute a waiver
of the right to such exemption for the assessment year.
§ 187-5. Inconsistent legislation superseded.
At all times this article shall supersede all existing ordinances, orders, rules
and regulations insofar as the latter may be inconsistent therewith.
81.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
82.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 187-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-5
1:425

ARTICLE III
Personal Property Tax Exemptions
[Adopted 2-17-1987]
§ 187-6. Exemption for certain ambulance-type motor vehicles.
A. Any ambulance-type motor vehicle which is used exclusively for the
purpose of transporting any medically incapacitated individual, except
any such vehicle used to transport any such individual for payment, is
exempt from personal property taxation.
B. For the purposes of this section, the term "ambulance-type vehicle"
means any motor vehicle that is specially designed or constructed, and
equipped, and is intended to be used for and is maintained or operated
for the transportation of wounded, injured, sick, invalid or incapacitated
human beings, or expectant mothers.
C. Application for such exemption shall be made annually upon such forms
as may be prescribed by the City Assessor and shall contain:
(1) The name and address of the applicant and the owners of the
ambulance-type vehicle.
(2) A description of each such vehicle, including the make, model, year
of manufacture, and motor chassis number; current state license
number; the length of time the ambulance-type vehicle has been
in use; and the color scheme, insignia, name, monogram or other
distinguishing characteristics to be used to designate the applicant's
vehicle.
(3) The location and description of the place or places from which it is
intended to operate.
(4) Such other information as the City Assessor shall deem necessary to
comply with this section.
D. Such application for exemption shall be made not later than November
1 following the assessment date with respect to which such exemption
is claimed. For vehicles purchased after October 1 and before August
1 of the assessment year for which such exemption is requested said
application shall be made within 30 days of said purchase.
E. This section shall be applicable to the assessment year which
commenced October 1, 1986, and succeeding assessment years
thereafter.
F. Applications for exemptions relative to the assessment year which
commenced on October 1, 1986, shall be made not later than 30 days
following the effective date of this section or, for vehicles purchased
after said effective date but before August 1, 1987, not later than 30 days
after such purchase.
§ 187-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-6
1:427

ARTICLE IV
Municipal Property Tax Relief
[Adopted 8-18-1997]
§ 187-7. Statutory authority.
This article is enacted pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes § 12-129n,
as amended.
§ 187-8. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ELIGIBLE PROPERTY — Property which is the principal residence of the
eligible taxpayer, the lot upon which the residence is located, and the
appurtenant outbuildings. Benefits will be prorated for partial ownership,
and for occupancy in a dwelling of up to three dwelling units. "Eligible
property" shall in no event include dwellings of four units or more.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, "eligible property" shall
include a unit of a cooperative.
ELIGIBLE TAXPAYER — Any taxpayer, 65 years of age and over, or his or her
spouse, living with the taxpayer, who is 65 years of age or over or 60 years
of age or over, or any taxpayer under age 65 and eligible in accordance
with applicable federal regulations to receive permanent total disability
benefits under social security or otherwise eligible in accordance with the
provisions in Connecticut General Statutes § 12-129n(a), as amended, and
the surviving spouse of a taxpayer who was an eligible taxpayer at the
time of death, provided that the applicant has been a taxpayer in the City
of Meriden for one year immediately preceding the receipt of tax benefits
under this article, and provided that the applicant meets the requirements
established herein with respect to maximum allowable income during the
calendar year preceding the year in which application is made for the tax
relief provided in this article.
INCOME — When considering eligibility for property tax deferral, means
the gross income of the applicant if single, or gross joint income of the
applicant and spouse if married. "Income," when considering eligibility for
property tax abatement, means the gross income of all individuals living
within the dwelling unit. After January 1998, "income," when considering
eligibility for property tax deferral or property tax abatement, shall be
defined as the gross income of the applicant if single, or gross joint income
of the applicant and spouse if married.[Amended 11-17-1997]
MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE INCOME — The maximum income which a
taxpayer and/or the taxpayer's spouse may receive and still be eligible for
relief under this article. The maximum allowable income for any abatement
or deferral is $35,000. Said amount and the scale provided below shall be
amended annually, or as recommended by the Finance Committee.
§ 187-9. Tax relief. [Amended 6-3-2002]
§ 187-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-9
1:429
A. Any eligible taxpayer may apply for and receive either a property tax
abatement or property tax deferral for an eligible property upon
completion of the application form provided by the Tax Assessor. The
applicant must choose either the abatement option or the deferral option
and may not amend said choice. Said applications shall be made, in
1997, within 60 days of the passage of this article. In later years,
said application must be made between February 1 and May 15. Said
application must be renewed every two years. For good cause shown, the
Assessor may permit a renewal application to be filed within 30 days of
May 15.
B. At no time shall property tax relief be granted under this article if the
total taxes past due, abated or deferred in the previous years, in addition
to the present year, will equal or exceed the assessed value of the subject
property.
C. No such property tax relief, together with any relief received by any
eligible taxpayer under the provisions of Connecticut General Statutes
§§ 12-129b to 12-129d, inclusive, shall exceed, in the aggregate the total
amount of the tax which would, except for said sections, be laid against
the eligible taxpayer.83
D. The City of Meriden will lien the subject property for the amount of any
deferral granted and may establish a lien on the subject property in the
amount of the relief granted, provided that if the total amount of such
property tax relief with respect to any such taxpayer, when combined
with any such tax relief for which such taxpayer may be eligible in
accordance with Connecticut General Statutes §§ 12-129b to 12-129d,
inclusive, exceeds in the aggregate 75% of the property tax for which
such taxpayer would be liable but for the benefits under this section
and any of the sections mentioned above in this subsection, the City of
Meriden shall establish a lien on such property in the amount of the total
tax relief granted, plus interest applicable to the total of such unpaid
taxes at the rate set forth in this section. Any such lien shall have a
priority in the settlement of such person's estate.84
E. This program shall be funded as needed by the annual budget.
§ 187-10. Tax deferral.
If the property tax deferral application is approved by the Tax Assessor, 50%
of the property taxes shall be deferred at an annual interest rate of 7 3/4%
per annum. Said interest rate shall be subject to review and amendment on
an annual basis, on recommendation of the Finance Committee.
§ 187-11. Tax abatement. [Amended 1-19-1999]
A. If property tax is abated, it shall be abated as follows:
83.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
84.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 187-9 MERIDEN CODE § 187-11
1:430
Benefit Amounts Grand List 10-1-1996
Income Brackets Abatement Amount
Married Single
$0 to $15,200 $500 $400
$15,201 to $27,500 $300 $200
$27,501 to $35,000 $200 $100
B. If property tax is abated, it may be as follows but shall not fall below the
1996 funding level: [Amended 3-6-2017]
Benefit Amounts Grand List 10-1-1997
Income Brackets Abatement Amount
Married Single
$0 to $15,200 $1,000 $800
$15,201 to $27,500 $600 $400
$27,501 to $35,000 $400 $200
Benefit Amounts Grand List 10-1-1998
Income Brackets Abatement Amount
Married Single
$0 to $15,200 $1,500 $1,200
$15,201 to $27,500 $900 $600
$27,501 to $35,000 $600 $300
Benefit Amounts Grand List 10-1-2017
Income Brackets Abatement Amount
Married Single
$0 to $15,200 $750 $600
$15,201 to $27,500 $450 $300
$27,501 to $35,200 $300 $150
$35,201 to $42,900 $300 $300
C. The total abatement of property tax revenue, based on an estimate in any
tax year by the Finance Committee, which may be granted in such tax year
pursuant to the provisions of this article shall not exceed an amount equal
to 10% of the total real property tax assessed in the preceding tax year.
D. The property tax for the Grand List of October 1, 1999, and subsequent
grand lists shall be abated in accordance with this article if the City Council
makes the necessary provisions in the annual budget in consideration of the
Municipal Property Tax Relief Program. For the grand list years in which
the property tax is abated, the abatement amounts shall be determined on
an annual basis by the City Council, but in no event shall the abatement
§ 187-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-11
1:431
amounts be less than the benefit amounts as set forth in Subsection A
herein.
§ 187-12. Cooperative units.
Notwithstanding any provision in this article to the contrary, the amount
of annual property tax relief for the unit owner of a cooperative shall
be determined in relation to an assumed amount of property tax liability
applicable to the assessed value for the dwelling unit which such person
owns and occupies, as determined by the Tax Assessor. Annually, not later
than the first day of June, the Tax Assessor, upon receipt of an application
for such relief, shall determine, with respect to the assessment list for
the assessment year commencing October 1 immediately preceding, the
portion of the assessed value of the entire cooperative, as included in such
assessment list, attributable to the dwelling unit occupied by such person.
The assumed property tax liability for purposes of determining the amount
of the relief shall be the product of said assessed value and the mill rate
as determined for purposes of property tax imposed on said assessment list
for the assessment year commencing October 1 immediately preceding. The
amount of relief to which such person shall be entitled for such assessment
year shall be equivalent to the amount of tax reduction for which such
person would qualify, considering such assumed property tax liability to be
the actual property tax applicable to such person's dwelling unit and such
person as liable for the payment of such tax.
§ 187-13. Cessation of benefits; penalties.
A. Any benefits accruing pursuant to this article under the tax abatement
program shall cease immediately upon the death of the eligible taxpayer,
provided that the eligible taxpayer's spouse does not qualify for relief
under this article, and shall be prorated for the year in which the
taxpayer dies. If the taxpayer is utilizing the tax deferral program,
upon death of the eligible taxpayer, provided that the eligible taxpayer's
spouse does not qualify for relief under this article, the reduced interest
rate shall continue in effect only until the estate is probated or two
years after death, whichever comes sooner, at which point the statutory
interest rate shall be reinstated and the interest assessed in a prorated
manner.
B. The penalty for filing of an application which is false in any respect shall
be the refund of all credits improperly taken, together with interest at
18% per annum.
§ 187-14. Applications for tax refunds. [Added 10-16-2000]
Applications for tax refunds may be made within 15 years from the date
when such tax was due.
§ 187-15. Tax abatement for service with Volunteer Fire
Department. [Added 5-21-2001]
A. A resident of the City of Meriden who serves as a member of the
South Meriden Volunteer Fire Department shall be eligible for the tax
§ 187-11 MERIDEN CODE § 187-15
1:432
abatements set forth hereinafter, provided that such resident has
achieved two years of service prior to January 1 of the fiscal year for
which the abatement is to be granted, and provided that the member
has achieved a good year in the calendar year prior to the fiscal year
for which the abatement is granted, a good year being defined as
participating in 25 of all alarms in which the Department is called upon,
meeting all requirements as set forth by the bylaws of the Department,
meeting all mandatory training requirements, and participating in eight
company meetings in that year. For eligibility property taxes must be
current.
B. Annually on or before March 1 of each year the Chief of the South
Meriden Volunteer Fire Department shall certify to the City Manager
and to the Tax Collector a list of residents who have meet the above
eligibility requirements, together with the addresses of such residents
and the amount of abatement for which each is eligible.
C. Taxes otherwise due and payable shall be abated according to the
following schedule; years of service shall be determined as of January 1
of each year:
(1) For eligible residents with two years of consecutive service, an
abatement of $250.
(2) For eligible residents with five years of consecutive service, an
abatement of $500.
(3) For eligible residents with seven years of such consecutive service,
an abatement of $750.
(4) For eligible residents with 10 years of such consecutive service, an
abatement or $1,000.
(5) For residents who have met the eligibility requirements for at least
20 consecutive years, an abatement of $1,000 annually thereafter.
D. The Tax Collector shall cause an application for abatement to be sent
to each such resident certified as set forth above on or before April
1 of each year. Each such resident shall file such application on or
before May 15 of each year and shall indicate on such application the
tax or taxes to be abated. In the case of a tax paid in installments
the abatement amount shall be divided as equally as possible among
such installments. The abatement may be applied to property owned
by such resident individually, jointly or in common with others. No
unused abatement amount shall be carried over to a subsequent year. No
abatement shall be made for property transferred during a fiscal year for
the remainder of the fiscal year.
§ 187-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-15
1:433

ARTICLE V
Exemptions From Assessments and Taxes
[Adopted 10-1-2001]
§ 187-16. Urban rehabilitation homeownership program.
A. The Assessor may enter into a written agreement with any owner of any
real property located in Meriden who agrees to rehabilitate such real
property with assistance provided by the Connecticut Housing Finance
Authority under the Urban Rehabilitation Homeownership Program.
Such agreement shall provide that any increase in assessment
attributable to such rehabilitation shall be deferred for a period of five
years from the date such rehabilitation is completed.
B. Such agreement shall provide for the:
(1) Completion of such rehabilitation by a date fixed;
(2) Inspection and certification by the Building Official that the
completed rehabilitation is in conformance with such provisions of
the state building and health codes and the Meriden Housing Code85
as may apply; and
(3) Continued residence of the applicant and owner in such property
during the period of such deferral.
C. Such agreement shall also provide that in the event of general
revaluation in the year in which such rehabilitation is completed
resulting in any increase in the assessment of such property, only that
portion of the increase resulting from such rehabilitation shall be
deferred, and in the event of a general revaluation in any year after the
year in which such rehabilitation is completed, such deferred assessment
shall be increased or decreased in proportion to the increase or decrease
in the total assessment on such property as a result of such general
revaluation.
§ 187-17. Tax-exempt organizations.
A. Effective as of the Grand List of 2000, the property tax exemptions
authorized by Subsections (7) to (16) inclusive of § 12-81 of the
Connecticut General Statutes, as amended, shall be effective as of the
date the tax-exempt organization recording of the deed or other
instrument on the land records which conveys the property to which the
exemption applies. The Assessor shall issue a notice to the Tax Collector
of the date on which such property is exempt. The Tax Collector shall,
if such notice is received after the normal billing date, within 30 days
thereafter issue a corrected or prorated tax bill for such property, such
that no tax shall be due for the portion of the grand list assessment year
for which the property was exempt.
B. Any tax paid by such tax-exempt organization for a period subsequent to
said date shall be reimbursed to the tax-exempt organization by the Tax
Collector within 30 days of receipt of the notice from the Assessor of the
tax-exempt status of the property.
85.Editor's Note: See Ch. 125, Housing Standards.
§ 187-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-17
1:435
C. Any tax paid by the prior owner for a period subsequent to said date for
which the tax-exempt organization reimbursed or credited such owner
on the transfer of title to such property shall likewise be reimbursed to
such tax-exempt organization by the Tax Collector.
§ 187-17 MERIDEN CODE § 187-17
1:436
ARTICLE VI
Information Technology Zone Program
[Adopted 7-1-2002]
§ 187-18. Statutory authority.
This article is enacted pursuant to §§ 12-65b and 12-81t of the Connecticut
General Statutes.
§ 187-19. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meaning indicated:
ELIGIBLE TAXPAYER — Any taxpayer owning real property located in the
Information Technology Zone that is used principally or in part for the
purpose of operating or housing an information technology business or any
taxpayer owning information technology personal property housed in such
real property, provided that such taxpayer is not eligible for any comparable
benefit from the State of Connecticut.
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY BUSINESS — A business that uses
information technology property in the conduct of its operations. Examples
of information technology businesses include, but are not limited to,
software developers; web designers; telemarketing firms; internet-based
businesses; data processing companies; video conferencing operations;
distance learning, training and educational conferencing operations;
switching centers; data centers; computer software or hardware research
firms; information technology property component manufacturing or
assembly operations; information technology property retail
establishments; and the following businesses within information technology
classifications under the Standard Industrial Classification Codes as
amended or succeeded: communication equipment service providers or
manufacturers, industrial electronic component or accessory
manufacturers, manufacturers of measuring, analyzing and controlling
instruments, photonics manufacturers or assemblers, manufacturers or
assemblers of electromedical equipment, industrial and commercial
machinery and computer equipment manufacturers, direct mail advertisers,
catalog and mail order houses, computer photography operations, office
machine rental and leasing operations, computer programming service
centers, computer integrated system designers, computer facilities
management service providers, information retrieval service providers,
computer maintenance/repair businesses, data processing schools,
computer/software consultants, radio and television broadcast and
communications equipment manufacturers, and providers of information
technology temporary or continuing employees.
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY PERSONAL PROPERTY — Electronic data
processing equipment, any equipment necessary for the utilization of
information systems, telecommunication equipment or installations, any
equipment necessary for the utilization of telecommunication systems, or
any other personal property utilizing data processing hardware and
§ 187-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-19
1:437
software in the collection, processing and distribution of data to and from
interactive computer systems to meet information needs, or for the
electronic distribution of information, including voice, data and images.
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ZONE — Geographic portion of Meriden
designated by the City Council as the area to which this article applies.
§ 187-20. Tax incentives.
A. Real property tax assessment deferrals.
(1) The Assessor shall defer the net increase in the assessed value of real property
of any eligible taxpayer for property located in the Information Technology Zone
based on the cost of any improvements as follows:
Cost of
Improvements
Percentage Deferred of
Increased Assessment Term
$3,000,000 or more Year 1: 100% 6 years
Year 2: 100%
Year 3: 80%
Year 4: 60%
Year 5: 40%
Year 6: 20%
$500,000 or more Year 1: 100% 2 years
Year 2: 75%
$25,000 or more Year 1: 50% 3 years
Year 2: 50%
Year 3: 50%
(2) The above schedule may be modified from time to time to conform to the
requirements of state law.
(3) Assessment deferrals shall be effective as of the grand list that follows the
issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
(4) Each assessment deferral shall be memorialized in an agreement to be
approved by the City Council. Each such agreement shall provide that the
eligible taxpayer use its best efforts to employ qualified Meriden residents and
that the taxpayer may assign its rights in such an agreement with the written
consent of the City, which consent shall not be unreasonably withheld.
B. Personal property tax abatement.
(1) Personal property taxes on information technology personal property shall
be abated in accordance with the following schedule:
(a) Year one: 100%.
(b) Year two: 100%.
(c) Year three: 50%.
(2) The eligible taxpayer shall apply for such abatement 60 days prior to
October 1 of each grand list year. The Assessor shall determine prior to
October 1 of each grand list year whether the property is eligible for such
abatement and shall notify the applicant. The applicant shall identify those
items of property determined to be eligible when filing its personal property
§ 187-19 MERIDEN CODE § 187-20
1:438
declaration. Upon completing the grand list each year the Assessor shall
report to the Tax Collector those items of personal property the taxes for
which shall be abated pursuant to this article. The abatement shall be
effective beginning with that succeeding grand list. The applicant shall
agree to use its best efforts to employ qualified Meriden residents. Each
applicant shall agree that in the event that it cease to be an eligible taxpayer
within three years of the grand list year for which it received an abatement,
it shall pay to the City the amount of such abatement, together with interest
at a rate equal to the interest rate applicable to delinquent taxes.
§ 187-21. Conditions of eligibility.
No taxpayer shall receive any tax incentive otherwise provided for in this
article if such taxpayer is delinquent on any obligation to the City of
Meriden, or in violation of any City ordinance, provided that the City
Manager may waive the provisions of this section upon such taxpayer
entering into an agreement to cure such delinquency or violation in a form
satisfactory to the City Manager.
§ 187-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-21
1:439

ARTICLE VII
Delinquent Property Taxes
[Adopted 10-20-2003]
§ 187-22. Fee imposed.
A fee of $5 shall be charged each person paying any delinquent property
tax or any installment thereof on any motor vehicle, which delinquency
has been reported to the Commissioner of Motor Vehicles of the State
of Connecticut pursuant to the provisions of § 14-33 of the Connecticut
General Statutes, as amended.
§ 187-23. through § 187-24. (Reserved)
§ 187-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-23
1:441

ARTICLE VIII
Veterans' Exemptions
[Adopted 3-6-2017]
§ 187-25. Statutory authority.
This article is enacted pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes
§§ 12-81(19) and 12-81f, as amended.
§ 187-26. Veterans' exemption.
Any veteran entitled to an exemption from property tax in accordance with
Connecticut General Statutes § 12-81(19) whose qualifying income does not
exceed the applicable maximum amount as provided under Connecticut
General Statutes § 12-81 shall be entitled to an additional local exemption
in the amount of $500.
§ 187-27. Exemption to be applied to assessed value of property.
The exemption provided for in this section shall be applied to the assessed
value of an eligible veteran's property.
§ 187-28. Application.
Any veteran submitting a claim for the additional exemption shall file an
application on a form prepared by the Assessor, not later than the
assessment date to which such additional exemption is claimed. When a
veteran has filed for an exemption and received approval for the first time,
the eligible veteran shall be required to file an application for exemption
biennially thereafter. Each application shall include a copy of the veteran's
federal income tax return or, in the event that a return is not filed, such
evidence related to income as required by the Assessor, for the tax year
ending immediately prior to the assessment date when the exemption under
this section is claimed.
§ 187-29. Renewal and eligibility.
Any veteran who has submitted an application and been approved in any
year for the additional exemption under this section shall be presumed to be
qualified for such exemption for the next year. During the year immediately
following the approval, the Assessor shall notify in writing each veteran
presumed to be qualified. If any veteran has qualifying income in excess
of the maximum allowed under § 187-26 or Connecticut General Statutes
§ 12-81(19), § 12-81f or § 12-81, such veteran shall notify the Assessor on
or before the next filing date for such exemption and shall be denied
the exemption for the assessment year immediately following and for any
subsequent year until the veteran has reapplied and again qualifies for
such exemption. A veteran who fails to notify the Assessor of such
disqualification shall make payment to the City of Meriden in the amount of
property tax loss related to the exemption improperly taken.
§ 187-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-29
1:443
Chapter 191
TOW TRUCKS AND TOWING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 180.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 198.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 200.
Zoning — See Ch. 213.
STATUTORY REFERENCES
Wreckers — See C.G.S. § 14-66.
§ 191-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Tow Truck
Ordinance."
§ 191-2. Definitions and word usage. [Amended 2-20-1990]
A. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense
include the singular number, and words in the singular number include
the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely
directory.
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CITY — The City of Meriden.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
WRECKER — A motor vehicle equipped for the purpose of removing
wrecked, abandoned, inoperative or disabled vehicles.
§ 191-3. Permit required. [Amended 2-20-1990]
No person shall engage in the business of operating a wrecker for the
purpose of towing or transporting vehicles within the City or offer such
services for police rotation towing without first obtaining a permit as
hereinafter provided from the Chief of Police.
§ 191-4. Information required for application. [Amended 2-20-1990]
A. Application for permits issued hereunder shall be made upon forms
prepared and made available by the Chief of Police, and such forms shall
include:
(1) The name, home address, home telephone number, business address,
business telephone number and business name of the applicant.
In addition to the information herein stated, in the event that the
applicant is a corporation or partnership, the names and addresses
§ 187-29 MERIDEN CODE § 191-4
1:444
of its officers or partners, as the case may be, and the names and
addresses of the person or persons charged with the day-to-day
operation of the business shall be provided. All information required
herein shall be kept up-to-date by the applicant by filing the update
with the Chief of Police.
(2) The location, number, description and Connecticut registration
number of the tow trucks or flatbed carriers owned or operated by
the applicant.
B. Additional documents submitted with the application shall include:
(1) A copy of the applicant's current approved schedule of towing rates
and storage charges, as required and filed pursuant to § 14-66 of the
Connecticut General Statutes, as amended. The applicant shall also
provide the Chief of Police with all subsequent approved schedules
of rates and charges.
(2) A notarized agreement by the applicant to protect, indemnify and
save harmless the City of Meriden, its servants, agents and
employees of and from any and all liability or claims of liability,
expense damages, causes of action, suits, claims or judgments on the
part of anyone growing out of any act or omission by any employee
of said applicant in the performance of duties and obligations.
§ 191-5. Insurance required.
No permit shall be issued to an applicant hereunder until such applicant
shall have deposited with the Chief of Police evidence of the following
insurance:
A. Garage keeper's policy: a garage keeper's legal liability policy covering
fire, theft and explosion in the amount of $300,000/$300,000.
B. Garage liability policy: a garage liability policy covering the operation of
the applicant's business, equipment or vehicles for any bodily injury or
property damage in the amount of $300,000/$300,000.
§ 191-6. Review of adequacy of insurance coverage. [Amended
9-15-1980]
The amounts of these insurance policies shall be reviewed by the City
Council every three years for their adequacy.
§ 191-7. Notice of change or cancellation of insurance policy.
Each insurance policy required herein must contain an endorsement
providing for 30 days' notice to the City in the event of any material change
or cancellation.
§ 191-8. Requirements for permit. [Amended 2-20-1990]
A. The applicant must be duly licensed by the State of Connecticut and
have complied with all the provisions of § 14-66 of the Connecticut
General Statutes, as amended, including but not limited to being a duly
licensed used or new car dealer, repairer or limited repairer.
§ 191-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 191-8
1:445
B. The business must comply with all applicable ordinances and
regulations, including but not limited to zoning.86
C. The business must provide inside storage space for a minimum of two
vehicles and outside storage for a minimum of five vehicles.
D. In the event that the Police Department or the City of Meriden requests
a tower to store towed vehicles, then the City shall provide adequate
storage facilities and police protection for said towed vehicles.87
E. The business shall be of sufficient operating size to accept and respond
to all calls for municipal towing services, including but not limited
to accidents, abandoned vehicles, parking violations, street cleaning,
snow removal, parking bans and removal of vehicles illegally parked on
private property.
F. A towing firm on the rotation list shall maintain a tow truck and tow
truck operator on twenty-four-hour call.
G. The tow truck operator shall have a proper driver's license.
H. Unless otherwise specified, no wrecking firm may tow for another firm
that has been called to tow a vehicle.
I. Each tow truck must be radio dispatched from a base station of the firm.
J. Wreckers must have a Federal Communications Commission licensed
two-way radio system, with a minimum of 25 watts, within six months
from issuance of a permit by the Chief of Police, not intended herein to
include a CB. The installation and use of cellular telephone equipment
providing direct two-way communication, in addition to or in lieu of said
radio system, is permitted.
K. The business must own, maintain and have registered with the State of
Connecticut at least one tow truck, and each truck shall be registered as
a wrecker and have a state highway permit. Additionally, the tow truck
equipment must comply with the following requirements:
(1) Light-duty tow truck.
(a) Shall have the lights and safety equipment as set forth in
§ 14-66(b) of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
(b) At least one push broom, one shovel, one axe, one winch bar/
crowbar/wrecker bar and dollies shall be carried on each tow
truck.
(c) Shall have a minimum manufacturer's capacity of one ton, a
boom capacity of not less than four tons, a power winch pulling
capacity of not less than four tons (no electric winches), 100 feet
of minimum three-eighths-inch cable and a tow sling, equipped
with a safety chain.
(d) Appearance of the truck shall be reasonably good, with
equipment painted and the name of the firm lettered on both
sides of the truck.
(2) Heavy-duty tow truck.
(a) Shall have the lights and safety equipment as set forth in
§ 14-66(b) of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
86.Editor's Note: See Ch. 213, Zoning.
87.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 191-8 MERIDEN CODE § 191-8
1:446
(b) At least one push broom, one shovel, one axe, one set of bolt
cutters capable of cutting a one-half-inch bolt, and one pinch
bar/crowbar/wrecker bar shall be carried on each tow truck.
(c) Shall have a minimum manufacturer's capacity of not less than
five tons, a boom capacity of not less than 15 tons, a power winch
pulling capacity of not less than 25 tons, 200 feet of minimum
nine-sixteenths-inch cable and air brakes so constructed so as to
lock all wheels automatically upon failure.
(d) Shall have available storage space to accommodate a minimum
of one tractor-trailer at the place of business.
(e) Appearance of the truck shall be reasonably good, with
equipment painted and the name of the firm on both sides of the
truck.
(3) Flatbed carrier in lieu of tow truck. Such flatbed carrier:
(a) Must have been manufactured and designed for the purpose of
transporting, by acceptable industry standards, motor vehicles.
(b) Must be registered and approved with and through the
Commissioner of Motor Vehicles for the purpose of transporting
motor vehicles.
(c) Shall meet or exceed those requirements as established through
the Commissioner of Motor Vehicles in the licensing of such
flatbed carrier for the purpose of transporting motor vehicles.
(d) Shall be maintained in accordance with all applicable criteria as
established by the Commissioner of Motor Vehicles while used in
the commerce of transporting of motor vehicles and § 14-66 of
the Connecticut General Statutes, where applicable.
§ 191-9. Presence at scene of accident.
No wrecker or any employee or owner of a garage or repair shop shall go
to the scene of an accident unless dispatched to the scene by an authorized
member of the Meriden Police Department or unless requested by the
owner or operator of the damaged vehicle.
§ 191-10. Soliciting at scene of accident.
It shall be unlawful for any wrecker to go to the scene of an accident with
the intent to solicit repair or tow jobs.
§ 191-11. Time limit for answering call.
Failure to respond to the scene of an accident within 20 minutes after being
dispatched by the Police Department will be deemed an unreasonable delay,
and a second wrecker will be dispatched from the rotation list. The wrecker
failing to respond in the given time will be charged with a passed call.
§ 191-12. Suspension or removal from rotation list.
Wrecker firms which fail to respond to a call for services from the Police
Department three times in a three-month period within a calendar year
§ 191-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 191-12
1:447
shall be suspended or removed from the wrecker rotation list. For the first
offense suspension shall be 30 days; for the second offense, 90 days; and
for the third offense, permanent removal from the rotation list roster. Each
offense shall be removed from the record upon expiration of two years from
the date of said offense.
§ 191-13. Request for hearing. [Amended 9-15-1980]
The owner of a wrecker firm may ask for a hearing before the City Council
to answer any charges of violations that are being brought against his/her
firm or employees.
§ 191-14. Report of misconduct.
The overall responsibility for the safety of persons and property at the scene
of an accident shall rest with the investigating officer. The following will
apply if any wrecker operators violate any of the policy and procedure as
stated in this order: the officer at the scene shall forward a written report
of the wrecker's conduct and violation to his/her shift commander; the shift
commander will forward this report to the Captain of Operation, who will
forward the same to the Chief of Police for evaluation and record keeping.
It shall be the duty of shift commander to see that this policy and procedure
is followed.
§ 191-15. Wrecker rotation list; impoundment procedure.
A. A wrecker rotation list shall be maintained in the dispatcher's room,
with participating wrecker firms kept up-to-date and logged as to when
wrecker firms are called. The wrecker rotation list and record of wrecker
offenses shall be available for inspection at all reasonable hours to any
citizen.
B. When, in the opinion of the officer detailed to investigate an accident or
any other official of the Police Department, a vehicle is to be impounded,
the police shall put this in writing and provide the wrecker with the
written request to impound the particular vehicle. Further, the Police
Department shall provide rules and regulations as to how a procedure to
impound a vehicle is to be governed.
Chapter 194
TRAILERS AND TRAILER CAMPS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 77.
Housing standards — See Ch. 125.
Health nuisances — See Ch. 144.
Sewers — See Ch. 170.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 180.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 200.
Water — See Ch. 207.
Zoning — See Ch. 213.
§ 191-12 MERIDEN CODE § 191-15
1:448
STATUTORY REFERENCES
Mobile home parks — See C.G.S. § 21-64 et
seq.
Mobile and modular homes — See C.G.S.
§ 21-85 et seq.
§ 194-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
TRAILER — Includes an automobile trailer, trailer coach or any vehicle
or structure so designed and constructed in such manner as will permit
occupancy thereof as sleeping quarters for one or more persons or the
conduct of any business or profession, trade or occupation or for use as a
selling or advertising device, and so designed that it is or may be mounted
on wheels and used as a conveyance on highways or streets, propelled or
drawn by its own or other motive power, excepting a device used exclusively
upon stationary rails or tracks.
§ 194-2. Restrictions on parking.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park any trailer, occupied or
unoccupied, on any street, highway or alley or other public place or on any
tract of land owned by any person, within the City, except as provided in this
chapter.
§ 194-3. Emergency or temporary parking.
Emergency or temporary stopping or parking is permitted on any street,
alley or highway for not longer than one day, subject to any other and
further prohibitions, regulations or limitations imposed by the traffic and
parking regulations as provided in Chapter 200, Vehicles and Traffic, or
other ordinances for that street, alley or highway.
§ 194-4. Location outside of trailer camps prohibited; exception.
No person shall park or occupy any trailer on the premises of any occupied
dwelling or on any lot which is not a part of the premises of any occupied
dwelling, either of which is situated outside of an existing and approved
trailer park or camp, except that the parking of one unoccupied trailer
in an accessory garage building, or in the rear yard of any premises, is
permitted, provided that no living quarters shall be maintained or any
business practiced in the trailer while such trailer is so parked or stored.
§ 194-5. Use as living quarters prohibited; exception.
Except as provided in the preceding section, trailers shall not be used as
a permanent place of abode or as a permanent dwelling or for indefinite
periods of time, provided that any such trailer properly connected with the
City water supply and sanitary sewer systems and constructed and located
§ 191-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 194-5
1:449
in compliance with all the requirements of the building, plumbing, sanitary,
health, electrical and zoning ordinances of the City and not inhabited by a
greater number of occupants than that for which it was designed may be
permitted under permits properly secured as provided for in the building,
plumbing, sanitary, health, electrical and zoning ordinances of the City.
§ 194-6. Enforcement; penalties for offenses. [Added 9-16-1996]
The provisions of this chapter may be enforced by citation, in addition
to other remedies. The citation fine amount shall be $77. The following
persons have authority to issue citations for violations pursuant to this
section: City of Meriden police officer.
Chapter 196
TREES AND SHRUBS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Tree Replacement and Preservation
Fund — See Ch. 25, Art. IV.
Parks and recreation — See Ch. 150.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 159.
§ 196-1. Short title.
The short title of this chapter shall be "Tree Ordinance."
§ 196-2. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote and protect the public health,
safety, and general welfare by providing for the regulation of the planting,
maintenance, and removal of trees, shrubs, and other plants within the
public way or on public land.
§ 196-3. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement
of this chapter:
APPLICATION REVIEW BOARD — A board consisting of the Chairperson of
the Planning Commission, the Chairperson of the Conservation Commission
and the Chairperson of the Inland Wetlands and Watercourse Commission,
authorized to hear appeals as set forth in § 196-4C(5).
BOULEVARD EFFECT — Arrangement of trees along a street for aesthetic,
scale or climate control purposes. For purposes of this chapter a boulevard
effect is created when there are three or more trees within a one-hundredfifty-
foot stretch of street frontage on the same side of the street.
PUBLIC LAND — Any and all property owned by the City of Meriden.
§ 194-5 MERIDEN CODE § 196-3
1:450
PUBLIC TREES — Any trees or shrubs planted or placed by the City of
Meriden or its Tree Warden.
PUBLIC WAY — Any and all property within the City of Meriden's right-ofway.
SHRUBS — A woody plant, branched from the base, generally expected to
grow less than 15 feet tall when mature.
TREES — A woody plant, usually with one main trunk, generally expected
to grow to a height of at least 15 feet when mature.
URBAN FORESTRY PLAN — A management plan and resulting annual work
plans prepared by the Tree Warden and approved by the Conservation
Commission. The City's Department of Development and Enforcement is
assigned the responsibility to assist the Tree Warden in his/her duties. For
those areas that are incorporated in the City's park system or are part
of the streetscape (boulevard effect), the Director of Parks shall assist in
development and maintenance of the plan. For all watershed properties,
exclusive of those under control of the Parks Department, the Public Works
Department shall assist in the development and maintenance of the plan.
§ 196-4. Tree Warden. [Amended 5-20-1996; 10-21-1996;
12-21-1998]
The Tree Warden shall be initially appointed by the City Manager for a term
of one year, thereafter for a term of three years. The Tree Warden shall
have a working knowledge of arboricultural practices either through formal
education and/or directly related experience.
A. Duties of Tree Warden. The Tree Warden shall have the duty to:
(1) Enforce all provisions of law for the preservation of trees and shrubs
and of roadside beauty.
(2) Remove or cause to be removed all illegally erected signs or
advertisements placed upon trees within any public way, on public
land or on public trees.
(3) Remove or cause to be removed any tree or shrub which constitutes
an immediate public hazard, without notice.
(4) Remove, prune or cause to be removed or pruned any tree or shrub
under his/her control. He/she shall post a suitable notice on the tree
or shrub at least five days prior to the removal or pruning. If any
person, firm or corporation objects to the removal or pruning in
writing to the Tree Warden, the Warden shall hold a public hearing.
Within three days after the hearing, the Tree Warden shall render
his/her decision.
(5) Issue permits for removal of any trees within the public way or on
public land in accordance with the Urban Forestry Plan and the
Arboricultural Specifications and Standards, as amended.
(6) Enforce regulations for the care and preservation of trees and
shrubs.
B. Management plans.
(1) The Tree Warden, with the assistance of the Conservation
Commission, shall develop and, each subsequent year, update the
§ 196-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 196-4
1:451
Urban Forestry Plan. This plan shall describe the urban forestry
activities to be undertaken by the City, the reasons for those
activities, the possible funding source(s), the alternatives available
to the City to fund or accomplish the activity, the projected date of
completion, and the consequences if the activity is not completed.
Activities may include but are not limited to municipal tree inventory,
planting, tree removal, beautification projects, and educational
projects.
(2) The Urban Forestry Plan shall include a management plan for all
City-owned forested areas and a Master Street Tree Plan. The
Master Street Tree Plan shall consist of a City-wide, street-by-street
written evaluation of the tree species best suited to a particular
planting site in regard to growing habits, shape, form, health,
disease and pest resistance, conflicts with wires, lights, pavement,
traffic, pedestrians, sidewalks, environmental pollution, sewers, and
space availability. It shall also include recommendations for
maintenance and replacement of existing trees as well as
recommendations for the type of street trees to be planted in new
residential, commercial or industrial subdivisions.
C. Permits and applications.
(1) Scope of requirements. No person may perform any of the following
acts without first obtaining a permit from the Tree Warden:
(a) Plant, treat, prune, remove or otherwise disturb any tree or
shrub on public land.
(b) Plant, treat, prune, remove or otherwise disturb any public tree
or tree or shrub on the public way. This provision shall not apply
to prohibit an abutter from watering or mulching any tree or
shrub.
(c) Treat, prune, remove or otherwise disturb any public tree or any
tree or shrub, or portion thereof, overhanging or partially upon
the public way.
(d) Place on public land, including forested areas, or in the public
way, either above or below ground level, a container for trees or
shrubs.
(e) Damage, cut, tap, carve, or transplant any public tree(s) or any
tree(s), shrub(s), or other plant(s) located on the public way or
public land.
(f) Attach any rope, wire, nail, sign, poster, or any other man-made
object, or paint or mark, on any public tree or tree or shrub
located on public land or the public way.
(g) Cause damage to the root zone of any public tree or tree or
shrub on the public way or public land, by digging a tunnel or
trench, moving or storage of construction vehicles, materials, or
equipment or changing of the grade within the drip line.
(2) The Tree Warden, in considering a permit application, shall balance
the interest of the City of Meriden in maintaining and protecting
its natural resources with the interest of the applicant in taking the
requested action. In particular, the Tree Warden should consider the
following factors, if applicable:
§ 196-4 MERIDEN CODE § 196-4
1:452
(a) The rarity, age and size of the tree or shrub.
(b) The invasiveness of the activity proposed.
(c) The potential damage to the tree or shrub if the activity is
undertaken.
(d) The necessity for the activity to take place in order to meet the
applicant's goal.
(e) Whether or not the applicant is willing to replace the tree or
shrub with a like kind, size and quality tree or shrub in another
location.
(f) Whether or not the tree or shrub can be relocated.
(g) Available feasible or reasonable alternatives.
(h) The financial burden to the applicant in utilizing the
alternative(s), should the application be denied.
(i) The consequences to the Urban Forestry Plan.
(j) The public benefit or burden which would accrue if the activity is
allowed to take place.
(k) The public benefit or burden which would accrue if the activity is
not allowed to take place.
(l) Any other considerations which are relevant to a thorough
determination of the benefits and burdens to acceptance or
denial of the application.
(3) If the Tree Warden determines that a complete review of the
application cannot be made with the information on the application,
or finds that the issue involved is of public concern, the Warden may
provide a forum at which the public may state its concerns.88
(4) During the growing season, April 15 to November 1, the Tree
Warden shall issue a written decision granting or denying the
application, along with the reasons therefor, within 10 working days
after the public forum, if any, or within 20 working days of the
submission of the application, if no public forum is held. Said
decision shall be mailed to the applicant at the address provided on
the application, first-class mail, postage prepaid. In addition, a copy
of said decision shall be posted outside the City Clerk's office for a
period of two weeks.
(5) If an applicant or abutting property owner is aggrieved by the
decision of the Tree Warden, that decision may be appealed to the
Application Review Board. Such appeal shall be taken within 30 days
of the entering of the Tree Warden's decision by filing a written
notice of appeal, along with the reasons for the appeal, in the
Building Division. The hearing for the appeal shall be held within 20
working days of the filing of the appeal, at which time the applicant
and the Tree Warden shall present arguments on their own behalf.
The Application Review Board shall have a de novo review of all
facts and evidence. It shall be the applicant's burden to show by a
preponderance of the evidence that the decision of the Tree Warden
should be reversed; otherwise, said decision shall be sustained.
Within three days of the conclusion of the hearing, the Application
Review Board shall issue its ruling either reversing or sustaining the
decision of the Tree Warden.
§ 196-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 196-5
1:453
§ 196-5. Enforcement.
The provisions of this chapter may be enforced by citation, in addition to
other remedies. The following persons have authority to issue citations for
violations pursuant to this chapter: Tree Warden. Each instance of activity
on each public tree, tree or shrub shall constitute a separate offense. In
addition, if the damage is done to a tree owned by the City of Meriden, the
City may seek civil penalties as allowed by law.
Chapter 198
VEHICLES, ABANDONED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Solid waste, recycling and littering — See Ch.
176.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 180.
Tow trucks and towing — See Ch. 191.
Trailers and trailer camps — See Ch. 194.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 200.
Zoning — See Ch. 213.
STATUTORY REFERENCES
Abandoned or unregistered motor
vehicles — See C.G.S. § 14-150 et seq.
§ 198-1. Statutory authority.
This chapter is enacted pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes
§ 14-150a, as amended.
§ 198-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MOTOR VEHICLE — Any vehicle as defined in Connecticut General Statutes
§ 14-1, as amended, and shall include any part of a motor vehicle so defined.
§ 198-3. Unregistered motor vehicles; taxation.
Any unregistered motor vehicle must be registered on the tax rolls of the
City of Meriden as provided by Connecticut General Statutes.
88.Editor's Note: Former § 196-4C(4), which immediately followed this subsection and
provided for the Conservation Commission to review all permit applications, was repealed
2-17-2004.
§ 196-5 MERIDEN CODE § 198-4
1:454
§ 198-4. Prohibited acts.
It shall be unlawful to deposit, park, place, permit to remain, store or have
any abandoned or inoperable or unregistered motor vehicle or any part
thereof on any property located within the City of Meriden.
§ 198-5. Impoundment and disposal of certain vehicles.
Pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes § 14-150(b), as amended, any
sworn City of Meriden police officer shall take into custody and store any
motor vehicle which is a menace to traffic, a menace to public health or
a menace to safety. The vehicle shall be disposed of as described in the
procedures set forth in Connecticut General Statutes § 14-150, as amended.
§ 198-6. Motor vehicles on private property.
A. Whenever any motor vehicle which appears to be abandoned, inoperable
or unregistered is found on private property, any sworn City of Meriden
police officer shall take the following steps:
(1) Cause a general notice to be placed in a newspaper having a
substantial circulation in the City of Meriden specifying the make,
model, year and color of the motor vehicle; the license plate number
of the vehicle, if available, or, if not, the VIN number, if available;
the name of the last registered owner of the motor vehicle, if known
or ascertainable; the location of the motor vehicle; and that the
vehicle is under investigation as being abandoned, inoperable or
unregistered. The notice shall also state that the City of Meriden will
remove and dispose of the motor vehicle unless it is removed and
properly disposed of within 30 days of the publication of the notice.
(2) At the same time, send by first-class mail or by hand delivery written
notice to the owner of the property upon which the motor vehicle
is found, with a copy to the last registered owner of the motor
vehicle, if known, at that owner's last known address, requesting
that the motor vehicle be removed within 30 days from the date of
the publication of the notice as provided in Subsection A(1) above
and describing the procedure for an appeal to a hearing officer. If the
motor vehicle remains unmoved after the expiration of the 30 days,
the vehicle shall be caused to be removed by the Chief of Police or
his authorized agent.
B. The Chief of Police shall be responsible for notifying the owner of the
property, causing publication of the general notice and for removal and
disposition of such motor vehicle by an authorized agent.
C. The owner of the property upon which the motor vehicle is found,
or the last registered owner of the vehicle, has the right to contest
the determination that said motor vehicle is abandoned, inoperable or
unregistered by making a written application for a hearing to the City
Manager, which application must be received by the City Manager
before the expiration of the thirty-day period. Said application will stay
proceedings under this chapter pending a decision by the hearing officer.
The City Manager shall appoint one or more hearing officers to hear
these appeals. Upon receipt of an application for hearing pursuant to
§ 198-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-6
1:455
this subsection, the City Manager shall notify the Chief of Police and the
hearing officer, which hearing officer shall promptly schedule a hearing.
Any party may for good cause request a continuance of a hearing, but the
decision to allow such continuance will be at the reasonable discretion
of the hearing officer. At the hearing, the owner of the motor vehicle may
produce any relevant evidence to show that the motor vehicle is not in
violation of this chapter. At the hearing, the authority which made the
decision to tow the motor vehicle may produce any relevant evidence to
show that the motor vehicle is not in compliance with this chapter. The
hearing officer shall proceed with reasonable dispatch to conclude any
matter pending before him and render a decision. The hearing officer
shall provide both parties with written notice of his decision, which shall
state the reason for his determination. If the hearing officer determines
that the motor vehicle is in violation of this chapter, said motor vehicle
must be removed within the thirty-day period or within five days from
the issuance of the hearing officer's decision, whichever is later.
D. In the event that a motor vehicle is not removed prior to the expiration of
the thirty-day period and is therefore removed by the Chief of Police or
an authorized agent, the last registered owner of the motor vehicle and
the owner of the property from which the motor vehicle was removed
shall be jointly and severally liable for all costs of such removal, storage
or sale of said motor vehicle, and a lien for such cost shall be placed
on the real property from which the motor vehicle was removed.
Notwithstanding the above, if the owner of the property upon which the
motor vehicle is found notifies the Chief of Police, in writing, that said
motor vehicle was abandoned and that the owner of said property is not
the owner of said motor vehicle and consents to its removal prior to the
expiration of the thirty-day period, the owner of said property shall not
be liable for any costs associated with removal, storage or sale of said
vehicle.
E. At the expiration of the thirty-day period, if the motor vehicle has not
been removed or brought into compliance with this chapter, the vehicle
shall be caused to be removed and stored by an authorized agent of
the Chief of Police. Within 48 hours of the time that a motor vehicle
is taken into custody and stored pursuant to this subsection, the Police
Department shall give written notice by certified mail to the owner of
such motor vehicle, if known, which notice shall state that the motor
vehicle has been taken into custody and stored, the location of storage
of the motor vehicle, and that such motor vehicle may be sold and/or
destroyed after 15 days if the market value of such motor vehicle does
not exceed $500 or after 90 days if the value of such motor vehicle
exceeds $500. The owner of the motor vehicle shall also be informed
of the right to pay all associated costs, and thereby retrieve the motor
vehicle, and of the right to appeal the sale of the motor vehicle to the
hearing officer, utilizing the procedure set forth in Subsection C above.
F. The following shall be exempted from proceedings under this section:
(1) Any and all motor vehicles owned by the City of Meriden.
§ 198-6 MERIDEN CODE § 198-6
1:456
(2) Motor vehicles being held, retained, repaired or offered for sale,
lease or rental by a licensed car dealer, licensed auto body shop,
licensed repair garage and facilities, or licensed junkyards.
(3) Motor vehicles that would otherwise fall within the provisions of this
chapter but are kept in a wholly enclosed garage.
(4) A limit of one motor vehicle that is owned by the owner and occupant
of the property that would otherwise fall within the provisions of this
chapter but is kept under a secured cover manufactured, marketed
and sold specifically and solely as an automobile cover and is stored
in the rear of the property, if possible.
(5) A limit of one motor vehicle at any one time, and not more than
three motor vehicles in a span of 12 months, that would otherwise
fall within the provisions of this chapter, to be offered for sale by the
owner. Said motor vehicle shall be on the premises and offered for
sale for 30 days at which time it shall be removed. If the same motor
vehicle is again offered for sale on the premises after the 30 days
or after its removal, said motor vehicle shall constitute an additional
motor vehicle.
§ 198-7. Motor vehicles on public property.
When a sworn City of Meriden police officer discovers a motor vehicle on
public property, including any City or state road, which appears abandoned,
or is without proper registration, said officer shall follow the procedures set
forth in Connecticut General Statutes § 14-150(c), (d) and (e), as amended,
in order to properly dispose of said motor vehicle.
§ 198-8. Motor vehicle towing charge. [Amended 1-23-2008]
A fee of $0 shall be charged for the towing of each motor vehicle towed
pursuant to this chapter. The fee will be adjusted in the future should there
be a cost for the service provided by the vendor.
Chapter 200
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Traffic Authority — See Ch. 6, Art. XI.
Parking Commission — See Ch. 6, Art. XVI.
Transit District — See Ch. 6, Art. XVII.
Ambulances — See Ch. 62.
Bicycles — See Ch. 73.
Parks and recreation — See Ch. 150.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 180.
Tow trucks and towing — See Ch. 191.
Trailers and trailer camps — See Ch. 194.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 198.
§ 198-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-8
1:457
STATUTORY REFERENCES
Regulation of vehicles generally — See C.G.S.
§ 14-1 et seq.
Traffic control — See C.G.S. § 14-297 et seq.
§ 198-8 MERIDEN CODE § 198-8
1:458
ARTICLE I
General Regulations
§ 200-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES — Vehicles of the Fire Department
and the Police Department and ambulances and emergency vehicles of City
departments.
OPERATOR — The person operating or in control of a vehicle.
PARKING — The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, upon a
street otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually
engaged in receiving or discharging passengers, loading or unloading
merchandise or in obedience to traffic regulations or signs or signals.
PARKING METER — A mechanism having a visible time indicator and a
coin-receiving and a coin-actuating mechanism, all enclosed and mounted
on top of a post.
PARKING METER ZONE — Any restricted street upon which parking meters
are installed and in operation.
TRAFFIC — Pedestrians, parades, ridden or herded animals, vehicles and
other conveyances, either singly or together, while using any street for
purposes of travel.
VEHICLE — Every device in, upon or by which any person or property
may be transported or drawn upon a street, except devices used exclusively
upon stationary rails or tracks.
§ 200-2. Traffic Authority. [Amended 9-15-1980]
There shall be a Traffic Authority as designated by Chapter 6, Boards,
Commissions and Appointed Positions, Article XI.
§ 200-3. Erection of traffic control devices.
A. The Chief of Police shall cause to be erected and maintained, at such
places in the City and in such manner as the Traffic Authority may
designate, signs and markings for the direction and regulation of traffic
and the parking of vehicles upon the streets, and he shall cause to be
erected and maintained all traffic control signal lights authorized by
such Authority.
B. The City Council or the Chief of Police may cause appropriate signs or
warnings to be posted temporarily along any street or public place for
the purpose of prohibiting the parking of vehicles while the Department
of Public Works is engaged in the performance of its duties in connection
with any public work or undertaking in such street or public place, and
the Chief of Police may suspend traffic regulations and prohibit parking
temporarily in any areas where, in his opinion, it is necessary in order
to facilitate the removal of snow or to prevent the obstruction of traffic
§ 200-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-3
1:459
in times of heavy snowfall or other emergency. The Chief of Police shall
give notice of such temporary prohibition by causing appropriate signs
to be placed indicating that parking is prohibited and, if practicable, by
publication through radio and newspaper. [Amended 9-15-1980]
§ 200-4. Authority of police officers.
Any police officer may orally direct traffic or prohibit the parking of any
vehicle on any street or public place in the City for the purpose of
preventing any obstruction or impediment to the safe travel of vehicles
thereon.
§ 200-5. Authority of school crossing guards to direct traffic.
[Added 9-2-1986]
All school crossing guards who have been duly appointed are hereby
empowered and authorized to stop and/or direct traffic in those areas
designated by the Chief of Police as necessary for the protection and safety
of children traveling to and from school.
§ 200-6. Compliance required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to comply with any law, ordinance
or rule or regulation of the Traffic Authority relating to traffic or parking
or for any person to fail to comply with any direction by voice, hand or
sign of any member of the Police Department in connection therewith or for
any person to fail to comply with any traffic sign, marking or signal unless
otherwise directed by a member of the Police Department.
§ 200-7. Damaging traffic control devices. [Amended 9-15-1980]
No unauthorized person shall deface, injure, remove or destroy any traffic
sign, signal or marker erected or affixed by the direction of the Traffic
Authority or under authority of state law or by or under the direction of the
Chief of Police.
§ 200-8. Speed limits.89
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle upon any street in
the City at a rate of speed exceeding 25 miles per hour.90
§ 200-9. Right-of-way to funeral processions.
No vehicle, except authorized emergency vehicles, shall pass through a
funeral procession. If the head of a funeral procession, whether vehicles
or persons, has started past a traffic signal light on the green light, such
procession may continue to proceed past such signal light continuously
89.Editor's Note: For speed limits in parks, see Ch. 150, Parks and Recreation.
90.Editor's Note: Former § 200-8, Street parades and processions, which immediately
followed this section and was amended 9-15-1980, was repealed 10-5-1981.
§ 200-3 MERIDEN CODE § 200-9
1:460
regardless of whether such signal light changes from green to any other
color while such funeral procession is passing, and while such funeral
procession is so passing all other traffic shall refrain from crossing or
passing through such funeral procession.
§ 200-10. Certain animals prohibited on sidewalks.
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride, drive or lead any horse or draft
animal upon any sidewalk in the City.
§ 200-11. Certain vehicles prohibited on sidewalks.
It shall be unlawful for any person to roll any wheelbarrow or handcart,
except a baby carriage, or to course, coast or slide on any sled, sleigh or
other device or vehicle, except toy vehicles, upon any sidewalk in the City.
§ 200-12. Operation of snowmobiles. [Added 4-3-1978]
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, and no owner shall permit
the operation of, any snowmobile on a sidewalk or school safety walk in
the City of Meriden.
B. No snowmobile will be permitted to operate on any public highway or
City street, except that such snowmobile, if operated by a licensed motor
vehicle operator, may cross a public highway or City street if the crossing
is made at an angle of approximately 90° to the direction of the highway
or street at a location where no obstruction prevents a quick and safe
crossing and the snowmobile is completely stopped before entering the
traveled portion of the highway or street.
C. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall have
committed an infraction of this section and shall be fined $25.
§ 200-13. Use of play vehicles on streets.
No person upon roller skates or riding in or by means of any coaster,
sled, toy vehicle or similar device shall go upon any roadway except while
crossing a street on a crosswalk and except upon streets set aside for such
purposes.
§ 200-14. Play streets. [Amended 9-15-1980]
The City Council may, under such restrictions as the Traffic Authority may
deem proper, designate certain streets or portions of streets in the City
upon which coursing, coasting or sliding shall be permitted. It may make
any restrictions and regulations which it deems necessary as to such use
of the streets so designated and shall publish in a newspaper in the City
the names of the streets so designated and the restrictions and regulations
relating thereto imposed by it.
§ 200-15. Restrictions on activities in streets.
No person shall play at any game of ball or fly any kite or balloon or throw
any stones or other missiles or engage in any other game or exercise in any
§ 200-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-15
1:461
street in the City, except those designated for such use under the preceding
section, which interferes with the free, safe and convenient use of such
street by traffic.
§ 200-16. Restrictions on operation of bicycles.91
No operator shall permit more persons to ride upon a bicycle at any one
time than the vehicle is designed to carry or permit such bicycle to be drawn
by clinging to or otherwise attaching such bicycle to any other moving
vehicle.
§ 200-17. Bells required for vehicles drawn by animals.
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any sled, sledge or sleigh drawn
by a horse or other animal on any street in the City unless there are bells
attached to such vehicle or to the horse or animal drawing the same.
91.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 73, Bicycles.
§ 200-15 MERIDEN CODE § 200-17
1:462
ARTICLE II
Parking
§ 200-18. Parking Commission. [Amended 4-4-1966; 9-15-1980]
There shall be a Parking Commission as established by Chapter 6, Boards,
Commissions and Appointed Positions, Article XVI.
§ 200-19. Owner presumed to be operator.
In any prosecution or proceeding for unlawful parking, the registered owner
of a vehicle so parked shall be presumed to have been the operator thereof
and prima facie guilty of having parked unlawfully.
§ 200-20. Charges for investigations by Parking Commission.
[Added 12-4-1967]
Where the Parking Commission is compelled to make an investigation to
determine the identity of the owner or operator of any vehicle for which the
regular parking charges for off-street parking remain unpaid, an additional
sum of $1 per day per violation shall be assessed against the delinquent
owner or operator to defray the cost of such investigation.
§ 200-21. Reasons for which vehicles may be impounded. [Amended
2-20-1990]
Any vehicle that is parked in violation of this chapter may be removed and
impounded at the expense of owner of such vehicle by a person authorized
to do so by the Chief of Police.
§ 200-22. Removal by authorized tower. [Amended 2-20-1990]
Any person authorized to remove a vehicle from the streets under the
provisions of Chapter 191, Tow Trucks and Towing, shall be an authorized
tower, who shall carry adequate insurance to indemnify the owner of any
vehicle so removed for any damage caused to such vehicle while such
vehicle is being removed or stored by such tower.
§ 200-23. Record of impounded vehicles; notice to owner.
The Chief of Police, or such other officer of the Police Department as he
shall designate, shall keep a record of the names of the owners of all
vehicles impounded, the numbers of the vehicles' state license plates, the
place where each vehicle was impounded, the nature of each violation and
the disposition of each case. The owner of an impounded vehicle shall
be duly informed as to the nature and circumstances of the violation on
account of which such vehicle has been impounded.
§ 200-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-24
1:463
§ 200-24. Release of impounded vehicles; charges. [Amended
12-5-1966; 2-20-1990]
Before the owner or person in charge of any impounded vehicle shall be
permitted to remove the same from the place to which it has been removed,
he shall furnish to the Chief of Police, or such other police officer as the
Chief shall designate, evidence of his identity and ownership of the vehicle
and shall pay the towing and storage charges for each day the vehicle is
impounded in excess of the first 24 hours. The tower shall not charge the
owner or person in charge of the impounded vehicle any more than the
towing and storage rates which have been approved by the Commissioner
of Motor Vehicles in accordance with Connecticut General Statutes § 14-66
and on file with the Chief of Police in accordance with § 191-4B(1) of the
City Code. The payment of the towing and storage charges shall be in
addition to any fine imposed for the parking violation.
§ 200-25. Tagging of vehicles; establishment of penalties; payment
procedure. [Amended 2-20-1990; 7-2-1990; 1-21-1997; 7-17-2000;
8-21-2000]
A. Whenever any vehicle is found parked in violation of any of the provisions
of this chapter or any ordinance or any rule or regulation of the Traffic
Authority which relates to parking a police officer shall attach to such
vehicle a notice to the owner or operator thereof stating that such vehicle
has been parked unlawfully and instructing such owner or operator to
report to the Traffic Division of the Police Department in regard to such
violation. The Traffic Authority of the City or any of its legally empowered
agents shall be empowered to excuse any such issued notice within 30 days
of the issuance of such notice. Each such owner or operator may, within
48 hours of the time when such notice is attached to such vehicle, pay
to the Traffic Division of the Police Department, as a penalty for and in
full satisfaction of such violation, excluding any towing or storage charges
assessed, the following fees:
$85.00 Posted handicapped parking space
$50.00 Parking during severe weather conditions
$50.00 Parking a truck, trailer or van on a public street or highway
except for deliveries or service calls
$15.00 Hindering snow plowing, street sweeping or snow removal
$15.00 Parking on lawn/front yard as defined in the Housing Code
$10.00 Parking any vehicle angled to and/or perpendicular to the curb
or curbline in or on any cul-de-sac on any accepted City street,
if posted by the Traffic Authority for parallel parking only
$10.00 Within 25 feet from corner
$10.00 Fire zone
$10.00 Fire hydrant
$10.00 Hospital zone
§ 200-24 MERIDEN CODE § 200-25
1:464
$25.00 Driveway
$10.00 Loading zone
$10.00 Crosswalk
$10.00 Double parking
$10.00 No parking zone
$15.00 Overtime parking
B. The above penalty for a violation of parking in a posted handicapped
parking space is subject to change without notice with mandatory increases
as set forth in Connecticut General Statutes § 14-253a.
C. The above penalty for parking during severe weather conditions is defined
as parking any vehicle on any public street or highway from November 15 to
March 15 of each year during any snow, sleet or freezing rain storm before
the Director of Public Works for the City of Meriden deems the streets and
sidewalks sufficiently cleared for public parking. The parking of any vehicle
on the streets during a snowstorm or until the snow has completely cleared
from the streets following a storm is prohibited between 12:00 midnight and
7:00 a.m.
D. The above penalty for parking during street cleaning operations is defined
as parking any vehicle on any public street or highway which has been
designated by signs for street sweeping.
E. The failure of such owner or operator to make such proper payment as
set forth above within 48 hours shall render him liable to an additional
two-dollar penalty. The payment of the total penalty within 30 days of the
time when such notice is attached to such vehicle, excluding any towing
or storage charges assessed, shall constitute full satisfaction for such
violation. After the expiration of the thirty-day period, such owner or
operator shall become subject to a fine of not more than $100 or
imprisonment for not more than 30 days, or both, as set forth in § 14-314 of
the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended, and the Traffic Division of
the Police Department shall submit all such notices to the prosecutor having
jurisdiction for criminal action.
§ 200-26. Prohibited parking. [Added 1-21-1997; amended
8-21-2000]
If a vehicle remains parked in any parking space beyond the parking time
limit fixed for such space, such vehicle shall be deemed unlawfully parked.92
92.Editor's Note: Former §§ 200-27 and 200-27.1, which immediately followed this section,
were repealed 2-20-1990. Former § 200-27 pertained to parking during severe weather and
was added 5-5-1969 and amended 9-15-1980, 11-7-1984, 3-16-1987 and 11-21-1988.
Former § 200-27.1 pertained to parking during street cleaning operations and was added
3-16-1987 and amended 11-21-1988.
§ 200-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-26
1:465

ARTICLE III
Parking Meters
§ 200-27. Authority to establish zones; collection of funds.
[Amended 4-4-1966; 9-15-1980]
In accordance with the provisions of § 7-207a of the Connecticut General
Statutes, as amended, the Parking Commission of the City is hereby
authorized to collect and receive all revenue from parking meters located on
public streets in the City and to establish metered on-street parking zones,
subject to modification or restriction of such zones by the Traffic Authority.
§ 200-28. Existing meters. [Amended 4-4-1966]
All existing parking meters shall become the property of the Parking
Commission, and such authority shall succeed to all the obligations of the
City relative to the payment of such meters.
§ 200-29. Use of revenue. [Amended 4-4-1966]
The revenues from such meters shall be used by the Parking Commission
for the regulation and control of the parking of vehicles in parking meter onstreet
and off-street zones, for the cost of purchase, installation, operation,
inspection, supervision and maintenance of parking meters and for
acquiring, operating and maintaining off-street parking facilities.
§ 200-30. Revenues to be listed as separate item on financial report.
[Amended 4-4-1966]
The revenues from such meters shall be shown as a distinct and separate
item on the annual financial report of the Parking Commission.
§ 200-31. Establishment of zones.
Whenever, because of traffic conditions or otherwise, the parking of vehicles
on any street or part thereof cannot, in the opinion of the Traffic Authority,
be adequately and efficiently regulated and controlled otherwise, it may
authorize the installation of parking meters and designate parking meter
zones, fix the zone parking fee and the legal parking time in such zones and
also fix the hours during which the use of parking meters shall be required.
§ 200-32. Marking of spaces. [Amended 9-15-1980]
The Chief of Police shall cause lines or markers to be placed upon the curb
or pavement, or both, of the street adjacent to each parking meter in a
parking meter zone, designating the parking space for which such meter is
to be used.
§ 200-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-33
1:467
§ 200-33. Proper parking; operation of meter.
When any vehicle is parked in a space adjacent to which a parking meter
is located, the operator of such vehicle shall park it within the lines or
marks established, unless such vehicle's length, width or load overlaps such
lines or marks, and, upon entering such space, shall immediately deposit or
cause to be deposited in such parking meter such coin of the United States
as is required by the Traffic Authority for such parking meter and as is
designated by proper directions on the meter. When required by directions
on the meter, the operator of such vehicle, after the deposit of the required
coin, shall also completely turn, or cause to be so turned, the crank handle
on the meter for the purpose of starting the timing mechanism.
§ 200-34. Permitted parking.
Upon the deposit of the required coin and the placing of a parking meter in
operation, the meter space may be lawfully occupied by a vehicle during the
period of parking time which has been prescribed for the part of the street
in which such meter space is located.
§ 200-35. Prohibited parking.
If a vehicle remains parked in any parking meter space beyond the parking
time limit fixed for such space and the parking meter by its dial and pointer,
or otherwise, indicates such unlawful parking, such vehicle shall be deemed
unlawfully parked.
§ 200-36. Parking beyond time limit prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or cause to be deposited in
any parking meter additional coins of the United States for the purpose of
increasing or extending the legal parking time which has been established
by the Traffic Authority for the parking meter space adjacent to which such
meter is placed.
§ 200-37. Use of spaces for loading.
Vehicles bearing commercial license plates may occupy the space adjacent
to any parking meter for the purpose of loading or unloading merchandise
or packages without the deposit of a proper coin in the meter, provided that
such loading or unloading is done as expeditiously as possible.
§ 200-38. Damaging meters.
It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to deface, damage, tamper
with or open or willfully break, destroy or impair the usefulness of any
parking meter installed under the provisions of this article or to aid or abet
any such action.
§ 200-33 MERIDEN CODE § 200-39
1:468
§ 200-39. Deposit of other than proper coins.
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or cause to be deposited in any
parking meter any slug, device or substitute for a coin of the United States.
§ 200-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-39
1:469

ARTICLE IV
Removal of Vehicles from Parking Lots
[Added 12-15-1965; amended 4-4-1966]
§ 200-40. Removal of vehicles authorized.
The Parking Commission and such other persons as may be designated by
it may remove from any parking lot under the control of said Commission
any vehicle found on said lot between the hours after 10:00 p.m. and before
7:00 a.m. on weekdays and at any time on Sundays or legal holidays.
§ 200-41. Charges.
The expenses of such removal shall be charged to the owner of the vehicle,
and the removal shall be effected by a person or organization authorized by
the Parking Commission.
§ 200-42. Insurance coverage required of persons removing
vehicles.
A. No person or organization shall be authorized to remove any vehicle
under the provisions of this article unless he has deposited with the
Parking Commission proper certificates to indicate that he has obtained
the following insurance coverage:
(1) A garage keeper's legal liability policy covering fire, theft and
explosion in the minimum amount of $5,000 and collision subject to a
fifty-dollar deductible, with each accident deemed a separate claim.
(2) A garage liability policy covering the operation of business
equipment and vehicles for risks involving injury or property damage
in the minimum amounts of $100,000 for any one person injured or
killed and $300,000 for more than one person injured or killed in any
one accident, together with coverage in the amount of $5,000 for
property damage.
B. Each policy required hereunder shall contain an endorsement providing
for 30 days' notice to the Parking Commission prior to the effective date
of any material change therein or the cancellation thereof.
§ 200-43. Records of removal.
The Parking Commission shall keep a record of every vehicle removed under
the provisions of this article, which description shall include the registration
number of the license plate, together with other descriptive identification of
such vehicle.
§ 200-44. Redemption of vehicles; charges.
Before the owner of a removed vehicle shall be permitted to reclaim the
same, he shall furnish evidence of his identity and ownership to the person
or organization who or which has custody of said vehicle, and he shall
pay the cost of removal and the cost of storage accruing to the date of
reclamation. Persons or organizations authorized to remove vehicles under
§ 200-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-44
1:471
the terms of this article may not charge an amount for storage which is in
excess of $1 for each day or portion thereof that such vehicle is stored.
§ 200-45. Penalties for offenses. [Added 9-16-1997]
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter may be fined $50 to $90
for each violation.
§ 200-44 MERIDEN CODE § 200-45
1:472
ARTICLE V
Motor Scooters, Minibikes and Pocket Bikes
[Added 10-18-2004]
§ 200-46. Definitions.
For purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated
MOTOR SCOOTER, MINIBIKE and POCKET BIKE — Any wheeled device
designed for the transport of one or more persons which is powered by any
type of motor, except:
§ 200-47. Operations prohibited; penalties for offenses.
A. Notwithstanding any other provision of these ordinances, any person
who operates any motor scooter, minibike, or pocket bike on any portion
of any public or private street shown on the Official Map of the City,
including the sidewalk area of any such street, or on any other public
property, including schools, playgrounds and parks, within the City of
Meriden shall be fined $90.
B. Any person who rides as a passenger on any motor scooter operated in
violation of the above shall be fined $50.
C. Whenever any police officer observes any person in violation of this
section, he or she may detain such person for purposes of the
enforcement of this section. Furthermore, such motor scooter may be
removed from the road by tow and the owner of said scooter shall be
responsible for the towing and storage fees.
A. Any motorcycle or motorized bicycle as defined in state statute.
Any vehicle registered as a motor vehicle by the Registrar of Motor
Vehicles or lawfully exempt from such registration.
B.
Any wheelchair used by a person with physical disabilities or any
similar mobility-assisting device used by a person whose ambulatory
mobility has been impaired by age, illness or physical ailment or
electric personal assistive mobility devices.
C.
Any self-propelled snowplows, snowblowers and lawn mowers when
used for the purposes for which they were designed and operated at
speeds not exceeding four miles per hour.
D.
Any moped or scooter which meets Federal Department of
Transportation and State Department of Transportation guidelines for
on-road transportation and whose owner's manual specifically indicates
an ability to be driven on public roads.
E.
F. Any vehicle owned or leased by the City of Meriden.
Any bicycle with a helper motor as referenced in § 14-286 of the
Connecticut General Statutes.
G.
§ 200-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-47
1:473
Chapter 207
WATER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Public Utilities Commission — See Ch. 6, Art.
XV.
Building construction — See Ch. 77.
Housing standards — See Ch. 125.
Health nuisances — See Ch. 144.
Sewers — See Ch. 170.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 180.
Trailers and trailer camps — See Ch. 194.
STATUTORY REFERENCES
Water supply — See C.G.S. 25-32 et seq.
§ 200-47 MERIDEN CODE § 200-47
1:474
ARTICLE I
Water Service Regulations
§ 207-1. Compliance required.
Supplies of water from the City's waterworks shall be furnished to
customers subject to the provisions of this chapter and any rules or
regulations of the Public Utilities Commission made in connection with such
services. The signing of an application for water service or the use of water
shall signify that the applicant agrees to comply with such provisions, rules
and regulations.
§ 207-2. Right of entry and inspection. [Amended 1-24-2008]
The Director of Public Utilities, or his agents when ordered, may at all
reasonable times enter any dwelling house or other premises to which water
is supplied from the waterworks system to make such inspection of the
pipes and fixtures and inquiries as to the use of water on the premises as
the Manager may consider necessary and proper for the best interest of the
City.
§ 207-3. Application for service. [Amended 1-24-2008]
Applications for new service pipes or for the renewal of existing service
pipes or for the use of water shall be made in writing at the office of the
Water Division, upon the prescribed form, by the owner of the premises to
be served or his agent.
§ 207-4. Service to other than owners.
The Public Utilities Commission may, in its discretion, supply service pipes
or water service to consumers other than the owners of the premises
served, upon the filing by such consumers of the application required by
§ 207-3.
§ 207-5. Nonrecurring charges. [Amended 1-24-2008]
A. Installation of service pipes.
(1) General. Service pipes measuring one inch in diameter from the main to the curb shall
be installed by the City at the owner's expense upon the approval of the Engineering
Division and the filing of an application therefor and payment to the Water Division.
Service connections from the curb to the premises to be served shall be installed the expense of the applicant for water service. First connection entering the building
(copper service only) shall be a flared connection. Whenever application for the renewal
of a service pipe is made, the applicant shall pay to the City the applicable nonrecurring
charges as if it were a new installation. The property owner or his agent shall install that portion of the service pipe from the shutoff at the curb to the building be served, whereupon the City shall install the portion from the shutoff to the main.
Whenever the installation of a new service pipe or the renewal of an existing service
pipe requires excavation in an improved roadway, highway or street, such excavation
§ 207-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 207-5
1:475
shall be made at the expense of the applicant therefor under the provisions of Chapter
180, Streets and Sidewalks, relating to excavations.
(2) Charges.
(a) Complete installation charges will be only for one-inch pipe diameters. This installation
is the service from the main to the curb which includes the following:
[1] Tapping the main.
[2] Provide and install corporation stop assembly.
[3] Copper service from main to curb.
[4] Curb stop and curb box.
[5] Excavation and backfill.
[6] Temporary and permanent pavement restoration.
(b) The water meter charges are not included. [Amended 2-6-2012]
Service Length
(feet)
Service Size
(inches) Nonrecurring Charge
Short service: up to 15 1 $1,755
Long service: greater than 15 up
to 30
1 $100 per foot
(c) Additional charges. Complete installation with road repairs that exceed 30 feet length should pay an additional charge of $50 per linear foot for distance in excess 30 feet. If rock is encountered in trench an additional cost of $50 per cubic yard shall
be charged if the Water Division elects to perform excavation.
(d) Partial installation charges for services 3/4 inch to two inches from the main to the curb
include the following: tapping the main; provide and install corporation stop assembly.
All other work, materials and road restoration are the responsibility of the applicant.
Applicant is responsible for permits and must ensure that materials and work meet
Department of Public Utilities standards.
Service Size
(inches) Nonrecurring Charge
3/4 $150
1 $200
1 1/2 $325
2 $325
(e) These charges do not include meter installation.
(f) The minimum service size for a residential dwelling unit shall be one inch.
(g) Partial installation charges for service/main connections for four inches to 12 inches
shall be for tapping the main only. All work, materials and road restoration shall be the
responsibility of the applicant and must meet Department of Public Utilities standards.
Tap Size
(inches) Nonrecurring Charge
4 $600
6 $600
§ 207-5 MERIDEN CODE § 207-5
1:476
Tap Size
(inches) Nonrecurring Charge
8 $600
10 $600
12 $600
(h) Charge includes pressure testing of tapping sleeve ($125).
(3) All installations made under this section shall be made under the supervision of Director of Public Utilities subject to the policies and regulations promulgated by Department of Public Works and Department of Public Utilities, Water Division.
B. Miscellaneous charges.
(1) Private meter readings. Readings that are requested by owner, attorneys or
others for interim readings (closing, etc.): nonrecurring charge: $25 each
appointment unless cancellation was received by office.
(2) Reconnection charges. These charges are applied when service is restored
subsequent to termination for nonpayment or failure to comply with Water
Division rules and regulations. Nonrecurring charges:
(a) Regular hours: $50 each.
(b) After hours: $75 each.
(3) Meter testing charge.
(a) Every meter has been carefully tested before it is installed and also before
it is reset after being removed for repairs or for any other reason. In a case
of a high meter reading, a recheck will be made of the reading, and if found
to be correct as originally read, the Division will base its billing on this
reading.
(b) If the property owner feels that the reading is in any way faulty, he may
request that the meter be removed and tested. The cost to the property
owner for such removal and testing will be $20, which must be paid in
advance. If the meter is found to register above the allowable limits, 2% or
more, the water bill will be adjusted according to the City and state code,
and the twenty-dollar testing fee will be refunded. If the meter is found to
be registering within the limits, plus or minus 2%, the fee will be retained
by the Division and the meter returned to the service from which it was
removed. The Division may install a new meter if it falls under the meter
replacement criteria. The tested meter will be kept in storage for no more
than three years.
(c) The twenty-dollar nonrecurring charge applies to meters ranging from 5/8
inch through two inches. Meters three inches and above will be charged at
actual costs plus 25% administrative costs.
(d) The property owner shall be encouraged to witness the tests.
(4) Meter resetting charge.
(a) This charge applies only to existing accounts where the meter has been
removed.
(b) The purpose of this charge is to recover the cost of turning on the service
and resetting a meter.
(c) Nonrecurring charge: $50 each.
(5) Meter pit pump-out.
§ 207-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 207-5
1:477
(a) It is the responsibility of the owner/customer to maintain the meter pit/
vault. On occasions Water Division personnel are requested to pump water
out of these pits/vaults to obtain a reading or to perform an inspection.
(b) The Water Division will notify the owner in writing of this situation and
allow him a reasonable time (five days) to correct the situation.
(c) If the owner fails to perform this work or if the owner requests that the
Water Division perform this work a charge will be applied.
(d) Nonrecurring charge: $200 each.
(6) After-hours charge:
(a) This is for call-out work performed outside regular Water Division working
hours if such call-out is for customer convenience.
(b) Nonrecurring charge: $75 each.
(7) Replacement/repair of damaged or missing meter and appurtenances. This
charge shall be based upon actual costs of labor, tools, materials and
equipment, plus 25%.
C. All installations made under this section shall be made under the supervision of the
Public Utilities Commission, subject to regulations promulgated by the Department.
§ 207-6. Maintenance of service pipes. [Amended 1-24-2008]
A. Every consumer supplied with water from the waterworks system shall
keep his service pipe, from the shutoff at the curb to the building served,
in good repair and shall maintain the same and all fixtures and apparatus
connected therewith free from leaks.
B. In case of leaking or broken water service pipe, the Water Division
will make such repairs as are practicable on the section of the pipe
between the water main in the street and the curb stop. Whenever, in
the opinion of the Water Division, the age and condition of the service
pipe are such as to make it impracticable to maintain service through
the present pipe, the water may be shut off after adequate notice is
provided. The customer will be advised that he should immediately apply
for the renewal of the facilities.
C. Water service pipe material shall be Type K Copper, with a minimum
of one-inch diameter. Ductile iron pipe may be used for properties that
require a water service pipe diameter larger than two inches. Plastic
service pipe shall not be permitted. [Added 8-21-2017]
D. No unauthorized person(s) shall uncover, make any connections with
or opening into, use, alter, repair or disturb any public water line or
appurtenance thereof. [Added 2-20-2018]
(1) A person intending to connect a water service pipe from his property
to the public main shall first obtain a permit to connect from the
Engineering Division. The application shall be made on forms
provided by the Engineering Division and it shall be accompanied by
a sketch or plan showing the proposed installation in sufficient detail
to enable the Engineering Division to determine that the proposed
installation meets the requirements of this regulation and other
applicable specifications, codes and laws. The application shall be
signed by the qualified contractor who has been chosen to perform
the work of installing and connecting the water service pipe to
the public main. Upon approval by the Engineering Division of the
§ 207-5 MERIDEN CODE § 207-6
1:478
application and plan, a permit shall be issued to have the work
performed by the stated contractor. In the event that the premises
changes ownership before the work is completed, or if another
contractor is chosen to perform or finish the work, the original
permit becomes void and a new permit must be obtained by the
parties in interest. New fees shall be charged.
(2) Prior to obtaining a permit to connect, the applicant or his
authorized representative shall provide adequate documentation to
the Engineering Division to indicate how the connection is proposed.
The Engineering Division and/or the Public Utilities Commission
shall review the application to determine if the proposal is
acceptable or if changes are required. It shall be unlawful for any
person who has received such a permit connect with any water main
or service other than the one approved in such permit.
(3) The City reserves the right to increase the limits of the repair if, in
the opinion of the Water Inspector or Water Distribution Supervisor,
the condition of the service pipe is such that a larger repair is
necessary.
E. All water service pipes shall be installed by a plumber who possesses
a valid license issued under Chapter 393 of the Connecticut General
Statutes, as amended. In addition thereto, no person shall make any
connection with any public or private main in the City unless he is
licensed and obtained all necessary permits, and no person shall employ
any unlicensed person to do such work. Every person so licensed shall
file with the Engineering Division a surety bond, payable to the City,
in the sum of $4,000, conditioned that the licensee will indemnify and
save harmless the City from all loss, cost or damage arising out of or in
connection with any work done under such license. [Added 2-20-2018]
§ 207-7. Extension of mains; apportionment of costs. [Amended
1-24-2008]
Extension of water mains shall be made under the following conditions,
subject to the provisions of the City Charter:
A. Extension of water mains in an existing, City-accepted and -maintained
street:
(1) Petitions for extension of water mains shall be submitted to the
Public Utilities Commission.
(2) Upon initial approval by the Public Utilities Commission, plans for
such extension shall be prepared by or under the supervision of
the City Engineer. The plans shall include cost estimates, a map
showing property lines and owners of all existing properties abutting
or otherwise benefiting from the proposed extension. Assessments
shall be based on the current cost of eight-inch pipe together with all
other necessary materials and cost of labor. If the City requires pipe
in excess of eight inches for any purpose, the added cost of larger
pipe shall be borne by the City. The Public Utilities Commission
shall, following review of the plan, recommend to the City Council
proposed assessments against the benefiting property owners. All
§ 207-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 207-7
1:479
maps, plans and pertinent data shall be forwarded to the City
Council.
(3) The Council committee shall schedule a public hearing to consider
the proposed water main extension. The committee shall prove at
least 10 days' written notice of such hearing to the owner or owners
of the land and buildings upon which the cost of such water mains
may be assessed. In addition, notice of the public hearing shall also
be published at least twice in a daily newspaper published in the City
prior to the date of the hearing. Following the hearing the committee
shall report its findings and/or recommendations to the full Council.
(4) If the City Council approves the extension of such water main, the
Director of Public Works (or City Manager) will proceed to have the
water main installed and assess the cost of such installation against
the benefiting property owners, as determined by the City Council.
(5) Upon final completion of construction of such main:
(a) The City Engineer shall provide written certification to the Public
Utilities Commission that the installation is in compliance with
the approved plans and that leakage and bacterial tests were
made and determined to be satisfactory.
(b) The Public Utilities Commission shall give written notice to the
owners of the land and buildings assessed therefor, and such
assessments are due and payable on the date of such notice.
Any such owner may pay the entire amount of such assessment
within 30 days without interest charges, or he may pay the
amount of such assessment or any portion of such assessment
within one year following the thirty-day period, and the amount
of such payment shall bear interest at the rate of 12% per
annum. All assessments or portions thereof which remain unpaid
following a period of one year and 30 days from the date of such
notice from the Public Utilities Commission shall bear interest
at the rate of 18% per annum, figured from the date when
assessments are first due and payable, except that payments
must be completed within a period of five years from the date
when assessments are first due and payable.
(6) The amount so assessed shall be a lien upon the property. Such lien
shall commence and attach to such land and buildings from the time
of the acceptance by the City Council of the recommendation of the
committee to extend such water main, provided that a certificate
of such lien describing the property and the amount thereof shall
be filed with the City Clerk, such certificate to be signed by the
Collector of Taxes and to be filed within 30 days of the date of the
notice from the Public Utilities Commission referred to in Subsection
A(5)(b).
(7) In the event that application is made for a water main extension to be
laid in any street, road or highway, as herein provided, and the land
abutting both sides of the street, road or highway or section thereof
in which the extension applied for is to be laid is owned by the same
person, the provisions of this section requiring notice and hearing by
the committee and the assessment of the costs of such extension and
§ 207-7 MERIDEN CODE § 207-7
1:480
the notice thereof by the Public Utilities Commission shall not apply,
provided that the street, road or highway or section thereof has been
accepted by the City Council or that the Planning Commission of
the City has approved the same for construction and has received
a bond from such person guaranteeing proper completion of such
street, road or highway or section thereof, provided further that such
person shall pay to the City Water Division an amount equal to the
cost of such extension as estimated by the City Engineer. No pipe
may be laid in any street or highway, under the provisions of this
section, until the same has been rough graded to an established
grade in the location assigned for such pipeline.
B. Extension of water mains in a private street owned and maintained by
a condominium association. Extension of City-owned and -maintained
water mains into private streets will be allowed under the following
conditions:
(1) The private street will be owned, maintained and controlled by a
permanent legal property owners' group, e.g., condominium
association.
(2) The private street is to be constructed in accordance with plans and
specifications approved by the Planning Commission.
(3) The development has been approved by the Planning Commission.
(4) All engineering specifications, calculations and detailed construction
plans of the waterlines and appurtenances have been submitted to
and approved by the Director of Public Works and Director of Public
Utilities.
(5) Following construction but before placing the line into use, the
consulting engineer shall certify to the Director of Public Works
and Director of Public Utilities that the construction was done in
compliance with the approved plans and specifications and that the
new main met all required leakage and bacterial tests.
(6) All water mains shall be located in the right-of-way and easements
according to City requirements.
§ 207-8. Maps and records of water system.
A. Whenever a new water main or other addition to or change in the water
system is made, the Director of Public Works shall have maps prepared
showing the size and location of the main, the size and location of all
gates and other fixtures, the location of all service connections from
the main to the shutoff and any other change or addition made to such
system.
B. Whenever a new connection is made to an existing water main, the same
shall be accurately located and a record kept of such location so that the
connection may be shown on any map subsequently prepared.
§ 207-9. Conditions requiring installation of meters. [Amended
1-24-2008]
A. The Public Utilities Commission may at any time order the meter placed on
any service connection if it deems it in the best interest of the City so to do,
and any property owner, upon notification by the Commission, shall allow a
§ 207-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 207-9
1:481
representative of the Water Division to enter upon his premises to install such
a meter. Upon application by the consumer, a meter shall be placed on any
service previously unmetered. The consumer shall provide a proper place for
the installation of a meter immediately inside the building wall which shall be of
easy access at all times for reading and repair. The Director of Public Works and
Director of Public Utilities, or their representatives, shall determine the size of
the water meter installed on any service and may determine when any meter
shall be repaired or replaced.
B. When a service line or other private water line is tapped off a public water main
and serves or is intended to serve more than one building or property, or when
the length of the service is over 100 feet, the Public Utilities Commission may at
any time order the installation of a frostproof accessible meter pit just inside the
first property nearest the public water main (or other location as recommended
by the Public Utilities Commission) and the placement of a meter in that pit.
Consumption of water and charges for such consumption shall be based upon
readings from that meter. Unpaid bills, including interest and lien fees, shall be
assessed against the property on which the meter pit is located.
C. Installation of meters.
(1) Water service shall not be supplied to a new account until a proper and
adequate meter setter has been provided by the owner immediately inside the
building wall which shall be of easy access at all times for meter reading and
repair, the required fee for the proper size meter has been paid to the Water
Division by the owner, and the Water Division has installed and sealed the
required meter. The Public Utilities Commission shall act as an appeals board
to determine when and if a frostproof meter pit shall be required rather than a
meter location within the building.
(2) The fee for the installation of new meters shall be as follows:
Size of Meter
(inches) Nonrecurring Charge
5/8 x 3/4 $175
3/4 $185
1 $250
1 1/2 $400
2 or larger Actual cost of meter/accessories plus
25%
§ 207-10. Meter seals; meter reading; sale of water. [Amended
1-24-2008]
A. All meters installed under § 207-9 shall be properly sealed immediately
upon their installation by an employee of the Water Division and shall
not be interfered with or tampered with thereafter by any unauthorized
person.
B. All broken seals shall be immediately reported to the City Water
Division. A charge of $50 shall be levied for each broken seal.
§ 207-9 MERIDEN CODE § 207-10
1:482
(1) If the seal is found tampered with by the same owner of property a
second time the fee is $200 plus the amount in Subsection C(1) or
(2).
(2) If the seal is found tampered with by the same owner of property a
third time the fee is $1,000 plus the amount in Subsection C(1) or
(2).
(3) It the seal is found tampered with by the same owner for a fourth
time, service will be terminated and account turned over to legal for
further action.
C. The minimum use charge for any billed period during any portion of
which the seal was broken or meter tampered with shall be as follows:
(1) Residential (per family or per dwelling unit): 4,000 cubic feet or
maximum recorded consumption during any of the last six billing
periods, whichever is higher. [Amended 2-6-2012]
(2) Commercial or industrial: twice the highest recorded consumption
during any of the last six billing periods.
D. Where it has not been possible to gain access to the property for
the purpose of reading the meter and the customer has declined to
return the self-reading cards provided, consumption shall be estimated
by the Water Division based upon previous readings. The number of
consecutive estimated readings shall not exceed two billing periods. The
use of self-reading cards or combination of estimated or self-reading
cards shall not exceed three successive billing periods.
E. When the above limitations of estimated or self-reading cards have
occurred, the customer must notify the Water Division within 15 days
of being notified by the Water Division of such limitations and indicate
a reasonable time when the premises will be accessible for the meter
reader. Failure to provide such access to the meter reader as scheduled
may result in termination of service and shall result in a charge of $50
during regular business hours or a charge of $75 after regular (Water
Division) business hours.
F. Where remote reading meters are installed, the premises shall be
entered into at least once every three years for the purpose of
ascertaining that the seal is intact. In the event of a broken seal and in
addition to the penalties above mentioned, readings shall be taken by
the Water Division on the actual meter rather than the remote gauge for
a minimum of four billing periods following the replacement of the seal.
G. The sale of water from the Water Division to other municipalities or
premises outside the City shall be subject to a surcharge of 50% of the
regular water rates existing for that billing period unless specifically
prohibited by prior contract.
H. It shall be the property owner's responsibility to report a meter leak or
malfunction to the Water Division as soon as it is detected.
I. The meter conversion program involving the change-over of all meters
which do not have a remote reading capability will continue so that all
meters shall be so equipped in due course.
J. The Water Division has the right of access, at all reasonable times, to the
customer's premises to read, inspect, repair, replace or service meters
§ 207-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 207-10
1:483
and accessory equipment, including but not limited to electrical circuits
and external terminal blocks.
§ 207-11. Liability for damage to meters.
Liability for damage to meters and appurtenances shall be charged to and
payable by the consumers served through such meters.
§ 207-12. Rates for unmetered service. [Amended 1-24-2008]
A. Except for possible use of water during construction, all new services
shall be metered. In instances of temporary variances issued by the
Public Utilities Commission, nonmetered buildings will be billed on
estimated consumption based on use and occupancy.
B. For the use of unmetered water during construction, the water fee shall
be as follows:
(1) Single-family dwellings: $35.
(2) Multiple dwellings: $35 per dwelling.
(3) Apartments, condo buildings with one meter unit.
(4) Commercial and industrial: $150 commercial; $300 industrial.
(5) New water main construction and a $40 per 100 feet.
(6) Large domestic and fire water services over four inches (water used
for testing purposes).
(7) Filling tank truck (bulk) at Water Division shop. Tank truck(s) may be
filled up at Water Division shop. Charges for this are as follows:
(a) One-time visit (per day): $20 administrative cost plus actual
water use.
(b) Multiple visits (per day) (five or fewer): $50 administrative cost
plus actual water use.
C. Hydrant use.
(1) No water shall be taken from a public hydrant by anyone other than
an authorized City employee.
(2) Hydrant permits will be issued by the Water Division only. The Water
Division will determine if a hydrant can be used.
(3) Charges.
(a) With meter: administrative charge of $150 plus water use based
on reading. A deposit of $150 will be paid in advance of any
hydrant use. It will be the permittee's responsibility to safeguard
and protect the meter at all times. Any damage or loss of meter
or appurtenances will be billed at actual cost.
(b) Without meter. If it is not possible to install a hydrant meter,
the hydrant use shall be estimated. An administrative charge of
$150 shall accompany the hydrant permit. The Water Division
will estimate usage based on facts from the permittee.
(c) Hydrant permittees will be responsible for the operation of the
hydrant if approved in advance by the Water Division. Any
damage that is done to a hydrant because of negligence will
be the responsibility of the permittee. Individuals/permittees are
also responsible for backflow prevention when using a hydrant.
(d) Any individual using a public fire hydrant without authorization
or a hydrant permit shall be charged a minimum of $250.
§ 207-10 MERIDEN CODE § 207-13
1:484
§ 207-13. Rates for metered service. [Amended 10-4-1993;
11-15-1993; 1-24-2008]
A. The water rents and rates for metered service and fixed user charges for the
Water Division shall consist of a flat basic service charge based on water meter
size plus a commodity charge based on consumption.
B. Commodity charge:
(1) Water rate: $3.15 per 100 cubic feet of water consumed. [Amended 2-6-2012]
(2) Public use charge. Municipal use charge shall be the same as other local service
customers.
(3) Basic service charge. The flat basic service rate based on meter size supports
the Water Division's share of the Fiscal Division. The expenses of the Fiscal
Division include meter reading, maintenance of customer account data and
billing services associated with a water customer. [Amended 2-6-2012]
Meter Size
(inches) Quarterly Charge
5/8 $15.66
3/4 $16.30
1 $18.23
1 1/4 to 1 1/2 $20.80
2 $27.87
3 $79.91
4 $99.19
6 $144.16
8 and larger $195.56
(4) Annual fire hydrant charge.
(a) Public fire hydrants: $40 per hydrant.
(b) Private fire hydrants: $100 per hydrant.
(5) Annual fire service charge. Any private line which services a fire protection
system, such as sprinkler heads, standpipe, siamese connections, etc., shall be
charged based on the size of service line, as follows:
Service Size
(inches) Annual Fee
2 $187.50
2 1/2 $187.50
3 $187.50
4 $231.25
6 $312.50
8 $437.50
12 $531.25
16 $531.25
§ 207-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 207-13
1:485
C. All annual charges set forth above shall be due and payable on December 1 of
each and every year.
D. The rates and charges for users of property located outside the territorial limits
of the City shall be 50% higher than the rates and charges above for the users
located within the City unless specifically prohibited by prior contract.
E. Private well water discharge into City sanitary sewers. The type, number and
location of meters shall be determined by the City. Metering of the supply
source is generally preferred due to the improved meter accuracy over
discharge meters. However, at the discretion of the City, discharge meters
may be required in certain situations. In general for new construction projects
served by private wells only or private wells and water supplied from City
water mains, a water meter shall be provided according to City standards for
each supply to ensure proper billing for discharge into City sanitary sewers.
For closed-loop systems served by private wells and not normally discharging
into City sewers, the requirement for a water meter may be waived by the
Engineering Division. For existing buildings or facilities served by private wells
only or private wells and water supplied from City water mains, alternatives,
including but not limited to the following, may be required at the discretion of
the City:
(1) The Director of Public Utilities or the Public Utilities Commission or their
authorized agent may order that a water meter be required according to
City standards for each supply to ensure proper billing for discharge into
City sanitary sewers. This is the preferred alternative for all existing and
proposed facilities.
(2) An estimate of usage will be made based on industry standards for the type
of use and other applicable factors. The City may require that the customer
provide an estimate of use, supported by detailed calculations, or the City
may provide the estimate of usage, supported by detailed calculations, or
the City billing review be contacted. In the event that there is still a dispute
over the estimated usage, the matter may be referred to the Meriden Public
Utilities Commission.
§ 207-14. Determination of charges when meter is defective.
A. Where a meter is operating incorrectly and a test of the meter results in
an accurate determination of the percentage of error exceeding 2%, the
consumer shall be allowed a credit for the amount overpaid, pursuant
to the State Department of Public Utilities Control Authority and/or
Meriden Public Utilities Commission guidelines.
B. Where a meter is operating incorrectly and it is not possible to
accurately determine consumption during any billing period, the water
use charge for that period shall be in proportion to previous charges for
similar periods when the meter was operating correctly.
§ 207-15. Due date for water rents. [Amended 2-6-2012]
Water rents shall be due and payable at the office of the Tax Collector
quarterly on the first day of March, June, September, and December.
Interest charges at a rate prescribed by the City Tax Collector and not
exceeding the minimum amount allowed by Connecticut General Statutes
shall be added as penalty to all water rents remaining unpaid one month
§ 207-13 MERIDEN CODE § 207-15
1:486
after their due date. The charges if applicable shall be calculated from the
payment date.
§ 207-16. Abatements for vacancy. [Amended 1-24-2008]
Any consumer to whom water is furnished through an unmetered service
may claim an abatement for partial or complete vacancy of his premises by
filing the proper notice at the office of the Water Division at the beginning
and termination of such vacancy, provided that no abatement shall be
allowed for a vacancy of less than two months' duration, and provided
further that no abatement may be claimed for any period prior to the date
of filing such notice. The right to claim an abatement shall be forfeited if the
consumer fails to give proper notice of the termination of the vacancy.
§ 207-17. Discontinuance of service. [Amended 1-24-2008]
The Water Division may, upon orders from the Director of Public Utilities
or the Public Utilities Commission, shut off water service in the City or any
part thereof, and wherever outside the City limits water service may be
supplied, for repairs, extensions or other necessary work connected with
the maintenance and operation of the waterworks system, for the purpose
of husbanding the resources of the reservoir, and in any other case where
the Director of Public Utilities or the Public Utilities Commission deems
such action to be in the best interest of the City. Neither the City nor the
Public Utilities Commission or its officers or employees shall be liable for
damage from failure of the water supply from any cause whatsoever.
§ 207-18. Discontinuance of service to particular customers.
[Amended 1-24-2008]
The Water Division may, upon the orders of the Director of Public Utilities
or the Public Utilities Commission, shut off water from the service pipe
of any consumer for nonpayment of water rents or neglect or refusal to
comply with provisions of this chapter or the rules and regulations of the
Public Utilities Commission relating to water service. Whenever the water
is shut off from any service pipe for nonpayment of a water bill or for
failure to comply with such provisions, rules and regulations, it shall not be
again turned on until the delinquent has paid all arrears, including penalty
charges, or arrangements for such payment satisfactory to the Tax Collector
have been made or the provision, rule or regulation complied with. If two
or more consumers are supplied with water from the same service pipe and
any one is subject to a discontinuance of service under this section, the
water may be shut off from such service pipe without liability to any other
consumer supplied by such service pipe.
§ 207-19. Water conservation measures. [Amended 1-24-2008]
The Director of Public Utilities or the Public Utilities Commission may, at his
or its discretion, promulgate such regulations and/or issue such orders as
it deems necessary to conserve the City's water supply when it determines
§ 207-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 207-19
1:487
that the condition of the City's reservoirs, wells and/or other water sources
so requires. Such regulations and/or other orders shall be published at
least once in a paper having a daily circulation in the City, and it shall be
unlawful, after the publication of such regulations and/or orders, for any
person who has been given a copy of such regulations and/or orders to do
any act therein forbidden.
§ 207-20. Unauthorized connections prohibited. [Amended
1-24-2008]
It shall be unlawful for any person, without special permission from the
Director of Public Utilities, to tap or make any connection with any main,
service or other distributing pipe of the water system.
§ 207-21. Consent required to open hydrant. [Amended 1-24-2008]
It shall be unlawful for any person, except for the use of City departments
or in case of fire, to open any hydrants without first securing the permission
of the Director of Public Utilities so to do.
§ 207-22. Obstruction of hydrant, curb stop or gate valve.
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit any building material or other
article in such a location as to hinder or obstruct free access to any public
hydrant or curb stop or gate valve.
§ 207-23. Damaging system. [Amended 1-24-2008]
A. It shall be unlawful for any person willfully to injure any main, pipe or
other equipment or property used in connection with the water system.
B. The Water Division is not responsible for pressure surges or fluctuations
in system parameters beyond its control. Pursuant to state and City
building code requirements, pressure reducing valves are required to be
installed by and at the expense of the owner where the water pressure
exceeds 75 pounds per square inch (psi). The Water Division may waive
the requirement for unusual circumstances, provided that the owner
provides adequate documentation to support the waiver.
§ 207-24. Prohibited conduct at reservoirs.
It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb or pollute the water of the City
reservoirs or to skate or walk upon the ice of such reservoirs or fish therein
without the permission of the Public Utilities Commission, or to trespass
upon any part of the grounds connected therewith.
§ 207-19 MERIDEN CODE § 207-24
1:488
ARTICLE II
(Reserved)93
§ 207-25. through § 207-31. (Reserved)
93.Editor's Note: Former Art. II, Air-Conditioning Systems Using Water, was repealed
2-6-2012.
§ 207-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 207-25
1:489

ARTICLE III
Cross-Connections
[Amended 1-24-2008]
§ 207-32. Prohibited connections.
No owner shall maintain upon his/her premises a cross-connection between
the public water distribution system or the potable water supplied thereby
and any auxiliary water source, unless the installation has been approved by
the Department of Public Utilities in accordance with procedures described
by the State of Connecticut and the Water Division.
§ 207-33. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AIR GAP — The obstructed vertical separation through the free atmosphere
between the lowest opening from any pipe or faucet supplying potable
water to a tank, pumping fixture or other device and the flood level rim of
the receptacle. Such separation shall be at least one inch.
AIR-VENT-TYPE BACKFLOW PREVENTER — A device containing two
independently operating check valves separated by a chamber which can
automatically vent to the atmosphere if backflow occurs.
APPROVED BACKFLOW PREVENTER or APPROVED BACKFLOW
PREVENTION DEVICE — Any device, method, or type of construction
intended to prevent backflow into potable water systems which has been
accepted by the State of Connecticut Department of Public Health and the
Water Division.
ATMOSPHERIC VACUUM BREAKER — A mechanical device not used under
continued pressure which automatically vents air from a pipeline to prevent
backsiphonage.
AUXILIARY WATER SOURCE — A water supply which is not approved for
potable use, such as a pond, river, open storage tank or swimming pool;
potable water which has become nonpotable by the addition of chemicals
or from contamination while the water is being stored or held in reserve;
private or public well supplies; or any other water supply system not
accepted by the State of Connecticut or the Water Division.
BACKFLOW — A reversal of flow from the direction which is normal or
intended or flow toward rather than away from the source of water.
BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE — A device that is installed and used to
prevent backflow of nonpotable water into potable water.
BACK PRESSURE — Pressure created by mechanical or other means that
creates resistance which, if such pressure rises to a particular level, may
cause water or other liquids or substances to flow or move in a direction
opposite to that which is intended.
§ 207-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 207-33
1:491
BACKSIPHONAGE — A form of backflow caused by reduced or negative
pressure within the water system.
BUILDING CONTAINMENT — The placement at premises or facilities of
an approved reduced-pressure backflow preventer or an air gap separation
on the downstream side of the Water Division's water meter and bypass
assembly and upstream of any cross-connection or service fixture.
CERTIFIED BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE TESTER — An individual
who is qualified to test backflow prevention devices and has attained
Connecticut State Department of Public Health certification.
COMPLIANCE PLAN — A document rendered by the owner and approved
by the Water Division outlining corrective action to be taken by the owner
to comply with this article.
CONTAMINATION — Any physical, chemical, biological or radiological
substance or matter in water above the allowable limits established by the
State of Connecticut Public Health Code and other applicable law.
CROSS-CONNECTION —
CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL PROGRAM — A program implemented by
the District to prevent the contamination of the potable water it supplies in
compliance with the Federal Safe Drinking Water Act, Public Law 93-523,
and the State of Connecticut Public Health Code, Section 19-13-b37.
CROSS-CONNECTION TECHNICIAN — An individual employed or retained
by the Water Division to inspect premises and/or facilities for crossconnections
who has been certified by the State of Connecticut as backflow
prevention device tester and cross-connection survey inspector.
CUSTOMER — The owner, tenant or other person in charge of any premises
supplied with water by the Water Division.
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC HEALTH — The State of Connecticut
Department of Public Health, its agents and representatives.
DOUBLE CHECK VALVE ASSEMBLY —
An actual or potential connection between a public water system and
any other source or system through which it is possible to introduce
into the water system any contamination or polluting agent.
A.
Any actual or potential connection between a potable water system and
any other source or systems through which it is possible to introduce
into the potable water system any contaminating or polluting agent.
B.
A backflow prevention device which contains two independently acting
check valves located between two tightly closing shutoff valves and
fitted with properly located test cocks.
A.
Fire sprinklers (only). The owner shall install a double check valve
assembly (DCVA) on public water supply lines to fire sprinkler systems
with siamese connections unless chemicals are added to the fire
sprinkler system. Where chemicals are added to such systems, the
B.
§ 207-33 MERIDEN CODE § 207-33
1:492
DOWNSTREAM — The intended direction of flow of fluid within a pipe or a
location on or within a pipe in relation to such intended direction of flow.
EXISTING FIRE SPRINKLER SYSTEM — A sprinkler system installed prior
to October 1, 1992, and not having undergone, after July 1, 1993,
substantial renovations, alterations or additions representing more than
50% of the replacement cost of the existing system at the time of
renovation, alteration or addition.
FIRE SPRINKLER SYSTEM — An integrated system of underground and
overhead piping designed to provide fire protection for a building or
structure.
HEALTH HAZARD — An actual or potential threat of contamination to
the potable water in the Water Division's public water distribution system
or within the potable water system of any premises served by the Water
Division.
IN-PLANT PROTECTION/ISOLATION — The location of an approved
backflow prevention device in a manner which provides simultaneous
protection of the Water Division's public water system and the potable
water system within premises served by the Water Division.
INSPECTION — A detailed survey of plumbing on or in premises and/or
facilities to locate or ascertain the location of testable backflow prevention
devices and existing and potential cross-connections, including any
reinspections.
IRRIGATION SYSTEM — An integrated system of piping underground and
sprinkler heads designed to provide irrigation to surrounding vegetation.
Any backflow preventers or sewer subtraction meters shall be installed
upstream of a building's main line water meter.
NEW FIRE SPRINKLER SYSTEM — A sprinkler system installed after
October 1, 1992, or a sprinkler which has undergone, after July 1, 1993,
substantial renovations, alterations, or additions representing more than
50% of the replacement cost of the existing system at the time of
renovations, alteration or addition.
NOTIFICATION OF VIOLATION — A written report which is sent to the
owner by the Water Division delineating cross-connection violations found
on the owner's premises and direction for corrective action.
OWNER — Any person holding fee title to or having a leasehold of premises
and/or facilities served by the Water Division's public water distribution
system and his/her agent or representative.
owner shall install a RPD pursuant to Section 19-13-b38a(c)(2)(A) of
the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies. An owner may install an
RPD instead of a DCVA on public water supply lines to fire sprinkler
systems with siamese connections. Any reduced-pressure-principle
RPD's or double check valve assemblies installed on a fire sprinkler
system shall be equipped with a metered bypass assembly. Chemicals
added to a fire line shall mean foam or antifreeze.
§ 207-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 207-33
1:493
PLUMBING or PLUMBING SYSTEM — All piping and appurtenances
thereof used to convey water within the premises to the last tap or outlet.
POLLUTANT — An aesthetically objectionable and/or degrading agent or
substance which causes pollution but which, if ingested, would tend not to
be life threatening.
POLLUTION — A condition in which a pollutant enters or poses the threat
of entering the Water Division's public water distribution system or the
plumbing systems within premises and/or facilities served with potable
water by the Water Division.
POTABLE WATER — Water from any source which has been approved by the
State of Connecticut Department of Public Health for human consumption.94
PREMISES — A piece or parcel of land and such of the structures, buildings
and facilities existing thereon which are connected to the public water
distribution system.
PRESSURE VACUUM BREAKER — An approved backflow prevention device
which contains a spring-loaded check valve and a spring-loaded
atmospheric vent which opens when the pressure approaches atmospheric.
Such a device shall include two tightly closing shutoff valves located at each
end of the device and two properly located test ports for testing the device.
PUBLIC HEALTH CODE — The Public Health Code of the State of
Connecticut, as the same may be amended from time to time.
PUMPER (SIAMESE) CONNECTION — An inlet equipped with one or more
couplings to which a fire hose can be attached and through which water
can be delivered to a sprinkler system by means of a pump. Fire pump
test header connections shall be considered the same as pumper (siamese)
connections.
REDUCED-PRESSURE BACKFLOW PREVENTER (RPD) — A device
containing within its structure a minimum of two independently acting
approved check valves, together with an automatically operating pressure
differential relief valve located between the two check valves.
SYSTEM HAZARD — Causing damage or posing the threat of damage to the
physical properties of the public water supply or public water distribution
system.
TESTABLE BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE or TESTABLE DEVICE —
A backflow prevention device that requires annual testing by a certified
backflow prevention device tester. Testable backflow devices include
reduced-pressure-principle type (RPD), double check valve assembly
(DCVA) (fire sprinklers only), and pressure vacuum breaker (PVB).
TEST AND MAINTENANCE REPORT FORM — A report form, designated
by the State of Connecticut, which is to be used by certified backflow
prevention device testers to record pertinent testing information.
94.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 207-33 MERIDEN CODE § 207-33
1:494
UPSTREAM — The direction of flow of fluid within a pipe which is opposite
of that which is intended or a location within or on a pipe in relation to the
intended direction of flow.
WATER DIVISION — The owner and/or operator of the public water system.
§ 207-34. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to:
A. Protect the public potable water supply of the City from the possibility
of contamination or pollution by isolating within the customer's internal
distribution system(s) such contaminants or pollutants which could
backflow into the public water system;
B. Promote the elimination or control of existing cross-connections, actual
or potential, between the consumer's in-plant potable water system(s)
and nonpotable water system(s), plumbing fixtures and industrial piping
systems; and
C. Provide for the maintenance of a continuing program of cross-connection
control which will systematically and effectively prevent the
contamination or pollution of all potable water systems. This program is
in compliance with the State of Connecticut Public Health Code.
§ 207-35. Responsibility of Water Division and owner.
A. Water Division. Under the cross-connection control regulations or rules
it is the responsibility of the Water Division to prevent water from
unapproved sources, or any other substance, from entering the public
water supply system. The Water Division's cross-connection inspector
shall make competent inspections of all premises necessary to comply
with all state regulations. The Water Division's cross-connection
inspector (also, the backflow prevention device tester) is responsible
for testing the backflow devices as required by State of Connecticut
Department of Public Health.95
B. Owner (consumer). The owner (consumer) has the primary responsibility
of preventing pollutants from entering his potable water system and
the public potable water system. All recommendations made by the
Water Division or its representative shall be complied with according to
the Division's rules and regulations. All approved backflow prevention
assemblies will be installed at the owner's expense, and the owner will
be responsible for maintenance of these devices. Failure to comply with
Water Division recommendations could result in termination of water
service.
§ 207-36. Tests and inspections; fees.
A. All reduced-pressure-principal backflow preventers (RPD's) and
pressure vacuum breakers (PVB's) must be tested annually as required
by State of Connecticut Public Health Code.
B. All new devices (installations) must be inspected.
95.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 207-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 207-36
1:495
C. Fees are charged as follows:
(1) First device: $50.
(2) Additional devices: $30.
(3) Retest: $10.
D. It shall be unlawful to install any water service to a premises served by
the Meriden water distribution system and connect the plumbing to any
device, fixture, tank, swimming pool, hose bib, toxic substance or other
matter that would be harmful to public health.
§ 207-37. Correction of existing cross-connections.
For any existing cross-connections prior to the date of the establishment
of this article, the property owner, after being notified in writing of the
existence of a cross-connection or cross-connections on his premises, shall,
within 30 days, install an approved backflow device or devices as may be
required by the Meriden Water Division. All devices shall be approved by
the Water Division prior to installation. All installations must be inspected
and approved by the Water Division.
§ 207-36 MERIDEN CODE § 207-37
1:496
Chapter 213
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning Board of Appeals — See Ch. 6, Art. III.
Air pollution — See Ch. 58.
Animals — See Ch. 65.
Building construction — See Ch. 77.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 110.
Food and food establishments — See Ch. 112.
Housing standards — See Ch. 125.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 146.
Sewers — See Ch. 170.
Signs and posters — See Ch. 174.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 180.
Trailers and trailer camps — See Ch. 194.
Water — See Ch. 207.
STATUTORY REFERENCES
Zoning generally — See C.G.S. § 8-1 et seq.
§ 207-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 207-37
1:497

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 213-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and cited as the "Zoning Ordinance of the City
of Meriden, 1983."
§ 213-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to encourage the most appropriate use of
land; to conserve and stabilize the value of property; to provide adequate
open spaces for light and air; to prevent fires; to prevent undue
concentration of population; to facilitate adequate provisions for community
utilities and facilities, such as transportation, water, sewerage, schools,
parks and other public requirements; to promote health, safety and general
welfare; and to that end to designate, regulate and restrict the location
and use of buildings, structures and land for agricultural, residential,
commercial, industrial or other purposes; to regulate and limit the height,
size and bulk of buildings and structures hereafter erected or altered; to
regulate and determine the size of yards and other spaces; to regulate the
percentage of the area of the lots that may be occupied by buildings or
structures; and to regulate and limit the density of population; and for said
purposes to divide the City into zoning districts of such number, shape and
area as may be deemed best suited to carry out this chapter and provide for
its enforcement, in accordance with Chapter 124, § 8-2, of the Connecticut
General Statutes, as amended.
§ 213-3. Conformance required.
A. No building or structure shall be erected, reconstructed or structurally
altered in any manner, nor shall any building or land or the space above
or beneath be used for any purpose other than is permitted by and in
conformance with this chapter and all other ordinances, laws and maps
referred to herein.
B. Any valid variance, special exception, building permit, certificate of
approval or certificate of occupancy which was issued before the
effective date of this chapter shall be unaffected by the provisions of
this chapter. Any application made prior to the effective date of this
chapter and legally pending before the Planning Commission, Zoning
Commission, Zoning Board of Appeals or Building Official shall be
considered under the provisions of the previous zoning regulations
(Zoning Ordinance of the City of Meriden, 1966, as amended).
§ 213-4. Zoning Map established.
The designations, locations and boundaries of the zoning districts
established are delineated on the map entitled "City of Meriden,
Connecticut, Zoning Map," dated January 1, 1966. as amended, which map
and all notations and information thereon are hereby made a part of this
chapter by reference, and said map is on file in the office of the City Clerk,
§ 213-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-4
1:499
City of Meriden, Connecticut. Any land within the incorporated limits of the
City and not designated or indicated on the Zoning Map shall be placed in
the proper zoning district by the Zoning Commission of the City of Meriden,
Connecticut.
§ 213-5. Applicability to municipal property.
A. In accordance with Chapter 124, § 8-2, of the Connecticut General
Statutes, as amended, this Zoning Ordinance shall not apply to municipal
property owned or leased by the City of Meriden for public purposes,
including public library, public hospital or public school or park and
recreation purposes, except that municipal building and site
development plans shall be approved by the City Planning Commission
in accordance with Chapter 126, § 8-24, of the Connecticut General
Statutes, as amended, and § 213-72 of this chapter.
B. Any use of land, buildings or structures and any building or structure
existing prior to January 1, 1990, which was exempt from the operation
of this chapter by virtue of municipal ownership thereof, may continue
after being subject to this chapter. Any changes, alterations,
enlargements or restoration of such use shall conform only to § 213-72
and all lot and bulk requirements of the zone in which such use is
located, except the minimum yard and lot size requirements shall be two
times that required in the zone in which the use is located. If such use
is discontinued for a period of one year, the use of said property must
thereafter conform to all provisions of this chapter. [Added 1-7-1991]
§ 213-6. Interpretation of provisions.
When interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, they shall
be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of
the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Except
as specifically herein provided, it is not intended by the adoption of this
chapter to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way to impair or interfere
with any existing provisions of law or ordinance or any rules, regulations
or permits previously adopted or issued or which shall be adopted or
issued pursuant to law relating to the erection, construction, maintenance,
establishment, moving, alteration or enlargement of any building or
improvement; nor is it intended by this chapter to interfere with or abrogate
or annul any easement, covenant or other agreement between parties;
provided, however, that in cases in which this chapter imposes a greater
restriction upon the erection, construction, maintenance, establishment,
moving, alteration or enlargement of buildings, or the use of any such
buildings or premises in said several districts or any of them, than is
imposed or required by such existing provisions of law or ordinance or
by such rules, regulations or permits or by such easements, covenants or
agreements, then in such case the provisions of this chapter shall control.
§ 213-4 MERIDEN CODE § 213-6
1:500
ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 213-7. Word usage; definitions.
A. Scope and meaning of certain words and terms.
(1) Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and phrases
shall be construed throughout this chapter to have the meanings
indicated in this article.
(2) Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, words used in the
present tense include the future, the singular number includes the
plural and the plural includes the singular.
(3) The word "person" includes a profit or nonprofit firm, corporation,
company, partnership, association or individual.
(4) The word "shall" is mandatory and not directory; the word "may" is
permissive.
(5) The word "lot" includes the word "plot."
(6) The word "structure" includes the word "building."
(7) The word "use" and the word "used" refer to any purpose for which
a lot or part thereof is arranged, intended or designed to be used,
occupied, maintained, made available or offered for use and to any
purpose for which a building or structure or part thereof is arranged,
intended or designed to be used, occupied, maintained, made
available or offered for or erected, constructed, altered, enlarged,
moved or rebuilt with the intention or design of using the same.
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ABUTTING PROPERTY OWNER — The owner of a property that adjoins
or abuts subject property, including property directly across a street
from a subject property.
ACCEPTED STREET — A street which has been accepted by the City
Council as a part of the City street system.
ACCESSWAY FOR REAR LOTS — A portion of the rear lot at least 25 feet
in width connecting the rear portion of the lot to a City accepted street.
The accessway must be fee simple and shall only be used for driveway,
landscaping or drainage.[Amended 4-3-2006]
ACTIVE SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM — A solar system, designed to provide
heating, cooling, hot water or electricity, that requires external
mechanical power for operation.
ADULT BOOKSTORE — See "sexually oriented business."[Added
11-21-199496]
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT — Any establishment featuring nude, topless
or sexually oriented entertainment, including, but not limited to, dance
halls, massage parlors, restaurants, taverns or clubs.[Added
11-21-1994]
96.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 213-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-7
1:501
ALLEY — A dedicated public thoroughfare, other than a street, which
affords a secondary means of access to the rear or side of abutting
property and which is 20 feet or more in right-of-way width.
AQUIFER PROTECTION AREA, LEVEL A — An underground drinking
water supply protection area shown on the Zoning Map, defined in
Connecticut General Statutes § 22a-354h, approved by the
Commissioner of DEP, and protected within Meriden by the City Aquifer
Protection Agency (APA) regulations and the state. Within this area,
certain land use activities that may affect groundwater are regulated
independent of zoning; check the APA regulations on file with the
City.[Added 9-21-2009]
AUTOMOBILE RENTAL FACILITY — Any building and/or lot used
exclusively for the renting and/or leasing of automobiles, provided that
no repair or service work is performed on the premises.[Added
3-5-1990]
AUTOMOBILE WASH — Any building and/or lot or portion thereof used
for washing and/or cleaning of automobiles.[Added 3-5-1990]
AWNING — A roof-like covering of metal, canvas or duck attached to a
metal frame and attached or supported entirely from a building.
BAR — An establishment where the main use is to serve spirituous
liquors to be consumed on the premises. Food may or may not be served.
Usually a counter and stools are present.[Added 3-4-2019]
BASEMENT — A story in a building, the structural ceiling level of which
is four feet or more above the average level of finished grade, where
such grade abuts the exterior wall of such building, and the floor level
of which is below finished grade at any point on the periphery of the
building.
BOARDINGHOUSE — A dwelling, other than a hotel or motel, where
lodging or lodging and meals for three or more persons is provided for
compensation.
BUILDING — Any structure having a roof supported by columns or by
walls and designed for the shelter or housing of any person, animal or
chattel. This term shall not include mobile homes or trailers.
BUILDING LINE — A line established by this chapter which determines
the minimum horizontal distance that a building or structure must be
located from a lot line.
BUILDING, ACCESSORY — A building to which the use is subordinate
and incidental to the main or principal use of a lot occupied by a main or
principal building.
BUILDING, MAIN — A building in which is conducted the principal use
of the lot and/or the building site on which it is situated.
BUILDING, RESIDENTIAL — A building designed or used exclusively for
dwelling purposes.
§ 213-7 MERIDEN CODE § 213-7
1:502
BUILDING, SECONDARY — A detached nonaccessory building of 600
square feet or less gross floor area, located within a shopping center
development or regional shopping mall with a primary use and larger
building.[Added 6-7-1999]
BUILDING SITE — A lot or parcel of land in single or joint ownership
which is occupied or can be occupied by a building, together with such
open spaces as are required by the terms of this chapter, and having its
principal frontage on a public street, road or highway.
CELLAR — Any space in a building, the structural ceiling level of which
is less than four feet above the average finished grade where such grade
abuts that exterior wall of such building which fronts on any street.
CLUB, COMMERCIAL — A business enterprise conducting leisure-time
activity, including tennis, swimming, ice skating, racquetball, health and
exercise facilities and similar uses, which makes facilities available to
members, customers or clients on a seasonal or hourly basis and which
may include incidental sale of snacks, incidental sales or rental of sports
equipment and clothing, and nursery facilities. Members of a commercial
club do not have a voice in the management of the club.
CLUB, MEMBERSHIP — An unincorporated association of persons for
common social purpose or an association incorporated under the
Membership Association Law and which association or membership
corporation is not conducted for profit and is not a part of, related
to or associated with a profit-making venture and whose premises are
available exclusively to members and their guests and which is managed
by officers or directors serving without pay and chosen or elected
directly by members who form such an association or membership
corporation.
COMMERCIAL AMUSEMENT ARCADE — A business enterprise which
houses three or more mechanical or electronic games or amusements
as its principal activity. Picture-taking and laminating machines,
merchandise vending machines or electronic reading or weight
machines are not considered to be part of this definition.
COMMUNITY BUILDING — A building of not more than 25,000 square
feet in size which is located on a parcel of land that is currently
developed with a housing development of at least 75 residential units,
is 20 acres or greater in area, and is under the ownership of one
common, not-for-profit owner; the building will be used primarily by
residents of the housing development in which it is located, except that,
in emergency situations as declared by the City, residents of the City of
Meriden may use it for purposes consistent with needs arising from the
declared emergency; and the building may include (but not be limited to)
management offices operated for the housing development, a gathering
room with kitchen, a fuel cell energy area, various programs run by
not-for-profit organizations, such as a child-care/day-care program, an
after-school program, training program for resident job searches, game
rooms, and leisure, health, and exercise programs using building
§ 213-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-7
1:503
facilities (i.e., swimming, skating, gym, racket games, etc.).[Added
1-6-2014]
CONFERENCE CENTER HOTEL — A facility used in part for business or
professional conferences and seminars and offering a minimum of 100
rooms for transient lodging accommodations and providing additional
services such as restaurants, meeting rooms and recreation facilities.
A building on site or a portion of a building must be designed to
accommodate 300 or more people in assembly. Such place of assembly
shall be in addition to restaurant and recreation facilities.[Added
11-19-1984]
CONFERENCE HOTEL — A building or part thereof that offers a
minimum of 75 rooms for transient lodging accommodations with or
without kitchenettes and is located within 1/4 mile of an approved
conference center hotel.[Added 10-1-2001]
CONVALESCENT HOME — A building where two or more infirm or
aged persons are housed for compensation and licensed by the State of
Connecticut, including a convalescent hospital, home for the aged, rest
home and similar uses.
CONVENIENCE STORE/GAS FACILITY — Any building and/or lot not
used for repairing or servicing of motor vehicles but used in part for
the retail sale of gasoline, methanol, diesel fuel or other common types
of motor vehicle fuel, provided such use is in conjunction with the
convenient dispensing of consumer goods items, i.e., prepackaged
grocery and dairy products, reading and directional materials, hot
snacks, small novelty items and tobacco products, etc.[Added
3-5-1990]
CORRECTIONAL INSTITUTION — An institution or facility to correct
illegal patterns of behavior.
COUNTY SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION DISTRICT — The New
Haven County Soil and Water Conservation District established under
Subsection a of § 22a-315 of the Connecticut General Statutes.[Added
2-3-1986]
COVERAGE — That portion of a lot that is covered by a building or
buildings.97
DAY CARE — A program of supplementary care for related or unrelated
children on a regular basis outside of their homes for a part of 24 hours
in one or more days of the week.
Child-care provider — Class I (family care provider*): A program
of supplementary care for not more than six related or unrelated
children in a private residence, carried out on a regular basis for
a part of the 24 hours in one or more days of the week as an
accessory use to the principal residential use. (*Definitions per State
of Connecticut.)
(1)
§ 213-7 MERIDEN CODE § 213-7
1:504
DEVELOPMENT — Any construction or grading activities to improved or
unimproved real estate.[Added 2-3-1986]
DISCONTINUANCE — Any cessation of a nonconforming use, whether
such cessation is voluntary or involuntary, active or passive, and
irrespective of the circumstances giving rise to such cessation or the
reasons therefor.
DISTRICT, ZONING — A portion of the City within which certain uses
of lands, buildings and/or structures are permitted or prohibited and
wherein certain yards and other open spaces are required and certain
height limits are established for the same; all as set forth and specified
in this chapter.
DISTURBED AREA — An area where the ground cover is destroyed
or removed leaving the land subject to accelerated erosion.[Added
2-3-1986]
DRIVE-THROUGH FACILITY — A customer window or counter service
designed for easy automobile access that must be an accessory and
subordinate part of the primary bank or financial institution, pharmacy,
bakery, or fast-food restaurant establishment catering to
customers.[Amended 6-2-2008]
DUSTLESS SURFACE — Adequately covered with concrete, asphalt or
bituminous products, unless otherwise prescribed by the Planning
Commission, and maintained in good condition at all times.
DWELLING — A structure containing one or more dwelling units.98
DWELLING UNIT — A group of rooms, including a kitchen and
bathroom, designed for nontransient occupancy by one family.
DWELLING, GARDEN APARTMENT — A multiple dwelling, not more
than 35 feet in height, with an entrance to each dwelling by direct access
from the outside or through a common hall serving not more than four
dwellings.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY — A building or portion thereof used
and designed as a residence for three or more families living
independently of each other and doing their own cooking in said
Child-care provider — Class II (group day-care home): A program
of supplementary care for not less than seven nor more than 12
unrelated children on a regular basis, for a part of the 24 hours in
one or more days in a week.
(2)
Child-care provider — Class III (child day-care center): A program
of supplementary care for 13 or more related or unrelated children
outside their homes on a regular basis for a part of the 24 hours in
one or more days of the week. [Added 7-5-1988]
(3)
97.Editor's Note: See Diagram 1, Building Area, included as an attachment to this chapter.
98.Editor's Note: See Diagram 2, Dwelling Types, at the end of this chapter.
§ 213-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-7
1:505
building, including apartment houses, apartment hotels, flats and
townhouses, but not including hotels, motels or boardinghouses.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED — A detached building
designed for and/or occupied exclusively by one family.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY or DUPLEX — A building designed and/or
used to house not more than two families living independently of each
other.
EROSION — The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by
water, wind, ice or gravity.[Added 2-3-1986]
EXTRACTION AND EXCAVATION — Removal or recovery (by any means
whatsoever) of soil, rock, minerals, mineral substances or organic
substances other than vegetation from water or land on or beneath
the surface thereof, or beneath the land surface, whether exposed or
submerged.[Added 12-21-1998]
FAMILY — One or more persons occupying the premises and living as
a single housekeeping unit, as distinguished from a group occupying a
hotel, boardinghouse, club, fraternity or sorority house.
FARMERS' MARKET — An occasional or periodic market held either on
an open lot, within a building, or on a closed off street where three
or more private sellers offer for sale to the general public such goods
as fruits, vegetables, plants, flowers, eggs, honey and maple syrup. The
sale of jams, jellies and baked or prepared foods may be permitted if
such items are prepared in a kitchen facility licensed by the appropriate
health department.[Added 6-4-1990]
FRONT FACE — The primary outer surface of a building which is visible
from any private or public street, particularly that surface which
contains the original principal entrance.[Amended 6-4-1990]
GRADING — Any excavating, grubbing, filling (including hydraulic fill)
or stockpiling of earth materials or any combination thereof, including
the land in its excavated or filled condition.[Added 2-3-1986]
GROSS LEASABLE AREA — Total floor area exclusive of common areas,
service corridors and mechanical rooms.[Added 2-4-1991]
HEALTH CARE SERVICES — A combination of diagnostic, therapeutic
and other health care professional service uses located in a separate
building or buildings of a scale and character that is different from
the traditional medical office use. Such uses include medical, dental,
physical therapy, radiology, urgent-care, surgical center, occupational
therapy and similar disciplines.[Amended 4-21-2008]
HEIGHT OF BUILDING — The vertical distance from the average level
of the highest and lowest point of that portion of the lot covered by the
building to the highest point of the roof.99
99.Editor's Note: See Diagram 3, Measurements of Building Heights, Stories and Basements,
included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 213-7 MERIDEN CODE § 213-7
1:506
HEIGHT RESTRICTED BAND — An area parallel to the minimum side
yard setback requirement for a distance of five feet towards the center
of the lot. (See Diagram 5B.100)[Added 1-3-2012]
HOME FOR SHELTERED CARE — A nonprofit home for the sheltered
care of persons which provides food and shelter to four or more persons
unrelated to the proprietor.[Added 7-7-1986]
HOME OCCUPATION — A use other than a professional office
customarily conducted within a dwelling, such as tutoring, music
lessons, craft making, dressmaking, millinery and the like, and carried
on by the inhabitants thereof, which use is secondary to the use of the
dwelling for residential purposes.
HOOKAH LOUNGE — A commercial establishment where patrons share
flavored tobacco, nontobacco and fruit that is heated and smoked
through water. The establishment may also include the sale of hookah
accessories and tobacco-related products.[Added 9-19-2016]
HOSPITAL — An institution licensed and defined by the State of
Connecticut as a general or special hospital.
HOTEL — A building or part thereof which has a common entrance
and general dining room and which contains 10 or more living and
sleeping rooms, designed to be occupied by individuals or groups of
individuals for compensation. Hotel facilities may include a cocktail
lounge or incidental retail and service uses.
INDOOR AUTOMOTIVE SALES AND SERVICE — Any building which
is utilized by an automotive sales and service business for the sale
of automobiles located within the structure. Said use may include
maintenance, servicing, painting, repair, parts or motor replacements or
body and fender work to or for motor vehicles accessory to the sale of
motor vehicles.[Added 7-16-2018]
INDUSTRIAL LAUNDRY — Establishment primarily engaged in
supplying laundered or dry-cleaned work uniforms; laundered wiping
towels; safety equipment (gloves, flame-resistant clothing, etc.); dust
control items such as treated mats or rugs, mops, dust tool covers and
cloths; and other selected items to industrial or commercial users only.
These items may belong to the industrial launderers and be supplied
to users on a rental basis, or they may be the customer's own
goods.[Added 9-2-1986]
INSPECTION — The periodic review of soil erosion and sediment control
measures and other construction activities shown on the approved
plan.[Added 2-3-1986]
JUNKYARD — An area of land, with or without buildings, used for or
occupied by the storage of used or discarded materials, such as
wastepaper, rags or scrap metal, building materials, house furnishings,
machinery and vehicles or parts thereof, with or without the dismantling,
processing, salvage, sale or other use or disposition of the same.
§ 213-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-7
1:507
LOADING SPACE — An accessible space a minimum of 10 feet in width
by 30 feet in length, adjacent to a street or alley, at the rear or side of a
building, and used for loading or unloading of goods.
LOCAL ACCESS ROAD — A street giving direct access to individual
properties. Such a road feeds into a collector (main interior street) and/
or arterial street (main feeder streets).[Added 9-5-1989]
LOT — Any parcel of land, not necessarily coincident with a lot or lots
shown on a map of record, which is occupied or which is to be occupied
by a building and its accessory buildings, if any, or a group of buildings
having any land in common with the buildings accessory thereto, if any,
together with the required open spaces appurtenant to such buildings
or group of buildings. Where a building is located on more than one lot
of record, which lots are either owned by the same person or entity or
are subjected to cross-easement or other similar recorded agreements,
then the size, lot coverage, setback, yard and other bulk and area
requirements shall not apply to each individual lot, provided the building
and the lots, as a whole, comply with such requirements.101[Amended
2-4-1991]
LOT AREA — The total horizontal area included within the lot lines.
LOT DEPTH — The horizontal distance between the midpoints of the
front and rear lot lines measured in the general direction of the side
lot lines. Minimum depth for a residential lot shall include amount
of standard required front setback, amount of standard required rear
setback, plus 30 feet in between to be reserved for building; use required
front and rear setbacks specified in § 213-12B unless greater amount
specified in § 213-48 is applicable.[Amended 12-21-2009]
LOT LINE — A boundary of a lot other than a street line.
LOT LINE, FRONT — The street line along the principal street on which
the lot abuts.
LOT LINE, REAR — The boundary opposite the front line, but should this
be less than 10 feet in length or should the lot come to a point at the rear,
the rear lot line shall be deemed to be a line parallel to the front line, not
less than 10 feet in length, lying wholly within the lot and farthest from
the front line.
LOT LINE, SIDE — The lines separating the lot from the immediately
adjacent lot.
LOT OF RECORD — A lot which is part of a subdivision recorded in the
office of the City Clerk, or a lot or parcel described by metes and bounds
which has been so recorded prior to the effective date of this chapter or
any amendment thereof that would affect such lot.
LOT WIDTH — The distance between the side lot lines measured across
the required front yard minimum setback line parallel with the street.
100. Editor's Note: Diagram 5B, Various Lot and Bulk Definitions, is included as an attachment
to this chapter.
§ 213-7 MERIDEN CODE § 213-7
1:508
Minimum lot width for a residential lot shall be maintained for a depth of
30 feet back from the front required building setback line per § 213-12B
or § 213-48 as applicable.[Amended 12-21-2009]
LOT, CORNER — A lot at the junction of and abutting on two or more
intersecting streets where the interior angle of intersection does not
exceed 135°. Any lot adjoining a curved street at a point where the street
line describes an arc subtended by an angle of 135° or less shall also be
considered a corner lot.
LOT, INTERIOR — A lot other than a corner lot or a through lot.
LOT, REAR — A lot located in such a position that it is to the rear of
some other lot fronting on the same street and served by means of an
accessway.
LOT, THROUGH — A lot which is not a corner lot and which has two
street lines.
MANUFACTURING — Any process whereby the nature, size, shape,
finish or appearance of articles is changed or where articles are
assembled or packaged in quantity.
MOBILE HOME — Factory-produced housing which is designed and
built for transportation to a site for installation and/or use. These units
are mobile through a structurally integrated, wheeled chassis. When
the wheels, axle and connecting apparatus of this chassis are removed
and the unit is placed on a foundation, either permanent or temporary,
the unit is still a mobile home. Recreational vehicles are not mobile
homes.[Amended 9-16-1985]
MOTEL — A building or group of buildings containing guest rooms
designed and used primarily for the accommodation of transient
automobile travelers for compensation.
MULTISCREEN THEATER — A building in which is located four or more
motion-picture theaters.[Added 6-17-1985]
NIGHTCLUB — An establishment engaged primarily in offering
entertainment to the general public, in the form of music for dancing
or live or recorded performances. The establishment may or may not
engage in the preparation and retail sale of alcoholic beverages for
consumption on the premises.[Added 3-4-2019]
NONCONFORMING BUILDING OR STRUCTURE — A building or
structure legally existing on the effective date of this chapter or any
applicable amendment thereto but which fails by reason of such
adoption, revision or amendment to conform to the present district
regulations for any prescribed structure or building requirement, such
as front, side or rear yards, building height, building area or lot
coverage, lot area per dwelling unit, dwelling units per building, number
of parking and loading spaces, etc.
101. Editor's Note: See Diagram 4, Types of Lots, as well as Diagram 5, Various Lot and Bulk
Definitions, included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 213-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-7
1:509
NONCONFORMING LOT — A lot legally existing on the effective date
of this chapter or any applicable amendment thereto but which fails
by reason of such adoption, revision or amendment to conform to the
present district regulations for any prescribed lot requirement.
NONCONFORMING USE — A use, whether of a building, structure or
lot, or combination thereof, legally existing on the effective date of this
chapter or any applicable amendments thereto but which fails by reason
of such adoption, revision or amendment to conform to the present
district regulations pertaining to use.
OUTDOOR DINING — An accessory portion of a restaurant, fast-food
restaurant, coffeehouse or other food service establishment for dining
outdoors or under cover. Outdoor dining is limited to food service
establishments in commercial districts only and in compliance with
standards and procedures of § 213-23C(4).[Added 6-7-2004]
PARKING SPACE — An accessible paved and usable space located off the
street with proper access for parking of motor vehicles.
PASSIVE SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM — A solar energy system which
relies upon the design and elements of a building to enhance the use of
natural forces, including solar radiation, winds and nighttime coolness,
to provide heating, cooling or hot water and which is not primarily
dependent upon mechanical power for operation.
PRIVATE GARAGE — A detached accessory building or a portion of a
main building for the parking or storage only of automobiles belonging
to the occupants of the premises. One commercial vehicle which does
not exceed 3/4 ton in capacity and which is used solely by the occupants
may be stored in a private garage.
PROFESSIONAL OFFICES — An office for any one of the following,
whether carried on in a home or a separate office: accountant, architect,
attorney, chiropractor, professional engineer, dentist, doctor (except
veterinarian), social worker or similar discipline requiring a combination
of a special training and license or certification. The following or similar
uses are not professional offices: contractor, pest control, beauty parlor
or pharmacy.
PUBLIC PARKING LOT — Any lot or structure used for the storage of
motor vehicles which contains space available to the general public by
the hour, day, week, month or year.
RECREATION CENTER — A private, quasi-public or public facility
designed to house passive and active recreation facilities, including
athletics, swimming, games, meeting rooms and accessory food services
and equipment rental, and designed to be generally available to the
public at minimal cost.
REGIONAL SHOPPING MALL — A building or group of interconnected
buildings containing not less than five retail facilities and 400,000
square feet of gross floor area located on a lot of 50 acres or greater
§ 213-7 MERIDEN CODE § 213-7
1:510
which abuts or is within 1/2 mile of a state or interstate highway.[Added
2-4-1991]
REPAIRER'S GARAGE — Any building and/or lot or portion thereof which
is utilized by an automotive business, service or industry and involves
major maintenance, servicing, painting, repair, parts or motor
replacements or body and fender work to or for motor
vehicles.[Amended 3-5-1990]
RESTAURANT — An establishment where food and drink are regularly
prepared, served and consumed primarily within the principal building,
or in an outdoor seating area to the general public. The establishment
may have a separate area, or lounge, where alcoholic beverages are
served with or without full food service, provided the area is accessory
to the primary use in: 1) square feet; or 2) sales.[Amended 3-4-2019]
RESTAURANT, FAST-FOOD — Any establishment whose principal
business is the sale of foods, frozen desserts or beverages to the
customer in a ready-to-consume state, usually served in paper, plastic
or other disposable containers, for consumption within the restaurant
building, elsewhere on the premises or for carry-out for consumption off
the premises.
SCHOOL — A public or private school teaching subjects required by the
Education Code of the State of Connecticut.
SECONDARY BUILDING — See "building, secondary."
SEDIMENT — A solid material, either mineral or organic, that is in
suspension, is transported or has been moved from its site of origin by
erosion.[Added 2-3-1986]
SERVICE STATION — A building or lot or part thereof supplying and
selling gasoline or other equivalent fuel for motor vehicles at retail,
direct from pumps and storage tanks. A service station may include
accessory facilities for rendering services, such as lubrication, washing
and repairs, which are incidental to the principal use.
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS — A business or commercial club
having a significant portion of its stock-in-trade, books, magazines,
periodicals, and videos which are distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on matter depicting, describing or related to sex acts or by
an emphasis on exposure of male or female genitals, buttocks or female
breasts.[Added 11-21-1994]
SHOPPING CENTER DEVELOPMENT — A tract of land, buildings or
structures planned as a whole and intended for one or more
establishments for a commercial purpose on a site, whether built at one
time as a unit or in two or more construction stages.
SIGN — Any structure or part thereof or any device attached to a
building, pole, tree, structure or device or painted or represented
thereon, which shall display or include any letter, word, model, banner,
pennant, insignia, device, trade flag, symbol or representation which
§ 213-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-7
1:511
is in the nature of or which is used as an announcement, direction or
advertisement, for commercial purposes or otherwise. A "sign" includes
any message, neon tube, string of lights or similar device outlining,
hung, painted upon or attached to part of a building or lot but does
not include the flag or insignia of any nation or group of nations or
of any governmental agency or of any political, educational, charitable,
philanthropic, civic, professional, religious or like campaign, drive,
movement or event. Excluded from this definition are signs not to exceed
four square feet in area which are solely devoted to prohibiting
trespassing, hunting or fishing.
SIGN AREA — Sign area shall be measured as follows:
When such a sign is on a plate or framed or outlined, all of the
area of such plate or the area enclosed by such frame or outline,
including such frame or outline, shall be included.
(a)
When such sign consists only of letters, designs or figures
engraved, painted, projected or in any manner affixed on a wall,
the total area of such sign shall be deemed the area of the
smallest triangle, rectangle or circle within which all of the
matter of which such sign consists may be inscribed.
(b)
(1)
BILLBOARD — A sign, including any support structures, displaying a
message not related to the use of the property on which it is located.
[Amended 9-16-2013]
CONVENTIONAL BILLBOARD — A billboard displaying a static
message or copy which cannot be changed mechanically (for
example, a tri-vision billboard) or electronically.
(a)
DIGITIAL BILLBOARD — A billboard utilizing digital message
technology capable of changing the static message or copy
electronically, but not displaying any movement, or the
appearance or optical illusion of movement, or any flashing,
scintillating or varying of light intensity during the static display
periods.
(b)
BILLBOARD OVERLAY DISTRICT — Billboards must be oriented
to limited access highways and are further restricted to the
Billboard Overlay District as shown on the City’s Zoning Map.
(c)
(2)
ILLUMINATED SIGN — Any sign illuminated by electricity, gas or
other artificial light, including reflective or phosphorescent light.
(3)
GROUND OR FREESTANDING SIGN — A sign supported by
uprights or braces in or upon the ground and not attached to any
part of a building.
(4)
HANGING SIGN — A sign designed to project beyond the front face
and perpendicular to it.
(5)
§ 213-7 MERIDEN CODE § 213-7
1:512
SOIL — Any unconsolidated mineral or organic material of any
origin.[Added 2-3-1986]
SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN — A scheme that
minimizes soil erosion and sedimentation resulting from development
and includes, but is not limited to, a map and narrative.[Added
2-3-1986]
SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN CERTIFICATION —
An approval by the Planning Commission or its designated agent that
a soil erosion and sediment control plan complies with the applicable
requirements of this chapter.[Added 2-3-1986]
SOLAR COLLECTOR — A device or structure designed to absorb
incident solar radiation, to convert the solar radiation to thermal,
chemical or electrical energy, and to transfer the converted energy to a
medium passing through or in contact with it.
SOLAR ENERGY — Radiant energy (direct, diffuse and reflected)
received from the sun.
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM — An arrangement or combination of
components and structures designed to provide heating, cooling, hot
water or electricity through the process of collecting, converting,
storing, protecting against unnecessary dissipation and distributing
solar energy.
SOLAR SKY SPACE — The space between a solar collector and the sun
which must be free of obstructions for a solar energy system's effective
operation.
SPECIAL EXCEPTION USE — A use of property that is basically
appropriate to a given zoning district but which may be incompatible in
some locations within the district, and therefore is not permitted by right
everywhere within such district. A special exception use, therefore, is
MARQUEE SIGN — A sign attached to a marquee, canopy or other
covered structure projecting from and supported by the building.
(6)
NONACCESSORY SIGN — A sign advertising a product or service or
carrying a message not related to the use on the property on which
it is located.
(7)
ROOF SIGN — A sign which is erected, constructed or maintained
on, above or as part of the roof of any building.
(8)
TEMPORARY SIGN — A sign which is designed to advertise or
announce a particular event or series of events, to solicit political
support or to announce the availability for sale of a particular item
or items which will be available for a limited period.
(9)
WALL SIGN — A sign which is attached directly to the building and
is parallel to the building.
(10)
§ 213-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-7
1:513
one which is allowable only when facts and conditions specified in the
chapter as those upon which the use is permitted are found to exist.
SPECIALIZED AUTOMOBILE SERVICE — Any building and/or lot used
to replace, repair or service specific automobile parts or provide
lubrication or lubrication services to automobiles, i.e., brakes, mufflers,
shock absorbers and/or the changing of lubricating fluids or greasing,
etc.[Added 3-5-1990]
STREET — Any dedicated public thoroughfare which affords principal
access to abutting properties. This shall include street, highway, road,
lane and drive but shall not include any unaccepted street for which the
City has no maintenance responsibility.
STREET CENTER LINE — A line equidistant from each street line; or if
no street line is established, the center line of the existing pavement; or
if the street is unpaved, the center line of the existing traveled way.
STREET LINE — The right-of-way line of a street and the dividing line
between a street and the abutting property.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS — Any change in the supporting members
of a building or structure, such as bearing walls, columns, beams or
girders.
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed or erected, the use of which
requires location on, under or above the ground or attachment thereto.
SWIMMING POOL, NONCOMMERCIAL — Any constructed body of
water or structure to contain water and any accessory equipment
pertaining thereto used or intended to be used for swimming or bathing
by any family or persons residing on the premises and their guests. Such
noncommercial swimming pools shall not be operated for gain and shall
be located on a lot only as an accessory use to the dwelling, motel,
membership club or nonprofit organization.
TEMPORARY BUILDING — A building or structure which is constructed
or located on a site and remains on said site for a period not longer than
one year.
TOPSOIL — The original upper layer of soil material which is usually
darker and richer than the subsoil and as certified by a soil
scientist.[Added 12-21-1998]
USE, ACCESSORY — A use incidental to the principal use of a lot or a
building located on the same lot.102
USE, PRINCIPAL — The primary purpose for which land, premises or a
building thereon is designed, arranged or intended or for which it is or
may be occupied or maintained.103
USE, TEMPORARY SALES — The exchange of goods or property for
money or some other consideration for a fixed period of time with
the intent to discontinue such use upon the expiration of the time
period.[Added 4-7-2008]
§ 213-7 MERIDEN CODE § 213-7
1:514
YARD, FRONT — A yard extending along the full length of the front lot
line between the two side lot lines.
YARD, REAR — A yard extending along the full length of the rear lot line
between the side lot lines.
YARD, SIDE — A yard extending along a side lot line from the front yard
(or from the front lot line if there is no front yard) to the rear yard (or
the rear lot line if there is no rear yard).
102. Editor's Note: See Diagram 6, Principal and Accessory Uses, at the end of this chapter.
103. Editor's Note: See Diagram 6, Principal and Accessory Uses, at the end of this chapter.
§ 213-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-7
1:515

ARTICLE III
Districts Established; Use, Lot and Bulk Regulations
§ 213-8. Establishment of districts. [Amended 10-21-1985;
12-5-1988; 6-17-2013104]
For purposes of this chapter, the City of Meriden is divided into the
following zoning districts:
R-R Rural Residential District
S-R Suburban Residential District
R-1 Single-Family Residential District
R-2 Two- or Three-Family Residential District
R-3 Multiple-Family District
R-H Residential Historic District
R-4 Multiple-Family/Professional Office District
C-1 Central Commercial District
C-1-A Central Commercial Annex
C-2 General Commercial District
C-3 Highway Commercial District
C-4 Convenience or Neighborhood Commercial District
NCDD Neighborhood Commercial Design District
M-1 Research, Development and Manufacturing District
M-2 Industrial District
M-3 Industrial District
M-4 Planned Industrial District
UID Unified Industrial District
PRD Planned Residential Development
PEOD Planned Executive Office Development
RDD Regional Development District
AACD Active Adult Cluster Developments
PEHC Planned Elderly Housing Community
PDD Planned Development District
TOD-HC Transit Oriented Development Historic Commercial Sub-District
TOD-P Transit Oriented Development Park Sub-District
TOD-H Transit Oriented Development Hanover Sub-District
TOD-C Transit Oriented Development Civic Sub-District
104. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 213-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-8
1:517
TOD-G Transit Oriented Development Gateway Sub-District
§ 213-9. Interpretation of district boundaries.
Where any uncertainty exists as to the correct location of any zoning district
boundary shown on the Zoning Map referred to under § 213-4 herein, it
shall be the duty of the Zoning Commission to establish the correct location
thereof according to the intent of this chapter.
§ 213-10. Applicability of regulations to existing parcels.
A. Lots of record. Any lot or parcel of land of record or any lot for which
final subdivision approval has been granted in accordance with the
ordinance in effect prior to the effective date (7-7-1983) of this chapter
may be used as a building site even when of less area or width or
depth than that required by the regulations for the district in which it
is located, subject also to the requirements of all other sections of this
chapter, and provided that it is in separate ownership from any adjoining
lot on the effective date of this chapter or, if such adjoining lot is in the
same ownership, one is developed as of the effective date of this chapter.
B. On any parcel of land having an average width of less than that required
by the district in which the lot is located, which parcel was under one
ownership of record prior to the adoption of this chapter or is shown as
a lot in any subdivision on file in the office of the City Clerk of the City
of Meriden on said date, and the owner thereof owns no adjoining land,
then except for residential lots of at least 75 feet in width, the width of
each side yard may be reduced to 10% of the width of such parcel but in
no case to less than six feet. [Amended 12-21-2009]
§ 213-11. Interpretation of use regulations. [Amended 5-7-2007]
Any uses not specifically permitted shall be deemed to be prohibited,
including, but not limited to, check-cashing establishments licensed
pursuant to § 36a-580 et seq. of the Connecticut General Statutes, tattoo
parlors, body piercing establishments, and pawnshops or pawnbrokers
licensed pursuant to § 21-39 et seq. of the Connecticut General Statutes.
§ 213-12. Schedule of land use, lot and bulk regulations.
To facilitate understanding of this chapter and for the better administration
thereof, the regulations establishing the permitted uses of land and
buildings, the limitations on the size of lots, percent of coverage of land
by buildings and the location, arrangement, height and size of buildings,
required open spaces and other lot and bulk requirements for each of the
districts established by Article III of this chapter, are summarized in the
schedule designated as § 213-12A, Summary of permitted uses by zoning
district, and § 213-12B, Lot and bulk requirements, which is annexed here
as part of this section.105 Such schedule is hereby adopted and declared to
105. Editor's Note: The Schedule of Land Use, Lot and Bulk Regulations, comprised of
§ 213-12A and B, is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 213-8 MERIDEN CODE § 213-12
1:518
be a part of this chapter, is hereinafter referred to as "the schedule" and
may be amended in the same manner as any other part of this chapter.
§ 213-13. Number of principal buildings per lot. [Added
10-21-1985; amended 4-6-1987]
Only one main principal building shall be permitted on one lot within the
City of Meriden, except for the following districts as established by § 213-8
of this chapter: R-3 Multiple-Family Residential District, R-4 Multiple-
Family/Professional Office District, C-1 Central Commercial District, C-2
General Commercial District, C-3 Highway Commercial District, M-1
Research, Development, and Manufacturing, M-2 Industrial District and
M-3 Industrial District, subject to the following conditions:
A. The building and use shall comply with or conform to all requirements of
the district in which it is located.
B. The distance between buildings shall be at least two times the required
side yard of the district in which it is located. Said distance shall be able
to be waived by the Planning Commission, but in no case less than 20
feet.
C. All buildings shall be compatible with the site as well as each other.
D. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter to the contrary, the
provision of this section of the chapter may not be used to allow more
than eight units to be erected in an R-3 Zone on any lot less than 35,000
square feet.
§ 213-14. Number of principal uses per lot. [Added 10-21-1985]
Unless otherwise provided, only one principal use shall be permitted on any
lot within any zoning district in the City of Meriden.
§ 213-15. Temporary sales use. [Amended 4-7-2008]
No temporary sales are permitted
§ 213-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-15
1:519

ARTICLE IV
Residential Districts
§ 213-16. R-R Rural Residential District.
A. The purpose of this district shall be to assist in the creation of areas of
relatively open character for single-family dwellings on individual lots,
as well as for preservation of open space and more efficient development
through cluster development on appropriate sites, and to provide for
facilities and uses which serve residents of those areas and for uses
which are benefited by and are beneficial to an open residential
environment.
B. Permitted uses. No building or premises may be used, in whole or in
part, for any purpose except those listed below.
(1) Permitted uses by right:
(a) Single-family dwellings.
(b) Municipal or public uses and buildings.
(c) Public and private utility substations.
(d) Child-care provider — Class II, provided that: [Added 2-3-1992]
[1] All play apparatus must be located in the rear yard;
[2] Parking shall be required at a rate of one space per 3,000
square feet of gross floor area dedicated to day-care use or
one per every six children, whichever is greater;
[3] Sanitary sewers and public water shall be required; and
[4] Residential structures converted to day-care use must retain
the residential character of the building and be
architecturally similar to the surrounding residential
properties.
(2) Uses permitted subject to issuance of a special exception permit by
the Zoning Board of Appeals in accordance with the requirements of
§ 213-73:
(a) Places of worship and public assembly, including parish houses,
parochial schools, meeting rooms and recreation facilities
customarily accessory to such uses.
(b) Crop and tree farming, keeping of farm animals, except for furbearing
animals raised for commercial pelting, greenhouses or
nurseries.
(c) Riding academies and stables for rental to the general public of
animals in the equine family or commercial kennels, subject to
the following conditions:
[1] The minimum site area for any of the above uses shall be
three acres.
[2] No barn, shelter or other building used for the housing of
said animals or the storage of feed and supplies shall be
located closer than 60 feet to any property line. Waste
materials shall not be stored or located closer than 100 feet
to any property line.
[3] The area used for grazing, exercising or training of said
animals shall be securely fenced to prevent the animals from
§ 213-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-16
1:521
straying and to provide adequate protection to keep the
general public from entering the enclosures.
(d) Membership clubs.
C. Accessory uses.
(1) Uses customarily accessory to permitted uses if constructed
concurrently with or subsequent to the main building.
(2) One sign in accordance with § 213-56N(5).
(3) Off-street parking in accordance with § 213-55.
(4) Keeping of horses, ponies and other animals of the equine family for
the use of the occupants of the property only, subject to the following
land area and setback requirements:
(a) There shall be a minimum lot area of one acre required for the
dwelling for the first animal being kept and 1/3 acre for each
additional animal, with a maximum of 10 such animals.
(b) No barn, shelter or other buildings used for housing of said
animals, the storage of feed and supplies or the storage of waste
materials shall be located any closer than 60 feet to the property
line.
(c) The area used for the grazing, exercising or training of said
animals shall be securely fenced to prevent straying and to
prevent the public from entering the enclosure.
(d) This shall not be construed as allowing the establishment of any
commercial enterprise.
(5) Child-care provider — Class I. [Added 7-5-1988]
(a) Day care may not be carried on in a separate building from the
main residence.
(b) All day-care providers must receive a certificate of fire safety
from the Fire Marshal.
D. Lot and bulk requirements. Lot and bulk requirements are found in
§ 213-12B.
E. A driveway or any type of access for any use not permitted by right or
special exception in this zone shall not be permitted as an accessory or
primary use. [Added 8-2-1988]
§ 213-17. S-R Suburban Residential District.
A. The purpose of this district shall be to assist in the creation of areas of
relatively open character for single-family dwellings on individual lots,
as well as for preservation of open space and more efficient development
through cluster development on appropriate sites, and to provide for
facilities and uses which serve residents of those areas and for uses
which are benefited by and are beneficial to an open residential
environment.
B. Permitted uses. No building or premises may be used, in whole or in
part, for any purpose except those listed below.
(1) Permitted uses by right:
(a) Single-family dwellings.
(b) Municipal or public uses and buildings.
(c) Public and private utility substations.
§ 213-16 MERIDEN CODE § 213-17
1:522
(d) Child-care provider — Class II, subject to the requirements of
§ 213-16B(1)(d). [Added 2-3-1992]
(2) Uses permitted subject to issuance of a special exception permit by
the Zoning Board of Appeals in accordance with the requirements of
§ 213-73:
(a) Places of worship and public assembly, including parish houses,
parochial schools, meeting rooms and recreation facilities
customarily accessory to such uses.
(b) Crop and tree farming, keeping of farm animals, except for furbearing
animals raised for commercial pelting, greenhouses or
nurseries.
(c) Riding academies and stables for rental to the general public of
animals in the equine family or commercial kennels, subject to
the provisions of § 213-16B(2)(c).
(d) Membership clubs.
(e) Professional offices in residences, subject to the following
conditions:
[1] Said office shall be limited to one professional who shall
reside on the premises and not more than two nonresident
assistants.
[2] Said office shall be incidental and subordinate to the
residential building and shall not occupy more than 25% of
the total floor area of the principal building. No office shall
be located in an accessory building.
[3] In no manner shall the appearance of the building be altered
nor shall the office within the residence be conducted in a
manner that would cause the premises to lose its residential
character.
C. Accessory uses.
(1) Uses customarily accessory to permitted uses if constructed
concurrently with or subsequent to the main building.
(2) One sign in accordance with § 213-56N(5).
(3) Off-street parking in accordance with § 213-55.
(4) Horses, ponies and other animals of the equine family, subject to the
requirements of § 213-16C(4).
(5) Child-care provider — Class I, subject to the requirements of
§ 213-16C(5). [Added 7-5-1988]
D. Lot and bulk requirements. Lot and bulk requirements are found in
§ 213-12B.
E. A driveway or any type of access for any use not permitted by right or
special exception in this zone shall not be permitted as an accessory or
primary use. [Added 8-2-1988]
§ 213-18. R-1 Single-Family Residential District.
A. The purpose of this district shall be to provide for areas of relatively
open character for single-family dwellings on individual lots, as well as
for preservation of open space and more efficient development through
cluster development on appropriate sites; to provide for facilities and
uses which serve residents of those areas and for uses which are
§ 213-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-18
1:523
benefited by an open residential environment, and to provide
opportunity for more intensive use of large older residential structures
as a means of assuring neighborhood stability.
B. Permitted uses. No building or premises may be used, in whole or in
part, for any purpose except those listed below.
(1) Permitted uses by right:
(a) Single-family dwellings.
(b) Municipal or public uses and buildings.
(c) Public and private utility substations.
(d) Child-care provider — Class II, subject to the requirements of
§ 213-16B(1)(d). [Added 2-3-1992]
(2) Uses permitted subject to issuance of a special exception permit by
the Zoning Board of Appeals in accordance with the requirements of
§ 213-73:
(a) Places of worship and public assembly, including parish houses,
parochial schools, meeting rooms and recreation facilities
customarily accessory to such uses.
(b) Crop and tree farming, keeping of farm animals, except for furbearing
animals raised for commercial pelting, greenhouses or
nurseries.106
(c) Riding academies and stables for rental to the general public of
animals in the equine family or commercial kennels, subject to
the provisions of § 213-16B(2)(c).
(d) Membership clubs.
(e) Home occupations, subject to the following conditions:
[1] Said home occupations shall be conducted by members of the
family owning and residing on the premises. No more than
two nonresidents shall be employed herein.
[2] Said home occupation shall not occupy more than 25% of the
total floor area of the principal building. No home occupation
shall be conducted in an accessory building.
[3] In no manner shall the appearance of the building be altered
nor shall the occupation within the residence be conducted
in a manner that would cause the premises to lose its
residential character, either by the use of colors, materials,
construction or lighting. No display of products shall be
visible from the street, and no stock-in-trade shall be kept on
the premises.
[4] No home occupation shall create noise, dust, vibration, odor,
smoke, electrical interference, fire hazard or any other
nuisance that is perceptible beyond the lot lines.
[5] Home occupations shall in no event be deemed to include
animal hospitals, kennels, barbershops, beauty parlors,
clinics or hospitals, dancing schools, mortuaries, auto repair
shops, restaurants, tourist homes, rooming houses or
boardinghouses, and uses similar to those listed above.
[6] Any Class III child-care facility legally existing by virtue of
former Zoning Board of Appeals action shall be governed by
the provisions of § 213-19B(2)(j). [Added 2-3-1992]
§ 213-18 MERIDEN CODE § 213-18
1:524
(f) Conversion of single-family dwellings. An existing single-family
dwelling erected more than 20 years prior to January 1, 1966,
may be converted to comprise a maximum of four dwelling units,
subject to the following conditions:
[1] The minimum lot area per family available shall meet the
requirements of this district.
[2] The building shall be maintained in its original appearance
or may be modified to conform to the character of the
neighborhood if such modification requires no major
structural changes. No addition to the building shall be
permitted, except for the purpose of providing secondary
egress if required.
[3] The plan for conversion shall provide for off-street paved
parking spaces in sufficient number to furnish two such
spaces for each dwelling unit. [Amended 5-1-1989]
(g) Professional offices in residences, subject to the requirements of
§ 213-17B(2)(e).
C. Accessory uses.
(1) Uses customarily accessory to permitted uses if constructed
concurrently with or subsequent to the main building.
(2) One sign in accordance with § 213-56N(5).
(3) Off-street parking in accordance with § 213-55.
(4) Horses, ponies and animals of the equine family, subject to the
requirements of § 213-16C(4).
(5) Child-care provider — Class I, subject to the requirements of
§ 213-16C(5). [Added 7-5-1988]
D. Lot and bulk requirements. Lot and bulk requirements are found in
§ 213-12B.
E. A driveway or any type of access for any use not permitted by right or
special exception in this zone shall not be permitted as an accessory or
primary use. [Added 8-2-1988]
§ 213-19. R-2 Two- or Three-Family Residential District.
A. The purpose of this district shall be to provide areas for several types
of housing in a medium-density environment with access to a range of
community services and transportation.
B. Permitted uses. No building or premises may be used, in whole or in
part, for any purpose except those listed below.
(1) Permitted uses by right:
(a) Single-family dwellings.
(b) Two- and three-family dwellings.
(c) Municipal or public uses and buildings.
(d) Public and private utility substations.
(e) Child-care provider — Class II, subject to the requirements of
§ 213-16B(1)(d). [Added 2-3-1992]
106. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(2)(c), which permitted mobile homes and mobile
home parks subject to issuance of a special exception permit, and which immediately
followed this subsection, was repealed 12-5-1983.
§ 213-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-19
1:525
(2) Uses permitted subject to issuance of a special exception permit by
the Zoning Board of Appeals in accordance with the requirements of
§ 213-73:
(a) Places of worship and public assembly, including parish houses,
parochial schools, meeting rooms and recreation facilities
customarily accessory to such uses.
(b) Crop and tree farming, keeping of farm animals, except for furbearing
animals raised for commercial pelting, greenhouses or
nurseries.
(c) Mobile homes and mobile home parks, subject to the following
conditions: [Amended 12-5-1983]
[1] Provision must be made to make existing trailer camps and
mobile home parks safe, sanitary and fit for human
habitation and aesthetically unoffensive.
[2] The following minimum standards shall be established for
trailer parks or mobile home parks:
[a] Minimum lot width: 50 feet.
[b] Minimum lot area per unit: 5,000 square feet.
[c] Minimum side yards: six feet.
[d] Minimum front and rear yard measured from any road or
driveway: 15 feet.
[3] Mobile homes not located within mobile home parks shall
conform to the density, lot and bulk requirements of the zone
they are located in.
(d) Riding academies and stables for rental to the general public of
animals in the equine family or commercial kennels, subject to
the provisions of § 213-16B(2)(c).
(e) Membership clubs.
(f) Home occupations, subject to the requirements of
§ 213-18B(2)(e).
(g) Conversion of single-family dwellings. Any single-family dwelling
in existence 20 years prior to June 1, 1966, may be converted
to comprise a maximum of four dwelling units subject to the
provisions of § 213-18B(2)(f).
(h) Professional offices in residences, subject to the requirements of
§ 213-17B(2)(e).
(i) An existing residential building not less than 50 years old which
is historically notable in accordance with the following
standards: [Added 1-19-1988; amended 6-5-1990]
[1] Uniqueness of the structure, distinctiveness of the
architectural character of the structure or historical
significance of the structure;
[2] The front face of the structure must face onto any of the
following streets or portions thereof: East Main Street
(except between Parker Avenue and Carpenter Avenue);
Broad Street; South Broad Street; North Broad Street south
of 1691; South Colony Street north of Olive Street; Cook
Avenue; Hanover Street up to Winthrop Terrace; Washington
Street; Lincoln Street; Parker Avenue North; or any other
§ 213-19 MERIDEN CODE § 213-19
1:526
streets that may be designated by the City Council after
a public hearing may be converted and used in total for
professional and/or executive offices subject to the following
conditions:
[a] Only one principal use and building shall be allowed on a
lot;
[b] All lot and bulk requirements of the existing zone must
be complied with;
[c] The building shall be maintained in its original
appearance or may be modified to conform to the
character of the neighborhood if such modification
requires no major structural changes and is approved by
the Design Review Board. No addition to the building
shall be permitted, except for the purpose of providing
a secondary egress if required. No alterations to the
exterior of the building shall lessen the residential
character of the building. Specific architectural and
landscape plans shall be submitted and approved by the
ZBA as to how the building will be restored. No
certificate of occupancy will be issued until the
architectural, landscape and signage plans have been
satisfactorily completed.
[d] Parking requirements shall be per § 213-55 of this
chapter, except that parking in the front yard shall be
prohibited.
[e] The Board must be satisfied with the historic significance
of the building as explained in a written statement
presented by the applicant. The ZBA may take into
consideration the recommendations of any City agencies
or outside specialists which it consults, such as, but not
limited to, the Meriden Historical Society.
(j) Child-care provider — Class III, subject to the following
requirements:
[1] All conversions or new construction of child-care centers
in residential zones must be architecturally similar to the
surrounding residential structures.
[2] All lot and bulk requirements must be met for the district
within which the operation is located.
[3] The number of children permitted within a Class III center
will be determined by the State of Connecticut Department
of Public Health and the Department of Social Services, the
licensing agents.107
[4] All play apparatus must be located in the rear yard and shall
be screened according to the requirements for multifamily
dwellings [§ 213-46A(2)].
[5] Parking shall be required at a rate of one space per 3,000
square feet of gross floor area dedicated to the day-care use
or one per every six children, whichever is greater.
§ 213-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-19
1:527
[6] Provision shall be made for safe circulation throughout the
site. Dropoff and pickup points shall be established.
[7] Sanitary sewers and public water shall be required.
[8] A certificate of fire safety must be received from the
Meriden Fire Marshal.
[9] All applicants must present an approved license from the
State of Connecticut Department of Public Health and proof
of registration with the Meriden Health Department prior
to issuance of a building permit.108
[10] Certificate of approval is required. [Added 2-3-1992]
(k) Garden-type multiple-family developments, subject to the
following conditions: [Added 10-15-2018]
[1] The site is at least two acres and is adequately served with
public water and public sanitary sewers;
[2] The lot coverage shall not exceed 40% of the total lot area;
[3] There shall be a maximum of six dwelling units in a single
structure, with a density of no greater than one unit for every
5,000 square feet of lot area;
[4] The minimum setback from all surrounding public streets
shall be no less than 35 feet; the minimum setback from all
other property lines will not be less than 25 feet;
[5] The proposed use shall be designed as a single architectural
project with appropriate landscaping;
[6] The distance at the closest point between any two buildings
of a group of garden-type multiple-family dwellings shall not
be less than 35 feet;
[7] A group of garden-type multiple-family dwellings shall not be
designed so as to permit subsequent subdivision into units
which would not conform to the use and area regulations of
the district in which it is located.
[8] A minimum of 200 square feet of usable open space shall be
provided per dwelling unit.
C. Accessory uses.
(1) Uses customarily accessory to permitted uses if constructed
concurrently with or subsequent to the main building.
(2) One sign in accordance with § 213-56N(5).
(3) Off-street parking in accordance with § 213-55.
(4) Horses, ponies and animals of the equine family, subject to the
requirements of § 213-16C(4).
(5) Child-care provider — Class I, subject to the requirements of
§ 213-16C(5). [Added 7-5-1988]
(6) A community building. [Added 1-6-2014]
D. Lot and bulk requirements. Lot and bulk requirements are found in
§ 213-12B.
107. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
108. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 213-19 MERIDEN CODE § 213-19
1:528
E. A driveway or any type of access for any use not permitted by right or
special exception in this zone shall not be permitted as an accessory or
primary use. [Added 8-2-1988]
§ 213-20. R-3 Multiple-Family Residential District.
A. The purpose of this district shall be to provide areas for a range of
housing types at a medium density commensurate with the scale and
characteristics of the City's older neighborhoods; these are areas with
access to major transportation arteries and a range of community
services.
B. Permitted uses. No building or premises may be used, in whole or in
part, for any purpose except those listed below.
(1) Permitted uses by right:
(a) Single-, two- and three-family dwellings.
(b) Multiple dwellings with a maximum of eight units in a structure,
except for garden-type multifamily development as may be
permitted by special exception.
(c) Municipal or public uses and buildings.
(d) Public and private utility substations.
(e) Child-care provider — Class II, subject to the requirements of
§ 213-16B(1)(d). [Added 2-3-1992]
(2) Uses permitted subject to issuance of a special exception permit by
the Zoning Board of Appeals in accordance with the requirements of
§ 213-73:
(a) Places of worship and public assembly, including parish houses,
parochial schools, meeting rooms and recreation facilities
customarily accessory to such uses.
(b) Crop and tree farming, keeping of farm animals, except for furbearing
animals raised for commercial pelting, greenhouses or
nurseries.
(c) Mobile homes and mobile home parks, subject to the provision of
§ 213-19B(2)(c).
(d) Riding academies and stables for rental to the general public of
animals in the equine family or commercial kennels, subject to
the provisions of § 213-16B(2)(c).
(e) Membership clubs.
(f) Home occupations, subject to the requirements of
§ 213-18B(2)(e).
(g) Garden-type multiple-family developments, subject to the
following conditions:
[1] The site is at least two acres and is adequately served with
public water and public sanitary sewers.
[2] The lot coverage shall not exceed 50% of the total lot area.
[3] The minimum setback from all surrounding streets shall be
not less than 35 feet.
[4] The distance at the closest point between any two buildings
of a group of garden-type multiple-family dwellings shall be
not less than 50 feet.
§ 213-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-20
1:529
[5] A minimum of 200 square feet of usable open space shall be
provided per dwelling unit.
[6] A group of garden-type multiple-family dwellings shall not be
designed so as to permit subsequent subdivision into units
which would not conform to the use and area regulations of
the district in which it is located.
[7] The proposed use shall be designed as a single architectural
project with appropriate landscaping and shall not materially
detract from the character of the neighborhood.
[8] All other requirements for multifamily dwellings shall be
satisfied.
(h) Rooming, boarding and tourist homes, provided that public
sanitary sewers are available.
(i) Professional offices in residences, subject to the requirements of
§ 213-17B(2)(e).
(j) Child-care provider — Class III, subject to the requirements of
§ 213-19B(2)(j). [Amended 7-5-1988; 2-3-1992]
(k) An existing residential building not less than 50 years old which
is historically notable in accordance with § 213-19B(2)(i).
[Added 1-19-1988; amended 6-4-1990109]
C. Accessory uses.
(1) Uses customarily accessory to permitted uses if constructed
concurrently with or subsequent to the main building.
(2) Signs, as regulated in § 213-56.
(3) Off-street parking and loading, in accordance with the requirements
of § 213-55.
(4) Horses, ponies and animals of the equine family, subject to the
requirements of § 213-16C(4).
(5) Child-care provider — Class I subject to the requirements of
§ 213-16C(5). [Added 7-5-1988]
D. Lot and bulk requirements. Lot and bulk requirements are found in
§ 213-12B.
E. A driveway or any type of access for any use not permitted by right or
special exception in this zone shall not be permitted as an accessory or
primary use. [Added 8-2-1988]
§ 213-21. R-4 Multiple-Family/Professional Office District.
A. The purpose of this district shall be to provide for a range of housing
types with opportunity for appropriate nonresidential uses at a high
density commensurate with the scale and characteristics of the City's
older neighborhoods; these are areas with access to major
transportation arteries and a range of community services.
B. Permitted uses. No building or premises may be used, in whole or in
part, for any purpose except those listed below.
(1) Permitted uses by right:
(a) Single-, two- and three-family dwellings.
(b) Multiple-family dwellings.
109. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 213-20 MERIDEN CODE § 213-21
1:530
(c) Professional offices and buildings.
(d) Home occupations, subject to the provisions of § 213-18B(2)(e).
(e) Municipal or public uses and buildings.
(f) Public and private utility substations.
(g) Real estate office. [Added 3-3-1986]
(h) Child-care provider — Class II, subject to the requirements of
§ 213-16B(1)(d). [Added 2-3-1992]
(2) Uses permitted subject to issuance of a special exception permit by
the Zoning Board of Appeals in accordance with the requirements of
§ 213-73:
(a) Places of worship and public assembly, including parish houses,
parochial schools, meeting rooms and recreation facilities
customarily accessory to such uses.
(b) Crop and tree farming, keeping of farm animals, except for furbearing
animals raised for commercial pelting, greenhouses or
nurseries.
(c) Mobile homes and mobile home parks, subject to the provisions
of § 213-19B(2)(c).
(d) Riding academies and stables for rental to the general public of
animals in the equine family or commercial kennels, subject to
the provisions of § 213-16B(2)(c).
(e) Rooming, boarding and tourist homes, provided that public
sanitary sewers are available.
(f) Commercial and membership clubs and social or recreational
centers.
(g) Hospitals, rest homes, clinics, convalescent homes or homes
for the aged, sanitariums and philanthropic or charitable
institutions.
(h) Correctional institution facilities.110
(i) Buildings with mixed uses, subject to the following
requirements:
[1] Only uses permitted in the district may occur.
[2] All lot and bulk requirements for each use are satisfied.
[3] Separate entrances and exits shall be provided for
residential and nonresidential portions of the building.
(j) Child-care provider — Class III, subject to the requirements of
§ 213-19B(2)(j). [Amended 7-5-1988; 2-3-1992]
(k) Homes for sheltered care, subject to the following requirements:
[Added 7-7-1986]
[1] Run by a nonprofit/religious organization.
[2] Review and approval by the Health and Human Services
Department, which shall establish standards and guidelines
pursuant thereto.
[3] The property is limited to noncommercial uses.
C. Accessory uses.
(1) Uses customarily accessory to permitted uses if constructed
concurrently with or subsequent to the main building. This shall not
110. Editor's Note: Former § 213-18B(2)(i), which pertained to high-rise multiple dwellings
over 75 feet tall and which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 8-2-2004.
§ 213-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-21
1:531
be construed as permitting any commercial use or occupation other
than those listed in this section.
(2) Signs, as regulated in § 213-56.
(3) Off-street parking in accordance with § 213-55.
D. Lot and bulk requirements. Lot and bulk requirements are found in
§ 213-12B.
E. A driveway or any type of access for any use not permitted by right or
special exception in this zone shall not be permitted as an accessory or
primary use. [Added 8-2-1988]
§ 213-22. R-H Residential Historic District.
A. Creation of district. Within any residential area, the Zoning Commission
may create a residential historic district in accordance with the
standards, criteria and procedures contained in this section of the
chapter.
B. Purpose. The Residential Historic R-H District is intended to protect
and enhance Meriden's historically significant residential structures.
Its purpose is to guide the manner in which historical residences are
maintained, restored, rehabilitated or altered, with a goal of preserving
Meriden's history through its architecture.
C. Applicability. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to any
neighborhood or group of neighborhoods in which there is:
(1) A prevailing architectural type, common to the majority of buildings;
(2) A majority of homes which are not less than 50 years old; and
(3) Which is geographically definable with regard to boundaries.
D. Application for a Residential Historic R-H District. The creation of such
a district shall be in accordance with § 213-77 of this chapter, provided
the following additional information is supplied to and approved by the
Design Review Board:
(1) A legal description of the land within the proposed district.
(2) A historic survey of all properties to be included in the R-H District.
Said survey shall include but not be limited to the following:
(a) Present use and condition of buildings;
(b) Date of construction and succession of titles on all structures;
(c) Boundaries of district, including names and addresses of all
owners;
(d) An existing-conditions streetscape plan showing sidewalks,
utilities, driveways, signs, etc.
(3) Appointment by residents of a spokesperson and alternate to work
with the Design Review Board. A letter from the neighborhood
group(s) appointing the spokesperson shall accompany the zone
change application. This letter shall list all members and the form of
the vote and the vote of each member.
(4) A petition in support of the R-H District signed by at least 51% of the
property owners in the proposed district.
E. Design Review Board authority. Any change in use or expansion of
residential density within an R-H district will require a Certificate of
Historic Residence Modification from the Design Review Board. Further,
no structure may be demolished, erected, moved, enlarged,
§ 213-21 MERIDEN CODE § 213-22
1:532
reconstructed, or structurally altered which is not first approved by the
Design Review Board. The Director of Planning and the Chairman of
the Design Review Board may waive the requirements for formal board
review if it is determined that the proposed change will have no adverse
effect on the building facade or streetscape.
F. Role of neighborhood spokesperson. A spokesperson and an alternate
shall be elected by a majority vote of the property owners within each
R-H District. This spokesperson may appear before the Design Review
Board whenever an application is pending in his/her R-H District. The
spokesperson will not be a voting member of the Board but will be
requested to report on his/her association's support and/or opinions
regarding pending applications.
G. Permitted uses. Permitted uses include all uses permitted by right and
all uses permitted by special exception allowed in the underlying zone.
The zoning designation will reflect the underlying zone as well as the
historic district status (i.e., R-2 would be redesignated RH-2). No
structure may be erected, reconstructed, altered, restored, moved,
demolished or changed in use or type of occupancy which is not in
conformance with the requirements of this section, and subject to the
following additional requirements:
(1) Only one principal use and building shall be allowed on a lot.
Accessory buildings shall not be converted into dwelling units.
(2) All lot and bulk requirements of the zone must be met.
(3) Parking requirements for any conversion shall be at a rate of two
spaces per dwelling unit. In the event of an office conversion per
§ 213-55B, said parking spaces shall be located on site and must be
of the dimensions and layout prescribed in § 213-55E. All parking
must be located in the rear yard. A minimum of six feet of
landscaping must be installed along the property boundaries.
(4) All buildings shall be maintained in their original appearances or
may be modified to better conform to the character of the
neighborhood.
(5) Additions to buildings shall be permitted only if original features
(i.e., porches, cornices, widows' walks) are maintained or replicated
or if it is determined that the addition will have no adverse impact
on the architectural character of the structure or on the streetscape.
(6) Conversion of single-family dwellings shall be in accordance with
§ 213-18B(2)(f), except that the maximum number of units shall be
in accordance with the underlying zone.
H. Nonapplicability. Nothing in the Residential Historic District regulations
shall be construed to prevent:
(1) The ordinary maintenance or repair of any building exterior in the
district which does not involve a change in design, material or the
outward structural appearance of the building, as determined by the
Director of Planning.
(2) The construction, reconstruction or alteration of any feature which
the Building Inspector shall certify is required because of an unsafe
or dangerous condition.
§ 213-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-22
1:533
(3) The construction, reconstruction, alteration or demolition of any
feature under a permit issued by a City inspector prior to the
effective date of establishment of the particular district.
I. General provisions.
(1) Within 65 days after official filing of the final application or within
such further time as the applicant may in writing allow for the
issuance of a Certificate of Historic Residence Modification, the
Design Review Board shall either grant or deny the Certificate of
Historic Residence Modification.
(2) The Board may from time to time adopt regulations which detail
the procedures for the issuance or denial of Certificates of Historic
Residence Modification. The Board shall be provided with a copy
of the application and all accompanying plans, specifications and
supporting materials. The decisions of the Design Review Board
shall be made in writing within the time prescribed by the
Commission in its request.
(3) If the Board determines that the proposed development is
appropriate, or if the Board fails to make a determination within the
time limit prescribed in this section, it shall issue to the applicant
a Certificate of Historic Residence Modification. If the Board
determines that a Certificate of Historic Residence Modification
should not be issued, it shall place on its records the reasons for
its determination, delivering to the applicant an attested copy of its
reasons for the determination.
(4) Predesign conference. The developer/homeowner is encouraged to
meet with the Planning Commission staff before presenting any
formal application, in order to provide an opportunity for the
developer to receive from the Planning Commission staff a full
explanation of the City's requirements.
J. Application for a historic residence modification. The application shall
supply the following information when making application to the Design
Review Board:
(1) All pertinent historic information regarding the structure (i.e., date
of construction, architectural type, history of ownership).
(2) Photographs or renderings of the building as it exists and a
rendering of proposed improvements and alterations.
(3) A description of proposed improvements, including changes to
architectural features, proposed materials, etc. [Added 2-5-1990]
§ 213-22 MERIDEN CODE § 213-22
1:534
ARTICLE V
Commercial Districts
§ 213-23. C-1 Central Commercial District.
A. The purpose of this district shall be to provide for and encourage a
variety of retail businesses, business and professional offices, service
businesses, entertainment and cultural establishments and limited light
industry and related activities, such as parking and pedestrian spaces,
all designed to serve the City and the region and to encourage the
concentration of retail and service uses to achieve continuity of frontage
devoted to such purposes which will strengthen and complement one
another; further, it is a purpose of this district to protect the major public
investment made and to be made toward revitalization of the central
business area, a vital part of the City's tax base, by conserving the value
of land and buildings.
B. Permitted uses. No building or premises may be used, in whole or in
part, for any use other than those listed below.
(1) Permitted uses by right:
(a) Retail stores.
(b) Banks, including drive-in windows.
(c) Service businesses, such as barbershops, beauty parlors,
furniture repair, tailors and dry-cleaning stores, launderette,
custom dressmaker, jewelry repair, shoe repair, travel agent,
appliance repair, photographer and duplicating business.
(d) Business, professional, service or governmental offices.
(e) Newspaper printing and job printing.
(f) Manufacturing, assembling, converting, altering, finishing,
cleaning or any other processing of products where goods so
produced or processed are to be sold at retail, exclusively on
the premises, provided that only an area fully concealed from
any street and equal to not more than 20% of the area devoted
to retail sales may be used for this purpose.
(g) Restaurant and/or catering establishments.
(h) Libraries, art galleries and museums.
(i) Art and craft studios and studios for teaching performing arts.
(j) Private transportation and auto rental services.
(k) Multiple-family dwellings.
(l) Hotels, motels and conference facilities.
(m) Theaters.
(n) Public and private utility substations.
(o) Living quarters in commercial buildings, provided that there
are separate entrances for the residential part of the building.
(p) Mortuaries.
(q) Public parking lots. [Amended 3-5-1990]
(r) Hospitals.
(s) Bus and taxi stands.
(t) Veterinarians.
(u) News and magazine stands.
(v) Transportation terminals.
§ 213-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-23
1:535
(w) Automotive sales and service.
(x) Bowling alleys.
(y) Real estate office. [Added 3-3-1986]
(z) Child-care provider — Class I. [Added 7-5-1988; amended
2-3-1992]
(aa) Child-care provider — Class II, subject to the requirements of
§ 213-16B(1)(d). [Added 2-3-1992]
(bb) Notwithstanding the general restriction on temporary sales as
stated in § 213-15 of this chapter, temporary sales are
permitted by nonprofit clubs, nonprofit organizations, as
defined and licensed by the State of Connecticut, and which
were not created for the purpose of selling goods, property
or wares. No such temporary sales shall be carried on for
longer than a thirty-day period in any given six months. All such
temporary sales must be approved by the Zoning Enforcement
Officer as to safety issues and compliance with this chapter.
[Amended 4-7-2008]
(2) Uses permitted subject to issuance of a special exception permit by
the Zoning Board of Appeals in accordance with the requirements of
§ 213-73:
(a) Automotive service stations, convenience stores/gas facilities
and specialized automobile service centers subject to the
following requirements.
[1] Storage of vehicles, parts or equipment: per § 213-47A and
B.
[2] Outdoor storage: visibility per § 213-48; parking per
§ 213-55. [Amended 3-5-1990; 6-5-1900]
(b) Drive-through facility in accordance with supplementary
regulations in § 213-59. [Amended 6-2-2008]
(c) Clinics.
(d) Cocktail lounges, nightclubs and package stores.
(e) Places of worship, schools, playgrounds and public buildings.
(f) Public and private academic and trade schools, subject to the
following requirements:
[1] The curriculum shall satisfy the requirements of the State
Department of Education.
[2] No accommodations for resident students shall be
permitted.
[3] No music or noise shall be audible beyond the immediate
premises.
(g) Dance halls, billiard parlors, skating rinks and recreation
centers.
(h) Fast-food restaurants, provided that eating on the premises shall
be permitted only inside the structure or in areas specifically
designated and properly maintained outside of the structures.
(i) Conversion of a portion of an existing building which is used for
commercial or service purposes into light manufacturing (light
assembly and/or research and development activity) space,
provided that:
§ 213-23 MERIDEN CODE § 213-23
1:536
[1] The building exists prior to the adoption of this chapter.
[2] The portion of the building to be utilized for light
manufacturing is limited to 45% of ground-floor (square
feet) space. Said use is not limited to a ground-floor location.
[3] The Commission is assured by the City Engineer, Health
Department, Building Official and Fire Marshal that said
use could be accommodated in a manner consistent with
building and fire codes.
[4] The facade of said building shall not be altered to detract
from the commercial/service appearance.
[5] All other requirements of this chapter are satisfied.
(j) Commercial amusement arcade, subject to the following
conditions:
[1] It shall be located at least 1,500 feet from any other
commercial amusement arcade, school buildings, school
playgrounds and church buildings and at least 500 feet from
a residence.
[2] An applicant must provide assurance that there will be
proper supervision and maintenance both inside and outside
of the arcade (as defined herein) at all times when the use is
open.
[3] The hours of operation shall be stated in the application
and approved by the Zoning Board of Appeals. Said hours of
operation must give consideration to discouraging use of the
arcade by schoolchildren during school hours.
[4] Fire Underwriters' Code requirements shall also be
complied with.
[5] Sanitary facilities consistent with applicable codes of the
City of Meriden shall be located on the premises and
accessible to users of the amusement arcade.
[6] Adequate off-street parking in addition to that otherwise
required for the uses on the premises shall be provided, and
bicycle racks shall be provided where appropriate.
[7] The Zoning Board of Appeals may set any restrictions it
deems necessary to ensure the health, safety and welfare of
the general public, including screening, security, personnel
and hours of operation. Said special exception may be
revoked by the Zoning Board of Appeals, after a public
hearing on the matter, if it is found that the permitted use
is generating excessive noise, loitering, littering, traffic
hazards or public nuisance.
(k) Buildings with mixed uses, subject to the following
requirements:
[1] All lot and bulk requirements for each use are satisfied.
[2] Separate entrances and exits shall be provided for
residential and nonresidential portions of the building.
(l) Mobile homes and mobile home parks, subject to the provisions
of § 213-19B(2)(c).
§ 213-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-23
1:537
(m) Heliports, subject to the following conditions as well as any
other determined to be appropriate by the Zoning Board of
Appeals as being necessary to carry out the purposes of this
chapter:
[1] In any residential zone, the hours of operation shall be
limited to prevent disturbance to nearby residences.
[2] No area shall be used as a heliport unless it is a minimum of
200 feet from any residential lot line.
[3] Access to areas used as heliports shall be securely fenced as
required by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
(n) Membership and commercial clubs.
(o) High-rise multiple-family dwellings over 12 stories, subject to
the following conditions:
[1] The City Engineer and Fire Marshal shall be satisfied that
adequate fire protection and water pressure can be provided
to serve the building.
[2] The area regulations for multiple-family dwellings in the
zone shall apply, except that an additional setback of one
foot for each five additional feet of building height shall be
required.
[3] There shall be provided, on the site, 200 square feet of
developed recreation space for each dwelling unit in the
building.
(p) Homes for sheltered care, subject to the following requirements:
[Added 7-7-1986]
[1] Run by a nonprofit/religious organization.
[2] Review and approval by the Health and Human Services
Department, which shall establish standards and guidelines
pursuant thereto.
[3] The property is limited to noncommercial uses.
(q) Child-care provider — Class III, subject to the requirements of
§ 213-19B(2)(j). [Added 7-5-1988; amended 2-3-1992]
(r) Hospitals, rest homes, clinics, convalescent homes, or homes for
the aged. [Added 1-6-1997]
(s) Secondary building, subject to the following conditions: [Added
6-7-1999]
[1] The building must be located a minimum of 25 feet from any
property line.
[2] A maximum of one secondary building is allowed per site.
[3] Parking requirements shall be a minimum of three parking
spaces for the secondary building. Said parking spaces shall
be immediately adjacent to the secondary building,
distinguished from the overall parking lot by curbing and
landscaping.
[4] No separate freestanding sign is allowed for the secondary
building.
[5] Certificate of approval from the Planning Commission is
required. The building shall be compatible to the
§ 213-23 MERIDEN CODE § 213-23
1:538
architectural and landscaping design of the site, primary
building, and the overall character of the area.
[6] No secondary building shall remain vacant for more than six
consecutive months. Secondary buildings must be occupied
for a minimum of three months during any six-month period.
The owner of the shopping center is responsible for
removing the building and restoration of the area in a
manner approved and bonded for by the Planning
Commission during the certificate of approval process.
(t) Health care services. [Amended 4-21-2008]
C. Accessory uses.
(1) Uses customarily accessory to permitted uses if constructed
concurrently with or subsequent to the main building.
(2) Signs, as regulated in § 213-56.
(3) Off-street parking in accordance with § 213-55.
(4) An outdoor dining area is allowed for restaurants and other food
service establishments with the permission of the property owner.
The area shall conform to the following: [Added 6-7-2004]
(a) The outdoor dining area must be immediately adjacent to the
indoor dining area and not adjacent to a residence.
(b) It shall be set back at least 15 feet from any travel or turning
lane.
(c) The outdoor dining area shall be physically separated from the
surrounding outdoor area. Such separators must be approved
by the Planning Department and can be a fence, elevated deck,
planters, movable gating or theater-type posts with ropes, etc.
(d) It shall not be located in any required front, rear or side yard
setback area (using the setback parameters for covered or
uncovered decks).
(e) It shall not exceed 50% of the square footage of the indoor
seating area for the restaurant/food service establishment.
(f) If more than 16 seats are added for outdoor dining, a certificate
of approval (site plan) is required. Otherwise, prior to
establishing the accessory use, an adequate plot plan needs to be
provided to the Planning Department that indicates dimensional
information for the outdoor service area. The location and
volume of seating, as well as the location and dimensions of the
restaurant/food service building, property boundaries, existing
and proposed surfaced areas, and access and separation shall be
indicated.
(g) The restaurant/food service establishment shall be in
conformance with parking requirements. Sufficient parking shall
be indicated on site plans.
(h) Depictions of nonpermanently sited tables, chairs, umbrellas,
awnings, trash receptacle(s) and the physical separator(s) should
be provided as well as corresponding information regarding
materials, flooring, and the proposed schedule of operation and
maintenance of the area. Indicate if outdoor consumption of
alcohol will be involved.
§ 213-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-23
1:539
(i) Any live or recorded music played or noise projected outside
the restaurant/food service establishment cannot be a nuisance.
The Zoning Officer is empowered to interpret a nuisance for a
minimal level of noise unacceptable to the neighborhood area.
(j) Customers need to be seated. For an outdoor dining area with
more than 16 seats, food service shall be provided by wait staff
D. Lot and bulk requirements. Lot and bulk requirements are found in
§ 213-12B.
§ 213-24. C-1-A Central Commercial Annex District. [Adopted
3-5-2001]
A. Purpose. The purpose of this district shall be to provide for and
encourage a variety of retail businesses, business and professional
offices, service businesses, entertainment and cultural establishments
and limited light industry and related activities, such as parking and
pedestrian spaces, all designed to serve the City and the region. It is a
purpose of this district to protect the major pubic investment made and
to be made toward revitalization of the area, a vital part of the City's
tax base, by restoring and conserving the value of land and buildings.
Further, this district is to be recognized as the transition zone between
all zones and the Central Commercial District.
B. Permitted uses. No building or premises may be used, in whole or in
part, for any use other than those listed below.
(1) Permitted uses by right:
(a) Retail stores.
(b) Banks, including drive-in windows.
(c) Service businesses, such as barbershops, beauty parlors,
furniture repair, tailors and dry-cleaning stores, launderette,
custom dressmaker, jewelry repair, shoe repair, travel agent,
appliance repair, photographer and duplicating business.
(d) Business, professional, service or governmental offices.
(e) Job printing.
(f) Restaurant and/or catering establishments.
(g) Libraries, art galleries and museums.
(h) Art and craft studios and studios for teaching performing arts.
(i) Private transportation and auto rental services.
(j) Hotels, motels and conference facilities.
(k) Theaters.
(l) Public and private utility substations.
(m) Living quarters in commercial buildings for the exclusive
housing of the merchant and family, provided that there are
separate entrances for the residential part of the building.
(n) Mortuaries.
(o) Public parking lots.
(p) Bus and taxi stands.
(q) Veterinarians.
(r) Hospitals.
(s) News and magazine stands.
(t) Transportation terminals.
§ 213-23 MERIDEN CODE § 213-24
1:540
(u) Automotive sales and service.
(v) Bowling alleys.
(w) Real estate office.
(x) Child-care provider — Class I.
(y) Child-care provider — Class II.
(2) Uses permitted subject to issuance of a special exception permit by
the Zoning Board of Appeals in accordance with the requirements of
§ 213-73:
(a) Automotive service stations, convenience stores/gas facilities
and specialized automobile service centers.
(b) Drive-through facility in accordance with supplementary
regulations in § 213-59. [Amended 6-2-2008]
(c) Clinics.
(d) Cocktail lounges, nightclubs and package stores.
(e) Places of worship, schools, playgrounds and public buildings.
(f) Public and private academic and trade schools, subject to the
requirements of § 213-23B(2)(f).111
(g) Dance halls, billiard parlors, skating rinks and recreation
centers.
(h) Fast-food restaurants, provided that eating on the premises shall
be permitted only inside the structure or in areas specifically
designated and properly maintained outside of the structures.
(i) Light manufacturing (light assembly and/or research and
development activity).
(j) Commercial amusement arcades, subject to the requirements of
§ 213-23B(2)(j).112
(k) Buildings with mixed uses, subject to the following
requirements:
[1] All lot and bulk requirements for each use are satisfied.
[2] All uses are either permitted or special exception uses in the
C-1-A Zone.
(l) Heliports, subject to the following conditions as well as any
others determined to be appropriate by the Zoning Board of
Appeals as being necessary to carry out the purposes of this
chapter.
[1] In any residential zone, the hours of operation shall be
limited to prevent disturbance to nearby residences.
[2] No area shall be used as a heliport unless it is a minimum of
200 feet from any residential lot line.
[3] Access to areas used as heliports shall be securely fenced as
required by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
(m) Membership and commercial clubs.
(n) Child-care provider — Class III, subject to the requirements of
§ 213-19B(2)(j).
(o) Elderly living and/or care units. [Adopted 10-1-2001]
[1] These uses are restricted to the elderly and can be one or a
combination of independent housing units, assisted housing
units, intermediate care, convalescent or nursing units. Also
allowed are day-care centers for the elderly. "Elderly" is
§ 213-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-24
1:541
defined as any person 62 years of age or over or a person
who has been certified by the Social Security Board as being
totally disabled under the Federal Social Security Act. At
the time of admission to an elderly independent or assisted
housing unit, at least one person per unit must meet the
foregoing definition.
[2] The minimum lot and bulk design criteria for elderly living
units or elderly care units or elderly day-care units include:
[a] Minimum lot area: 25,000 square feet.
[b] Minimum lot width: 80 feet.
[c] Setbacks, front and rear yard: 25 feet.
[d] Side yards: 15 feet.
[e] Lot coverage: 75% for principal buildings, accessory
buildings and paved areas.
[f] Pedestrian walks: A pedestrian circulation system shall
be so designed as to provide wherever possible for
separation between pedestrian and vehicular traffic. All
such walks shall be designed and built to provide for
wheelchair access. All existing walks shall be upgraded
to accommodate wheelchairs.
[g] All buildings on an individual lot shall be interpreted in
terms of architecture, color, texture and scale.
[h] All plans must receive a certificate of approval from
the Planning Commission per § 213-72. Structures may
be further restricted by the Planning Commission to
provide for public safety, adequate light and air, and to
maintain the neighborhood character.
[3] Density and parking requirements for each use in this zone.
[a] Elderly independent and assisted housing unit.
[i] Density: one unit per 2,500 square feet of lot area.
[ii] Parking: 1.5 spaces per unit, plus one space for
every three employees.
[b] Convalescent and nursing care units.
[i] Density: ratio of 30 beds per 40,000 square feet of
lot area.
[ii] Parking: one space for every three beds, plus one
space for every three employees.
[c] Day-care center for elderly.
[i] Parking: one space for every five people enrolled.
C. Accessory uses.
(1) Uses customarily accessory to permitted uses if constructed
concurrent subsequent to the main building.
(2) Signs, as regulated in § 213-56.
(3) Off-street parking in accordance with § 213-55.
111. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
112. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 213-24 MERIDEN CODE § 213-24
1:542
(4) Outdoor dining area per standards and procedures of § 213-23C(4).
[Amended 6-7-2004]
D. Lot and bulk requirements. Lot and bulk requirements are found in
§ 213-12B for C-1 Zone.
§ 213-25. C-2 General Commercial and C-3 Highway Commercial
Districts.
A. The purpose of these districts shall be to provide for a wide range of
commercial uses in areas with good access, particularly along major
arterials, and to accommodate uses that benefit from large numbers of
motorists, that need larger parcels of land developed less intensively
than would be appropriate in central or neighborhood businesses, and
that may involve characteristics, such as trucking and noise, that are
objectionable to residential areas and certain nonresidential areas. New
residential development is excluded from these districts except by
special exception. The C-3 District is intended to accommodate these
same activities at a lower intensity in a more open environment.
B. Permitted uses. No building or premises may be used, in whole or in
part, for any use other than those listed below.
(1) Permitted uses by right:
(a) Retail stores.
(b) Banks, including drive-in windows.
(c) Service businesses, such as barbershops, beauty parlors,
furniture repair, tailors and dry-cleaning stores, launderette,
custom dressmaker, jewelry repair, shoe repair, travel agent,
appliance repair, photographer and duplicating business.
(d) Business, professional or governmental offices.
(e) Newspaper printing and job printing.
(f) Manufacturing, assembling, converting, altering, finishing,
cleaning or any other processing of products where goods so
produced or processed are to be sold at retail on the premises.
(g) Restaurant and/or catering establishments.
(h) Libraries, art galleries and museums.
(i) Art and craft studios and studios for teaching performing arts.
(j) Private transportation and auto rental services.
(k) Hotels, motels and conference facilities.
(l) Theaters, open or enclosed.
(m) Public and private utility substations.
(n) Mortuaries.
(o) Public parking lots. [Amended 3-5-1990]
(p) Public and private academic and trade schools, subject to the
following requirements:
[1] The curriculum shall satisfy the requirements of the State
Department of Education.
[2] No accommodations for resident students shall be
permitted.
(q) Hospitals.
(r) Bus stations.
(s) Veterinarians.
§ 213-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-25
1:543
(t) Automotive sales and service.
(u) Bowling alleys.
(v) Real estate office. [Added 3-3-1986]
(w) Child-care provider — Class I. [Added 7-5-1988; amended
2-3-1992]
(x) Child-care provider — Class II, subject to the requirements of
§ 213-16B(1)(d). [Added 2-3-1992]
(y) Regional shopping mall. [Added 2-4-1991; amended
2-3-1992]
(z) Notwithstanding the general restriction on temporary sales as
stated in § 213-15 of this chapter, temporary sales are permitted
by nonprofit clubs, nonprofit organizations, as defined and
licensed by the State of Connecticut, and which were not
created for the purpose of selling goods, property or wares.
No such temporary sales shall be carried on for longer than a
thirty-day period in any given six months. All such temporary
sales must be approved by the Zoning Enforcement Officer as
to safety issues and compliance with this chapter. [Amended
4-7-2008]
(2) Uses permitted subject to issuance of a special exception permit by
the Zoning Board of Appeals in accordance with the requirements of
§ 213-73:
(a) Warehouse and distribution businesses, except petroleum or
other highly flammable substances.
(b) Automotive service stations, repairers' garages, convenience
stores/gas facilities, automobile wash and specialized
automobile services, subject to the following requirements:
outdoor storage per § 213-47A and B; visibility per § 213-48F;
parking per § 213-55. [Amended 3-5-1990; 6-5-2000]
(c) Drive-through facility in accordance with supplementary
regulations in § 213-59. [Amended 6-2-2008]
(d) Cocktail lounges, nightclubs and package stores.
(e) Places of worship, schools, playgrounds and public buildings.
(f) Dance halls, billiard parlors, skating rinks and recreation
centers.
(g) Fast-food restaurants, provided that eating on the premises shall
be permitted only inside the structure or in areas specifically
designated and properly maintained outside of the structure.
(h) Buildings with mixed commercial uses, subject to the
requirements of § 213-23B(2)(k).
(i) Mobile homes and mobile home parks, subject to the provisions
of § 213-19B(2)(c).
(j) Commercial amusement arcades subject to the requirements of
§ 213-23B(2)(j).
(k) Heliports, subject to the conditions of § 213-23B(2)(m).
(l) Multiple-family dwellings in the C-2 Zone, and provided that all
the following requirements are satisfied: [Amended 9-8-1987;
12-5-1988].
[1] Building coverage shall not exceed 50% of the lot area.
§ 213-25 MERIDEN CODE § 213-25
1:544
[2] A minimum of 200 square feet of open space (excluding
parking area) shall be provided for each dwelling unit.
[3] A five-foot landscaped buffer strip shall be established
around the perimeter of the site.
[4] In a building exceeding 35 feet in height, the following shall
also apply:
[a] A setback in addition to that set forth in § 213-12 shall
be applied on the basis of one additional foot of setback
for each five feet of building height in excess of 35 feet.
[b] The Fire Marshal shall certify that sufficient water
pressure can be provided to serve the building.
(m) Membership and commercial clubs.
(n) State of Connecticut-operated betting parlor, subject to the
following conditions: [Added 4-7-1986]
[1] It shall be located at least 1,500 feet from any church,
church building, school building or school playground and at
least 500 feet from any residence in a residential zone.
[2] The applicant must provide assurance that there will be
proper supervision and maintenance both inside and outside
of the parlor at all times when it is open.
[3] The hours of operation shall be stated in the application and
approved by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
[4] Applicable Fire Code requirements shall be complied with.
[5] Sanitary facilities complying with applicable codes of the
City of Meriden shall be located on the premises and
accessible to users of the parlor.
[6] Adequate off-street parking in accordance with the
provisions of § 213-55, subject to the approval of the
Planning Commission.
[7] The Zoning Board of Appeals may set any restrictions it
deems necessary to ensure the health, safety and welfare of
the general public, including screening, security and hours
of operation. Said special exception may be revoked by the
Zoning Board of Appeals following a public hearing to be
held upon the receipt of a petition signed by a City Council
member or members, a member of the Zoning Board of
Appeals or the Zoning Enforcement Officer, stating that the
permitted use is generating excessive noise, loitering,
littering, traffic hazards or public nuisance.
[8] If granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals, said permit
shall become effective 15 days following the granting of said
permit. If, however, a protest against a proposed betting
parlor is filed with the City Council within 15 days following
approval by the Zoning Board of Appeals, signed by the
owners of 20% or more of the areas of lots within 500 feet
in all directions of the perimeter of the property proposed
for said parlor, the request for approval for said parlor shall
then be referred to the City Council for final approval.
[9] Action by City Council.
§ 213-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-25
1:545
[a] The City Council, upon receipt of this protest, shall
consider the protest in light of the purpose and intent
of this chapter, the effects on the surrounding
neighborhood and the entire City. The City Council shall
act on this protest within 30 days of the meeting at
which it receives the protest, and its decisions shall be
final.
(o) Child-care provider — Class III, subject to the requirements of
§ 213-19B(2)(j). [Added 7-5-1988; amended 2-3-1992]
(p) Adult entertainment, adult bookstores, video booths, and
sexually oriented businesses. No such establishment featuring
nude or topless dancing, stripping, other adult entertainment
or adult- or sexually oriented businesses shall be located within
1,000 feet of a residence, school, church, park or within 1,000
feet of any other establishment featuring any of the above. Video
booths shall be open to the general retail area of the store and
shall not have doors or other material which may obscure the
view to the interior of said booths. [Added 11-21-1995]
(q) Secondary building, subject to the requirements of
§ 213-23B(2)(s). [Added 6-7-1999]
(r) Health care services. [Amended 4-21-2008]
C. Accessory uses. [Amended 6-7-2004; 8-19-2013]
(1) Notwithstanding the terms set forth in § 213-12, convenience stores/
gas facilities may operate a check cashing service pursuant and
subject to the provisions of Section 36a-580 et seq. of the
Connecticut General Statutes within the building approved for such
primary use, provided such building is at least 1,500 square feet in
area; total signage identifying this use may not exceed two square
feet.
(2) Uses customarily accessory to permitted uses if constructed
concurrently with or subsequent to the main building.
(3) Signs, as regulated in § 213-56.
(4) Off-street parking in accordance with § 213-55.
(5) Outdoor dining area per standards and procedures of § 213-23C(4).
D. Lot and bulk requirements. Lot and bulk requirements are found in
§ 213-12B.
§ 213-26. C-4 Convenience or Neighborhood Commercial District.
A. The purpose of this district shall be to provide for areas within or
adjoining residential neighborhoods for local convenience-scale
commerce with a range of retail stores and services which cater to daily
or recurring needs of nearby residents.
B. Permitted uses. No building or premises may be used, in whole or in
part, for any purpose except those listed below.
(1) Uses permitted by right:
(a) Bakeries.
(b) Barbershops and beauty shops.
(c) Banks, including drive-in windows.
(d) Grocery stores.
§ 213-25 MERIDEN CODE § 213-26
1:546
(e) Pharmacies and sundry stores.
(f) Dry cleaning and laundry pickup.
(g) Launderettes.
(h) News and magazine stands.
(i) Shoe repair.
(j) Smoke shops.
(k) Soda and ice cream shops.
(l) Professional and business offices.
(m) Single-, two- and three-family dwellings according to the lot
and density requirements of the R-2 District. [Amended
11-21-2005113]
(n) Public or private postal facility. [Added 1-22-2008]
(o) Child-care provider — Class I. [Added 7-5-1988; amended
2-3-1992]
(p) Child-care provider — Class II, subject to the requirements of
§ 213-16B(1)(d). [Added 2-3-1992]
(q) Notwithstanding the general restriction on temporary sales as
stated in § 213-15 of the Code of the City of Meriden, temporary
sales are permitted by nonprofit clubs, nonprofit organizations,
as defined and licensed by the State of Connecticut, and which
were not created for the purpose of selling goods, property or
wares. No such temporary sales shall be carried on for longer
than a thirty-day period in any given six months. All such
temporary sales must be approved by the Zoning Enforcement
Officer as to safety issues and compliance with this chapter.
[Added 4-7-2008]
(2) Uses permitted subject to issuance of a special exception permit by
the Zoning Board of Appeals in accordance with the requirements of
§ 213-73:
(a) Places of worship and public assembly, including parish houses,
parochial schools, meeting rooms and recreation facilities
customarily accessory to such uses.
(b) Buildings with mixed uses, subject to the provisions of
§ 213-23B(2)(k).
(c) Restaurants (not fast-food restaurants). [Added 2-2-1987]
(d) Child-care provider — Class III, subject to the requirements of
§ 213-19B(2)(j). [Added 7-5-1988; amended 2-3-1992]
C. Accessory uses.
(1) Uses customarily accessory to permitted uses if constructed
concurrently with or subsequent to the main building.
(2) Signs, as regulated in § 213-56.
(3) Off-street parking in accordance with § 213-55.
(4) Outdoor dining area per standards and procedures of § 213-23C(4).
[Amended 6-7-2004]
D. Lot and bulk requirements. Lot and bulk requirements are found in
§ 213-12B.
113. Editor's Note: This amendment also provided for the deletion of former Subsection
B(1)(n), which immediately followed this subsection and which provided for multifamily
dwellings in accordance with the requirements of the R-3 District.
§ 213-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-27
1:547
§ 213-27. Transit Oriented Development [TOD] District. [Added
6-17-2013, effective 8-5-2013114]
GENERAL
A. Background and authority. Consistent with the goals stated in the 2009 Plan of
Conservation and Development and recommendations made in the 2012 Meriden Transit
Oriented Development ("TOD") Master Plan, the City finds that the implementation of a
TOD District benefits the general health and welfare of the inhabitants by encouraging
the growth of a diverse economic base and diverse residential opportunities in a
sustainable manner.
B. Purpose. The purpose of the TOD District is to support a viable mixture of uses and
implement the Smart Growth principles set forth in the 2012 Meriden TOD Master Plan,
including:
(1) Accommodate future growth to enhance the tax base through the optimal use of
appropriate parcels for economic development purposes;
(2) Encourage moderate- to high-density development within walking distance of the
Intermodal Transportation Center, as hereinafter defined;
(3) Capitalize on opportunities to provide and/or encourage a continued and enhanced
variety of retail and service businesses, professional, offices, entertainment and
cultural establishments that serve Meriden residents and transit users, and provide
for limited light industry.
(4) Create a pedestrian-friendly environment to encourage walking, bicycling and transit
use and reduce dependency on the automobile;
(5) Emphasize mixed-use with a focus on developing financially viable and socially stable
mixed-income housing with supporting commercial and retail uses;
(6) Encourage infill and building reuse to create higher densities, preserve existing
fabric and complete the definition of streetscapes;
(7) Protect existing neighborhoods by ensuring high-quality development that is wellintegrated
and compatible in aesthetics;
(8) Protect the integrity of historically significant and environmentally sensitive areas;
and
(9) Eliminate or minimize existing segregated housing patterns within the TOD District
and replace the same with truly integrated and balanced living patterns.
C. Authority. The Director of Development and Enforcement is hereby designated to
administer and enforce this chapter. Projects that require special permit approval will be
subject to Planning Commission review and approval as outlined in § 213-27R(2).
D. Applicability. The TOD District, consisting of five sub-districts, includes those areas
shown on the City of Meriden Zoning Map on file with the City Clerk and dated 1966 –
Last Map Revision effective: August 5, 2013.
E. Precedence over inconsistent provisions in Zoning Ordinance. Other than terms used
but not defined herein, § 213-27 contains all necessary standards and criteria required
for development in the TOD District; applicants need not reference other articles in
this chapter other than § 213-7 with respect to terms used but not specifically defined
herein. Section 213-27 shall supersede all sections of the Zoning Ordinance of the City
of Meriden where they may conflict.
114. Editor's Note: This superseded former § 213-27, Central Commercial Design District
(CCDD), as amended.
§ 213-27 MERIDEN CODE § 213-27
1:548
F. Severability. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter is for
any reason held by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such decision shall
not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. The City Council hereby
declares that it would have passed this chapter and each section, subsection, sentence,
clause and phrase hereof irrespective of the fact that one or more sections, subsections,
sentences, clauses or phrases are declared invalid.
G. Definitions.
(1) Residential uses.
ELDERLY LIVING OR CARE FACILITIES — Residential uses that are restricted the elderly and can be one or a combination of independent housing units, assisted
housing units, intermediate care, convalescent or nursing units. Also allowed are
day-care centers for the elderly. "Elderly" is defined as any person 62 years of age
or over or a person who has been certified by the Social Security Board as being
totally disabled under the Federal Social Security Act. At the time of admission to an
elderly independent or assisted housing unit, at least one person per unit must meet
the foregoing definition.
TOD MIXED-INCOME DWELLING — A building or portion thereof used and designed
as a residence for three or more families living independently of each other and
doing their own cooking in said building, including apartment houses, flats and
townhouses, but not including hotels, motels or boardinghouses. As a primary
purpose of the TOD District is to provide for financially viable and socially stable
mixed-income housing and to eliminate or minimize existing segregated housing
patterns, not less than 66% of the dwellings in a TOD mixed-income dwelling building
must be market-rate units, meaning that they are not restricted as to their sales
or rental pricing. Ten percent of the units in such a building must be affordable
housing units. Notwithstanding the foregoing, if the TOD mixed-income dwelling
building contains so-called replacement units under an approved HUD demolition
and disposition plan, then not less than 30% of the units in such building shall be
replacement units and not less than 20% of the building shall be market-rate units. the building is located in the Historic-Commercial Sub-District, not less than 10% the building shall be market-rate units. The income restrictions on and mix of units
for the remaining 80% of the units in such a building that are not-market rate units
- 90%, if in the Historic-Commercial Sub-District - shall be ones that will provide for
the highest amount of low-income housing tax credits possible for such building and,
in any case, shall provide that not more than 25% of these units will be restricted those at 25% of the area median income (AMI), not more than 40% of these units will
be restricted to those between 26% and 50% of AMI, and not more than 35% of these
will be restricted to those between 51% and 60% of AMI. This mix may include units
that are income-restricted up to 120% of AMI.
(2) Commercial uses.
HEALTH CARE SERVICES/MEDICAL OFFICES — A combination of diagnostic,
therapeutic and other health care professional service uses. Such uses include
medical, dental, physical therapy, radiology, urgent-care, surgical center,
occupational therapy and similar disciplines.
INDOOR ARTS, RECREATION AND ENTERTAINMENT — Commercial
establishments providing indoor sports, recreation, and/or entertainment services by
and for participants, typically in exchange for the payment of a fee or admission
charge. This includes such uses as: art galleries; artist studios; amusement centers
§ 213-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-27
1:549
and arcades; billiard parlors; bowling alleys; ice rinks; recreation centers featuring
fitness facilities, swimming pools, tennis and similar activities; children's indoor play
centers; and performing arts, theaters or multiscreen theaters, but not including
drive-in movie theaters, community services and sexually oriented business uses.
RETAIL SALES AND SERVICE — Businesses involved in the sale, lease or rent of new
or used products to the general public, which are primarily conducted indoors. They
may also provide personal services, product repair or services for consumer and
business goods. Retail sales and service uses include four subgroups listed below.
(3) Industrial uses.
ARTISAN INDUSTRIAL — A use where works of art are created, displayed and/or
sold in such areas as painting, sculpture, ceramics, craft work, and photography.
LIGHT INDUSTRIAL/MANUFACTURING — Establishments primarily engaged in the
fabrication or assembly of products from processed, rather than raw, materials.
This may include storage, processing, fabrication, assembly and loading/unloading
of materials. Activities do not utilize or produce toxic, hazardous, or explosive
materials, and they are conducted primarily indoors. These activities are also
characterized as creating little or no noise, glare, vibration, or air/water pollution.
(4) Institutional uses.
COLLEGE/UNIVERSITY — Institutions of higher learning which offer courses of
general or specialized study leading to a degree or provide post-secondary-school
vocational/technical training. They are often but not always certified by the state or
by a recognized accrediting agency. Colleges often are in campus-like settings or
on multiple blocks. Examples include universities, liberal arts colleges, community
colleges, nursing and medical schools not accessory to a hospital, and seminaries.
Auto sales and service: businesses involved in the sale, leasing, and servicing
of automobiles, including automobile dealerships, automotive repair, car washes
and tire stores.
(a)
Personal service-oriented: businesses including such uses as branch banks;
laundromats; photographic studios; photocopy and blueprint services; hair,
tanning, and personal care services; business, martial arts, and other trade
schools; photo or laundry/dry-cleaning dropoff; quick printing; recycling dropoff;
and dance or music classes.
(b)
Repair-oriented: businesses that do repairs, including such uses as repair of
televisions, computers, bicycles, clocks, watches, shoes, guns, appliances and
office equipment; tailor; locksmith; and upholsterer. This does not include motor
vehicle repair or servicing.
(c)
Sales-oriented: stores selling, leasing, or renting consumer, home, and business
goods, including such uses as art, art supplies, bicycles, clothing, dry goods,
electronic equipment, fabric, furniture, garden supplies, gifts, groceries,
hardware, home improvements, household products, jewelry, pets, pet food,
pharmaceuticals, plants, printed material, stationery, videos, and food.
Automobile rental and car-sharing companies are included [Note: see definition
above for auto sales and service].
(d)
§ 213-27 MERIDEN CODE § 213-27
1:550
COMMUNITY SERVICES — Uses of a public, nonprofit, or charitable nature
generally providing a local service to people of the community. They typically provide
the service on the site or have employees at the site on a regular basis. The
service is ongoing, not just for special events. Community centers or facilities, which
have membership provisions, are open to the general public to join at any time.
Community services include such uses as libraries, museums, government offices,
senior centers, and community centers.
RELIGIOUS INSTITUTIONS — Institutions that are intended to primarily
accommodate meeting for religious activities, including such examples as churches,
temples, synagogues, and mosques.
(5) Other uses.
ACCESSORY USES — Uses that are incidental and subordinate to the primary use a property and located on the same lot as the primary use.
INTERMODAL TRANSPORTATION CENTER — The facility that accommodates
passenger interface between at least two forms of transportation, one of which is rail
service, to be located on the east side of Colony Road in proximity to the rail line.
LABORATORIES AND RESEARCH FACILITIES — A use devoted to the creation,
testing and analysis of any product, such as computer hardware/software, scientific
research, medical research and diagnostic services. No manufacturing is conducted
on the site except for experimental or testing purposes.
MIXED-USE DEVELOPMENT — The development of a site or building with two or
more different principal or primary uses, including, but not limited to, residential,
commercial, industrial, institutional and other uses permitted in this chapter. The
uses may be located in one or multiple buildings.
PARKING STRUCTURE — A covered structure or portion of a covered structure that
provides parking areas for motor vehicles. Parking may be the primary use of the
structure or it may be accessory to residential, commercial, employment, industrial,
institutional, or other uses. A structure that is accessory to a single-family detached,
two-family, and duplex dwelling is a garage and is not considered structured parking.
SURFACE PARKING — A parking area for motor vehicles where there is no building
floor area below or above the parking area. The area may be occupied by small,
permanent buildings, such as booths used by parking attendants.
(6) Additional definitions.
BUILDING STREET FRONTAGE — The width of a building, or part of a building, that
fronts on a dedicated pubic thoroughfare, and whose footprint is within the required
minimum to maximum setback range. Any portion of a building footprint that is excess of building street frontage requirements on a given street can be sited behind
the maximum setback range.
DENSITY — The number of residential dwelling units per gross acre of land area.
FACADE TRANSPARENCY — Areas on a building facade, such as windows,
storefronts and other glazing, through which interior space can be seen from the
exterior.
INTERIOR LOT LINE — A lot line not abutting a street.
§ 213-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-27
1:551
LOT COVERAGE — That portion of a lot that is covered by a building or buildings.
SIGNS —
H. Establishment of TOD sub-districts.
(1) TOD sub-district summaries. There are five TOD sub-districts:
(a) Historic – Commercial Sub-District [TOD-HC].
Figure 213-1. Buildings fronting the north side of West Main Street
[1] Home to the Meriden Historic District, this area focuses on two key commercial corridors
along Colony and West Main Streets and is characterized by a range of architectural
styles from the late 19th and early 20th centuries. The purpose of this sub-district to enhance the cohesive character of the center of Meriden through the restoration
and reuse of existing buildings of merit and encourage high-quality infill on vacant underdeveloped properties.
[2] The placement of buildings should reinforce a pedestrian-friendly environment contributing to defining the edges of streets in ways that are consistent with buildings
that remain a part of the traditional urban character. New development should reinforce
AWNING — A sign located on a structure, made of fabric, metal, or other
material, affixed to a building in such a manner that the structure may be raised
or retracted from a building to a flat position against the building, but not a
canopy.
(a)
BANNER — A sign made of fabric or rigid material, which is attached to a
building.
(b)
CANOPY — A sign located on a permanent structure, other than an awning,
made of fabric, metal or other material attached or unattached to a building for
the purpose of providing shelter to patrons or automobiles, or as a decorative
feature on a building wall. A canopy is not a completely enclosed structure.
REQUIREMENTS
APPLICABLE
TO
ALL
TOD
SUBDISTRICTS
(c)
§ 213-27 MERIDEN CODE § 213-27
1:552
the existing scale of the district and be respectful of adjacent residential architecture.
[3] Mixed-use, commercial development is the focus of this sub-district. Ground-uses should be designed with highly transparent storefronts. Residential on primary streets south of Foster Street must be contained in mixed-use buildings.
(b) Park Sub-District [TOD-P].
Figure 213-2. A pocket park along Pratt Street in the Park Sub-District
[1] This sub-district is characterized by the significant amount of usable open the focal point being the major public park in the center of Meriden. The District is bounded to the west by the railroad tracks and Intermodal Transportation
Center and to the east by a reconceived Pratt Street boulevard, both provide important first impressions for visitors to Meriden.
[2] The quality of the public realm will be defined by thoughtfully designed environments, where the ground floors of buildings contribute to lively and streetscapes. Infill development along Pratt Street will help define the eastern the major public park.
[3] High-quality, high-density, mixed-income housing, complemented by appropriately scaled commercial uses and publicly accessible institutional make this a vibrant 24/7 neighborhood.
(c) Hanover Sub-District [TOD-H].
Figure 213-3. Residential building similar to what might be found in the Hanover District
[1] The Hanover Sub-District holds a very important position in the center of south of West Main Street and the Historic-Commercial Sub-District, and the greenway running along Harbor Brook, this sub-district is suitable for mixed-income residential development.
[2] The conversion of Hanover Street to two-way traffic will help stimulate development along this important corridor. Mixed-use infill in the blocks Hanover Street will support Meriden's commercial core, while areas to the § 213-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-27
1:553
tremendous potential for a variety of residential typologies that will help knit surrounding residential districts.
[3] The development standards in this sub-district encourage high-density, mixed-residential by allowing more height, as well as flexibility with building siting and requirements.
(d) Civic Sub-District [TOD-C].
Figure 213-4. Board of Education Building in the Civic Sub-District
[1] This sub-district is characterized by a wide range of civic and cultural buildings,
including Meriden City Hall and the public library. In addition to these large-public buildings, there exist a number of more-intimate residential streets that provide complementary fabric for the neighborhood.
[2] The Civic Sub-District is established in order to both showcase these important
institutions, many of which front on East Main Street, and also preserve the character the smaller-scale residential streets.
[3] While a mix of uses is encouraged in this sub-district, new buildings should be located so that their use and scale are respectful of their immediate context. This appropriately siting buildings relative to the street and designing to an appropriate of architectural articulation.
(e) Gateway Sub-District [TOD-G].
Figure 213-5. Enterprise Center in the Gateway Sub-District
[1] This sub-district is established to help define the character of a key gateway City northeast of the major public park. Envisioned as a primary vehicular link interstate highway system to the center of Meriden, the Gateway Sub-District defined largely by the quality of the streetscapes and the development that evolves the Pratt Street corridor.
[2] Adaptive reuse and infill on highly visible, vacant properties along this new boulevard
is desired. Larger setbacks that allow for more flexibility in the siting of buildings § 213-27 MERIDEN CODE § 213-27
1:554
conjunction with a more-diverse range of permitted uses, which may include activity, make this a truly unique area.
[3] Though located farther from the Intermodal Transportation Center than residential uses are encouraged through incentives for greater flexibility in certain development criteria, including parking ratios. development remains a strong emphasis.
(2) TOD Sub-District Zoning Map. The locations of the five TOD sub-districts are shown 213-6.
Figure 213.6. TOD Sub-District Zoning Map
(3) TOD District street hierarchy. The TOD District Street Hierarchy Map is shown 213-7. A street hierarchy framework is being established within the TOD District that development is sited and designed to promote an active pedestrian-friendly environment
in descending priority by street type from primary streets to secondary streets to streets. Applicable development standards contained in this chapter are determined by the street type of a property's frontage or frontages. The TOD District street applies to the following streets within the TOD District, which are listed below and in Figure 213-7, TOD District Street Hierarchy Maps.
(a) Primary streets: Pratt Street, Colony Street, East Main Street, West Main Street, Street and Perkins Street.
(b) Secondary streets: Center Street, State Street and Cook Avenue.
(c) Tertiary streets: all other public streets within the TOD District.
§ 213-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-27
1:555
Figure 213-7. TOD District Street Hierarchy Maps
I. Use regulations. A mix of uses is encouraged in the TOD District. The specific mix
allowed varies among the five sub-districts to reflect their different character.
(1) Permitted uses. Permitted uses in the TOD sub-districts are listed in Table 213-1 with a uses are allowed by right if they comply with the development standards and other requirements
of this chapter.
(2) Limited uses. Limited uses in the TOD sub-districts are listed in Table 213-1 with an "uses are allowed if they comply with the supplemental standards in § 213-27I(6). The limitations
are noted (e.g., L-a) in the table with a corresponding lettered description of the supplemental
limited use requirements in § 213-27I(6). The development standards and other regulations chapter shall apply to limited uses.
(3) Special permit uses. Special permit uses are allowed in the TOD sub-districts as Table 213-1 with an "SP." These uses are allowed if they comply with § 213-27R(2) § 213-27 MERIDEN CODE § 213-27
1:556
supplemental standards in § 213-27I(7). The requirements are noted (e.g., SP-a) in a corresponding lettered description of the special permit use requirements in § 213-development standards and other regulations of this chapter shall apply to special (4) Prohibited uses. When a use is not listed in Table 213-1, it is prohibited.
(5) Multiple uses. The development of a site or building with two or more different primary uses shall be permitted subject to the requirements for the individual uses this section.
Table 213-1
TOD District Uses [Amended 9-19-2016]
TOD Sub-Districts
Historic-
Comm. Park Hanover Civic Residential Uses1
Elderly living and/or care
facilities
SP-a SP-a SP-a SP-a Home occupations/
professional office in
dwelling
L-e L-e L-a L-a Multiple-family dwellings
with 3 to 100 units per
site
P P P P Multiple-family dwellings
with more than 100 units
per site
SP-b SP-b SP-b SP-b Single-family detached
dwellings
L-b L-b TOD mixed-income
dwellings with 3 to 100
units per site
P P P P TOD mixed-income
dwellings with more than
100 units per site
SP-c SP-c SP-c SP-c 2-family and duplex
dwellings
L-c L-c Commercial Uses
Bars/nightclubs SP-d SP-d SP-d Day care, Classes I, II and
III
P P P P Drive-through facility for
permitted uses other than
fast-food restaurant
SP-e SP-e SP-e SP-e § 213-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-27
1:557
Table 213-1
TOD District Uses [Amended 9-19-2016]
TOD Sub-Districts
Historic-
Comm. Park Hanover Civic Gateway
Farmer's market P P P P Fast-food restaurant SP-f SP-f SP-f SP-f Health care services/
medical offices
P P P P Hookah lounge SP-k SP-k Hotel/conference hotel/
conference center hotel
P P P P Indoor arts, recreation
and entertainment, less
than 40,000 square feet
of gross leasable floor
area
P P P P Indoor arts, recreation
and entertainment, equal
to or greater than 40,000
square feet of gross
leasable floor area
SP-g SP-g SP-g SP-g Outdoor dining P P L-d L-d Package stores SP-h SP-h SP-h Professional offices P P P P Restaurant P P P P Retail sales and service,
except auto sales and
service
P P P P Retail sales and service -
auto sales and service
SP-i Industrial Uses
Artisan industrial SP-j SP-j P SP-j Light industrial/
manufacturing
P SP-j Institutional Uses
College/ university P P P P Community services P P P P § 213-27 MERIDEN CODE § 213-27
1:558
Table 213-1
TOD District Uses [Amended 9-19-2016]
TOD Sub-Districts
Historic-
Comm. Park Hanover Civic Hospitals P P P Religious institutions P P P P Schools P P P P Other Uses
Accessory uses P P P P Intermodal
Transportation Center
P P
Laboratories and
research facilities
SP-j P SP-j Mortuary P P P P Parking structures P P P P NOTES:
1Residential uses are not permitted on the ground floor of any building fronting street in the Historic-Commercial Sub-District, except north of Foster Street.
(6) Limited use requirements. The limited uses listed in Table 213-1 shall be subject to requirements consistent with the lettered notations in the table and the corresponding below.
(a) Home occupations/professional offices in dwellings in the Hanover, Civic and Districts shall be subject to the following conditions.
[1] Said home occupations shall be conducted by members of the family owning on the premises. No more than two nonresidents shall be employed therein.
[2] Said home occupations shall not occupy more than 25% of the total floor principal building. No home occupation shall be conducted in an accessory [3] In no manner shall the appearance of the building be altered nor shall the within the residence be conducted in a manner that would cause the premises residential character, either by the use of colors, materials, construction or display of products shall be visible from the street.
[4] No home occupation shall create noise, dust, vibration, odor, smoke, interference, fire hazard or any other nuisance that is perceptible beyond the [5] Home occupations shall in no event be deemed to include animal hospitals, barbershops, beauty parlors, clinics or hospitals, dancing schools, mortuaries, shops, restaurants, tourist homes, rooming houses or boardinghouses, and those listed above.
(b) Single-family detached dwellings in the Civic, Gateway, and Historic-Commercial Districts shall not be permitted on properties with frontage on primary or secondary (c) Two-family and duplex dwellings in the Civic, Gateway and Historic-Commercial shall not be permitted on properties with frontage on primary or secondary streets.
§ 213-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-27
1:559
(d) Outdoor dining area is allowed for restaurants and other food service establishments permission of the property owner. The area shall conform to the following:
[1] The outdoor dining area must be immediately adjacent to the indoor dining area.
[2] It shall be set back at least 12 feet from any travel or turning lane.
[3] The outdoor dining area shall be physically separated from the surrounding outdoor Such separators must be approved by the Director of Development and Enforcement can be a fence, elevated deck, planters, movable gating or theater-type posts with or similar.
[4] It shall not exceed 50% of the square footage of the indoor seating area for the restaurant/
food service establishment.
[5] If more than 16 seats are added for outdoor dining, a site plan approval is Otherwise, prior to establishing the accessory use, an adequate plot plan needs provided to the Department of Development and Enforcement that indicates dimensional
information for the outdoor service area. The location and volume of seating, the location and dimensions of the restaurant/food service building, property boundaries,
existing and proposed surfaced areas, and access and separation shall be indicated.
[6] Depictions of non-permanently-sited tables, chairs, umbrellas, awnings, receptacle(s), the physical separator(s), and other amenities shall be provided as corresponding information regarding materials, flooring, and the proposed of operation and maintenance of the area. Indicate if outdoor consumption of proposed.
[7] Any live or recorded music played or noise projected outside the restaurant/food establishment cannot be a nuisance, as defined by the City of Meriden's Ordinance.115
[8] Customers need to be seated. For an outdoor dining area with more than 16 seats, service shall be provided by wait staff.
[9] A minimum clear walkway width of six feet shall be retained for the public sidewalk the property frontage.
(e) Home occupations/professional offices in dwellings in the Historic-Commercial and Districts shall be subject to the following conditions.
[1] Said home occupations shall be conducted solely by members of the family owning residing on the premises.
[2] Said home occupations shall not occupy more than 25% of the total floor area individual unit or the principal building. No home occupation shall be conducted accessory building.
[3] In no manner shall the appearance of the building be altered nor shall the occupation
within the residence be conducted in a manner that would cause the premises residential character, either by the use of colors, materials, construction or lighting. display of products shall be visible from outside the housing unit.
[4] No home occupation shall create noise, dust, vibration, odor, smoke, interference, fire hazard or any other nuisance that is perceptible beyond the lot by other unit owners within the same building.
[5] Home occupations shall in no event be deemed to include animal hospitals, barbershops, beauty parlors, clinics or hospitals, dancing schools, mortuaries, auto shops, restaurants, tourist homes, rooming houses or boardinghouses, and uses those listed above.
[6] Said home occupation shall be conducted in such a manner that does not include visits by clientele.
§ 213-27 MERIDEN CODE § 213-27
1:560
(7) Special permit use requirements. The special permit uses listed in Table 213-1 shall to the additional requirements consistent with the lettered notations in the corresponding standards below.
(a) Elderly living and/or care facilities.
[1] These uses are restricted to the elderly and can be one or a combination units, assisted housing units, intermediate care, convalescent or nursing day-care centers for the elderly. "Elderly" is defined as any person 62 years person who has been certified by the Social Security Board as being totally Federal Social Security Act. At the time of admission to an elderly independent unit, at least one person per unit must meet the foregoing definition.
[2] The minimum site development standards for elderly living and/or care facilities [a] Minimum lot area: 25,000 square feet.
[b] Minimum lot width: 80 feet.
[3] Pedestrian walks: A pedestrian circulation system shall be so designed as possible for separation between pedestrian and vehicular traffic. All such walks and built to provide for wheelchair access. All existing walks shall be upgraded wheelchairs.
[4] All plans may be further restricted by the Planning Commission to provide adequate light and air, and to maintain the neighborhood character.
(b) Multiple-family dwellings with more than 100 units per site.
[1] A five-foot minimum landscaped buffer strip shall be established along all interior [2] For a building exceeding 35 feet in height, the following shall also apply:
[a] The facades of the upper floors of buildings shall step back from additional foot for each five feet of building height in excess of 35 feet frontages.
[b] The Fire Marshal shall certify that sufficient water pressure can be building.
(c) TOD mixed-income dwellings with more than 100 units per site.
[1] A five-foot minimum landscaped buffer strip shall be established along all interior [2] For a building exceeding 35 feet in height, the following shall also apply:
[a] The facades of the upper floors of buildings shall step back from additional foot for each five feet of building height in excess of 35 feet frontages.
[b] The Fire Marshal shall certify that sufficient water pressure can be building.
(d) Bars/nightclubs.
[1] The applicant shall demonstrate how the proposed bar/nightclub will not have on surrounding properties considering general appearance, noise, traffic generation, glare.
(e) Drive-through facilities.
[1] Consistent with the purpose of the TOD District to create more walkable, environments, drive-through facilities shall be located behind or beside landscaping or walls or fences (compatible in architectural style) as necessary, from primary streets.
115. Editor's Note: See Ch. 141, Noise.
§ 213-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-27
1:561
Figure 213-8. Drive-Through Facilities – Location and Access
[2] Drive-through facilities require a lot of at least 120 feet in width from front of property maintained for the length of the building and the facility; the facility, including shall be located in the rear or side in reference to the building.
[3] Ingress and egress for drive-through facilities shall be from secondary or tertiary only reasonable access is from a primary street (see Figure 213-8).
[4] Curb cut width and impact on sidewalks should be minimized.
[5] Drive-through ingress and egress points shall not be within 50 feet of an intersection, by the Director of Public Works.
[6] A minimum of five vehicle stacking spaces shall be provided on site for each including the vehicle being serviced. Each service aisle shall not have more than [7] Stacking lanes shall be separate from internal traffic aisles and customer parking circulate through the site without entering the drive-through facilities or being [8] Stacking lanes shall be a minimum of 10 feet wide, and each vehicle stacking space length.
[9] Outdoor speakers shall be located a minimum of 100 feet from the boundary of property and shall not be audible from other property.
[10] Drive-through facilities should be designed as a compatible architectural element building.
(f) Fast-food restaurants.
[1] The applicant shall demonstrate how the proposed fast-food restaurant will not impact on surrounding properties considering noise, traffic generation, odors, lighting (g) Indoor arts, recreation and entertainment uses equal to or greater than 40,000 square leasable area.
[1] The applicant shall demonstrate how the proposed facility will not have a detrimental surrounding properties considering traffic generation, hours of operation, noise, [2] If necessary, the applicant must submit a plan detailing how off-site parking, access, will be accommodated for large events.
(h) Package stores.
[1] No building or premises shall be used for the sale of alcoholic liquor at retail off the premises under any class of permit, as defined in § 30-15, as amended, General Statutes, which may be issued by the Liquor Control Commission Connecticut, if the main front entrance to the permit premises shall be located five-hundred-foot radius, measured in a straight line, from the main front other permit premises used for the sale of alcoholic liquor at retail for consumption under any class of permit issued by the Liquor Control Commission of the State [2] Notwithstanding the distance restrictions set forth above in this section, any permit premises for the sale of alcoholic liquor at retail for consumption off the § 213-27 MERIDEN CODE § 213-27
1:562
any class of permit issued by the Liquor Control Commission of the State be allowed to move such permit premises within a radius of 750 feet of the provided that said new location is within a district in which the sale of alcoholic is permitted under this chapter, and provided, further, that said removal with the Liquor Control Act and the rules and regulations of the Liquor Control more particularly, the need for said removal is a result of hardship or caused commencement of an eviction action against such permittee from the particular for which the original permit was issued. All other provisions of this chapter except the distance restrictions set forth within this section.
(i) Retail sales and service – auto sales and service.
[1] The applicant shall demonstrate how the proposed auto sales and service detrimental impact on surrounding properties considering noise, traffic generation, and glare.
[2] The storage of inoperable/junk vehicles is prohibited.
(j) Artisan industrial, light industrial, manufacturing, research facilities and laboratory [1] All activities shall be conducted indoors with the exception of on-site parking allowed in this chapter.
[2] The applicant shall demonstrate how the proposed artisan industrial and/will be compatible with surrounding properties considering noise, traffic lighting and glare.
(k) Hookah lounges. [Added 9-19-2016]
[1] Clean and sanitize the hookah and all attachments after every use and provide every user.
[2] No food will be served inside the establishment based on Connecticut (Connecticut General Statutes §§ 19a-324 and 31-40g).
[3] Cigarettes and e-cigarettes will be banned inside the establishment, and every to show identification. No persons under 18 will be allowed to enter or buy any [4] The establishment shall conform to all state and local building and Health Department J. Development standards and guidelines applicable to all TOD sub-districts. All
development standards and guidelines listed herein as applicable to all TOD sub-districts
shall supersede all other sections of the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Meriden.
(1) Site development standards.
(a) On-site parking: surface parking lots and garages - design and location. Consistent of the TOD District to create more walkable, pedestrian-friendly environments, not be visually dominant.
[1] While it is preferred that surface parking lots are placed behind buildings, on secondary and tertiary street frontages. Surface parking lots may be located frontages if that is the only street frontage for the parcel and the lot is configured parking behind the building is not possible.
[2] Ingress and egress to surface parking lots shall be from tertiary streets or, if streets. Access from primary streets is permitted if that is the only street frontage Figure 213-9).
[3] Ingress and egress points for surface parking lots shall not be within 50 feet unless approved by the Director of Public Works.
[4] Surface parking lots with spaces available to the public shall have pedestrian sidewalk.
§ 213-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-27
1:563
Figure 213-9. Surface Parking Lots – Vehicular and Pedestrian access
[Note: Building siting in diagram reflects Historic-Commercial setbacks]
[5] Surface parking lots fronting secondary or tertiary streets shall have a landscaped the sidewalk and parking lot of not less than six feet in width or three-foot-high compatible with the surrounding buildings. When a surface parking lot fronts there must be an eight-foot-wide landscaped buffer or three-foot-high walls or with the surrounding buildings.
[6] Surface parking lots abutting an interior lot line shall have a landscaped buffer between line and parking lot of not less than six feet in width or three-foot-high walls or with the surrounding buildings, unless the lot is contiguous with another parking have an agreement in writing to allow vehicular connections between the lots.
[7] Landscaped buffers shall have appropriate plantings at least three feet high planted center. A planting plan shall be approved by the Director of Development and plan shall specify appropriate plantings suitable to the circumstances and shall necessary clear zones beneath vehicle bumper overhangs.
[8] Surface parking lots contiguous with a residential zone shall provide a minimum 10 feet in width, or walls or fencing six feet in height to provide visual screening [9] All surface parking lots shall comply with the latest standards set forth in Disabilities Act (ADA) at time of initial construction.
§ 213-27 MERIDEN CODE § 213-27
1:564
Figure 213-10. Surface Parking Lots – Perimeter Buffers
(b) On-site parking: dimensional criteria (see Figure 213-11).
[1] Drive aisles for two-way circulation must be 24 feet wide minimum; circulation must be 16 feet wide minimum.
[2] Parking spaces: A standard space in the TOD District is 8.5 feet wide by of a standard space can be reduced to 17.5 feet if overhanging a curbed requirements for parking other than at a ninety-degree angle are set forth [3] Handicapped spaces: must comply with statutory requirements.
Figure 213-11. Parking Dimensions
(c) On-site parking: structured facilities.
§ 213-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-27
1:565
[1] Structured parking facilities located on primary streets must be set back at least sidewalk and must be located behind a building that meets the minimum frontage the sub-district (see Figure 213-12).
Figure 213-12. "Garage Liner" Buildings
[2] No sloped floors shall be visible from primary streets.
[3] Retail, office, civic or institutional uses are required on the ground floor of parking secondary streets for 50% of the building frontage.
[4] Ingress and egress to parking structures shall be from secondary or tertiary streets, reasonable access to the garage is from a primary street.
[5] Ingress and egress points for parking structures shall not be within 50 feet of an approved by the Director of Public Works.
[6] Structured parking facilities shall have architectural facade treatments, such as ornamental metalwork, pilasters and cornices, designed to make them compatible buildings (see Figure 213-13).
Figure 213-13. Structured Parking Facility – Architectural Facade and Cornice Floor Retail on Secondary Street
(d) On-site parking standards.
[1] For minimum and maximum allowable parking ratios for vehicles, see Table 213-§ 213-27 MERIDEN CODE § 213-27
1:566
Table 213-2
TOD District On-Site Parking Standards
LAND USE
NUMBER OF ON-SITE PARKING SPACES [Ratios based on spaces per 1,000 square feet of unless otherwise stated]
Hist.-Commercial Sub-
District
Park/Civic Sub-
Districts
Hanover/Minimum Maximum Minimum Maximum Minimum Residential
Uses
Elderly living
and/or care
facilities (per
dwelling unit)
0 1.0 0 1.0 Home
occupations/
professional
office in dwelling
(per office)
0 0 1.0 5.0 Single, 2- or
multiple-family
dwelling (per
dwelling unit).
Also see Note 2.
1.0 2.0 1.0 2.0 TOD mixedincome
dwelling
(per dwelling
unit). Also see
Note 2.
0.75 2.0 0.75 2.0 Commercial
Uses
Day care (per
student)
0 0.5 0 0.5 Fast-food
restaurant
3.0 10.0 3.0 10.0 Health care
services/medical
offices
0 6.0 2.5 6.66 § 213-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-27
1:567
Table 213-2
TOD District On-Site Parking Standards
LAND USE
NUMBER OF ON-SITE PARKING SPACES REQUIRED
[Ratios based on spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross unless otherwise stated]
Hist.-Commercial Sub-
District
Park/Civic Sub-
Districts
Hanover/Minimum Maximum Minimum Maximum Minimum Hotel/conference
hotel/conference
center hotel (per
key)
0 1.1 0.75 1.5 1.0 Indoor arts,
recreation and
entertainment
(per seat)
0 0.25 0.15 0.5 0.25 Professional
office in an office
building
0 3.33 1.5 3.33 2.5 Restaurant 0 7.0 2.0 10.0 4.0 Retail sales and
service, except
auto sales and
service
0 3.33 1.5 4.0 3.33 All other
permitted
commercial uses
0.25 3.33 1.5 4.0 2.0 Industrial Uses
All permitted
industrial uses
0 2.0 1.0 3.0 2.0 Institutional
Uses
College/
university (per
student)
0 1.0 0 1.5 0.5 Community
services
0 5.0 1.5 5.0 2.0 § 213-27 MERIDEN CODE § 213-27
1:568
Table 213-2
TOD District On-Site Parking Standards
LAND USE
NUMBER OF ON-SITE PARKING SPACES [Ratios based on spaces per 1,000 square feet of unless otherwise stated]
Hist.-Commercial Sub-
District
Park/Civic Sub-
Districts
Hanover/Minimum Maximum Minimum Maximum Minimum Hospital (per 3
beds plus every 2
employees of
largest shift)
0.75 1.5 0.75 1.5 Religious
institutions (per
seat for
assembly)
0.25 0.33 0.25 0.33 Schools (per
classroom)
1.5 4.0 1.5 4.0 Other Uses
Intermodal
Transportation
Center (ITC)
Note 1 Note 1 Note 1 Note 1 Laboratories and
research facilities
(per employee)
N.A. N.A. 0.25 1.0 Mortuary (per
assembly room
area)
13.33 13.33 13.33 13.33 NOTES:
Note 1 Parking requirements for a public ITC will be determined by the the time of development.
Note 2 Does not include high-occupancy multiple-family dwelling and dwelling units that contain three or more bedrooms; said units require parking spaces per unit.
Note 3 Parking for home occupations/professional office in dwelling (per District shall have a minimum and maximum requirement of "0."
[2] Unlimited additional parking is permitted on site if provided in structured grade.
[3] In meeting required on-site parking minimums, deductions for on-street parking to the number of public parking spaces provided along a lot's street frontage, this deduction exceed 10% of the required minimum parking.
§ 213-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-27
1:569
[4] Mixed-use buildings that include a multifamily residential component, plus constitutes at least 10% of the gross leasable area, may calculate the total required the sum of the minimum required parking for each use and subtracting 10%. For in the Park Sub-District containing a twenty-unit multiple-family dwelling use foot retail sales and service use could provide a minimum of 32 spaces [1.0 space x 20] + [1.5 spaces x 10] = 35 spaces - 3.5 spaces (a 10% discount) = [5] Minimum on-site parking requirements can be met off site, provided that a is presented with the site plan application and approved by the Director of Enforcement.
(e) On-site bicycle parking standards.
[1] A minimum of one bicycle parking space must be provided for every nonresidential additional bicycle parking space shall be provided for every 20 vehicular spaces required. parking spaces must be located where easily accessible and visible by pedestrians.
[2] Bicycle access. Safe and well-designed pedestrian access to parking and bicycle behind buildings must be provided from a public sidewalk. Pedestrian connections and a minimum of six feet wide.
(f) On-site loading standards - location and screening.
[1] Consistent with the purpose of the TOD District to create more walkable, pedestrian-environments, loading facilities shall be located behind buildings and screened with or walls or fences (compatible in architectural style) as necessary, so as to not acoustic impact on primary streets, secondary streets and abutting residential zones.
[2] Ingress and egress for loading areas shall be from tertiary streets or, if not available, streets. Access from primary streets is permitted if that is the only street frontage [3] Loading spaces shall be a minimum of 10 feet by 25 feet and provided in accordance following.
Nonresidential uses with gross leasable area:
[a] Less than 50,000 square feet: one space.
[b] 50,000 - 100,000 square feet: 1.5 spaces.
[c] Each additional 100,000 square feet: two spaces.
(g) Residential driveways and unit garages.
[1] Residential driveways and unit garages are accessory and should be incidental features; garage location to the rear of residential structures, or to the side for be considered, and excess protruding garages avoided.
[2] Driveways on all residential lots, including shared driveways, shall not exceed for access to the street, except if multiple exit lanes are deemed necessary by Development and Enforcement.
[3] There shall not be more than one driveway in front of the residential structure for in width or less.
[4] Total surfaced area for vehicles between the front of the residential structure(being accessed shall not exceed 24 feet in width except in a case where Development and Enforcement or, in the case of a special permit, the Planning Commission the layout for such vehicle accessory use is otherwise necessary, and a yard parking plan is approved by the Director of Development and Enforcement or, special permit, the Planning Commission.
[5] For multiple-family dwellings and TOD mixed-income dwellings, said total surfaced vehicles leading to unit garages shall not exceed 50% of the width of the residential along any street, except the Director of Development and Enforcement or, in special permit, the Planning Commission may consider approval of such design § 213-27 MERIDEN CODE § 213-27
1:570
an alternative part of an overall site plan that includes significant offsetting features.
[6] Residential unit garages shall be located either 20 feet or more, or four feet sidewalk/property line, except in a case where the Director of Development in the case of a special permit, the Planning Commission approves such plan.
(h) Landscaping and open space.
[1] All portions of improved properties, which are not used for buildings, parking and loading, permitted outdoor storage, driveways, walkways or similar be landscaped with grass, shrubs, trees and other ground covers, in such minimize erosion and stormwater runoff and to maintain or improve the properties.
[2] The design of publicly accessible open space should include features landscaping, furnishings, pavement and art that create an aesthetically environment, promote safety and adhere to the standards set forth in Disabilities Act (ADA) at the time of initial construction. Should such space, sidewalks or public open space, have street furniture, trash receptacles or other elements should be compatible in design to those provided by the City.
(i) Modifying or intensifying a site.
[1] Development can intensify usage of sites and street infrastructure in connected street infrastructure or the site's drainage capability may be be inadequate. Development standards shall be applied to any development significantly modify or intensify a site. Development shall meet the requirements of Meriden's Official Development Regulations, Title IV Requirements including and Repair at Time of Development and Construction, and Title V Development Management Standards. These requirements and standards approved Commission in June 2011, as amended, including applicable flexible techniques, into these regulations by reference.
(2) Building form and architectural standards. The Director of Development and Enforcement the case of a special permit, the Planning Commission may, at its discretion, solicit the Design Review Board for issues related to the design of the exterior of buildings.
(a) Building orientation.
[1] The main entrance must be located on the hierarchically most-important street on the TOD District Street Hierarchy Map (see Figure 213-7).
(b) Ground-floor design.
[1] Building entrances should have a high level of visual interest, be appropriately building's architectural framework and be located to relate to the surrounding fronting on important streets and key view corridors.
[2] Cornice heights and other features at the base of facades should be designed adjacent buildings.
[3] Minimum ground-floor transparency required for all permitted residential uses, detached dwellings and two-family and duplex dwellings: 30% transparency between two feet and eight feet above the average grade for all frontages parks.
[4] Minimum ground-floor transparency required for all permitted nonresidential with residential: In the Civic, Gateway and Hanover Sub-Districts, the two feet and eight feet above the average grade (the "facade area") shall transparent glass for frontages facing primary streets, so as to activate the interest (see Figure 213-14 and Table 213-3). For secondary and tertiary the facade area must be transparent. In the Historic-Commercial and Park § 213-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-27
1:571
area shall have a minimum of 60% transparent glass for frontages facing primary streets, so as to activate the streetscape with visual interest. For frontages on public parks, 30% of the facade area must be transparent.
Figure 213-14. Architectural Facade Design and Transparency
(c) Architectural form and style.
[1] Base, middle and top of buildings (see Figure 213-14 and Figure 213-15). Building primary and secondary streets should be designed to the traditional architectural includes a discernible base, middle and top. The base of buildings is governed transparency requirements and should have a high level of articulation and utilize scaled features designed to enliven the pedestrian environment. The upper (middle and top) shall have a minimum of 20% transparency (see Table 213-3). buildings should consist of elements that cap the facade composition, including a change in materials and/or unique fenestration.
Figure 213-15. Examples of Buildings with a Base, Middle and [2] Fenestration. Windows above the ground-floor level, whether individual or articulate an architectural scale and composition compatible with surrounding Ribbon windows and continuous floor-to-ceiling glazing (i.e., curtain wall systems) in the Historic-Commercial Sub-District (see Figure 213-16).
§ 213-27 MERIDEN CODE § 213-27
1:572
Figure 213-16. Unacceptable Facade Style in the Historic-Commercial [3] Building facades. Building facades, especially those more than 100 feet in in scale through visual articulation including multiple entries, the windows and variations in massing and architectural detail. This may include the addition of pilasters and cornices, and the thoughtful juxtaposition of materials. be spaced no further than 75 feet apart (see Figure 213-17).
Figure 213-17. Facades with Visual Interest and Appropriate [4] Roof forms and parapets. Roof forms should be compatible with surrounding roof vents and rooftop mechanical equipment should be screened from public and, where feasible, from adjacent buildings.
[5] Overhangs. Canopies, awnings, cornices and similar architectural elements exterior of buildings, provided that they are made of high-quality materials surrounding buildings. Overhangs should not extend more than eight feet building, may not be closer than two feet to the back of the curb and should trees/plantings. Awnings and canopies must be located a minimum of eight (see Figure 213-18).
§ 213-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-27
1:573
Figure 213-18. Building Canopies/Awnings
[6] Building materials. Materials shall be selected to be generally consistent with buildings (see Figure 213-19). In buildings where there are transitions from high-to lesser-quality materials, the higher-quality materials should be utilized for streets and public parks. The use of certain materials as the primary material may, at the discretion of the Director of Development and Enforcement or, in the permit, the Planning Commission, be subject to review and approval by the Design including exterior insulation finishing system (E.I.F.S.), metal panels, aluminum concrete masonry units and precast concrete panels.
Figure 213-19. Traditional Materials and Punched Openings in the Historic-Commercial District
(3) Signage standards.
(a) Allowable total sign area for all permitted nonresidential developments, including developments with residential.
[1] Front facades. One and five-tenths square feet of total sign area is permitted for front facade frontage. The total square footage is based on the sum of the areas facade, such as wall signs, awning and canopy graphics, banner signs and hanging and portable signs shall not be included in calculating the total square footage.
[2] Side and rear facades. One square foot of total signage is permitted for every linear rear facade frontage on a maximum of two sides of the building.
§ 213-27 MERIDEN CODE § 213-27
1:574
Figure 213-20. Building-mounted Wall Signs on West Main (b) Allowable total sign area for all permitted residential uses, except single-family and two-family and duplex dwellings.
[1] Primary facades. One sign not exceeding 10 square feet in size is permitted.
(c) Sign design standards for all permitted nonresidential developments, developments with residential.
[1] Wall signs. Flush-mounted wall signs must be compatible with building architecture, second-floor windowsills and, to the extent possible, be at the same height adjacent signs (see Figure 213-20 and Figure 213-21).
[2] Hanging signs. Signs perpendicular to the building facade are limited to square feet (measured on one side), shall be located below second-floor maximum projection of eight feet, and must be mounted to provide a minimum above grade (see Figure 213-21).
[3] Banner signs. Fabric or rigid material banner signs are limited to a maximum sign area (measured on one side). Banner signs shall be located 14 feet minimum a maximum projection of three feet, be spaced at least 20 feet apart, and be elements (see Figure 213-21).
Figure 213-21. Building-mounted Signage examples
[4] Awning/canopy signage. The sloped surface of awnings and canopies may contain logos not exceeding 20% of the awning/canopy area. The street-facing vertical canopies may contain text only.
(d) Sign design standards for all buildings.
[1] Materials. All signs must be complementary in their use of color, shape adjacent buildings and signage.
[2] Illumination. All signs must be externally illuminated. No illumination of glare observable from a residential district.
[3] Flashing and animated signs are prohibited.
§ 213-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-27
1:575
[4] Structure. All building-mounted signs shall be constructed and fastened to manner adequate to withstand wind pressure applied to the projected exposed direction of 30 pounds per square foot. All structural armatures and connections aesthetically compatible with the building's materials as well as the surrounding [5] All building-mounted signs and awnings/canopies that overhang a public right-held back a minimum of two feet from the edge of street curb.
[6] Adverse impacts. No sign shall be erected that would adversely impact visibility [7] Portable/movable signs. One well-designed A-frame sidewalk sign, not exceeding and 48 inches high, may be placed outside of a tenant space. Signs may not hinder movement or interfere with vehicular sight lines.
[8] Temporary signs. Signs that are not permanently installed or affixed to any structure are not allowed unless approved by the Director of Development and Enforcement. temporary signs - including signs for construction and real estate signs - are not more than 60 days, unless renewed.
(e) Ground/freestanding signs.
[1] Permanent ground/freestanding signs shall not exceed five feet in height and 20 total sign area, except in the Gateway Sub-District, where they shall not exceed and 40 square feet in total sign area. Freestanding signs are permitted on primary, and tertiary streets and must be located in the building setback zone so as to not vehicular sight lines. No freestanding pylon signs are permitted.
K. Adaptive reuse. The purpose of this section is to foster the renovation and reuse of
structures that have significant historical, architectural or cultural value to the City.
This section recognizes that many existing structures within the TOD District will not
conform to all of the standards and guidelines in § 213-27. The redevelopment and
reuse of buildings that pre-date 1963 and have qualities of significance and integrity
consistent with criteria used to evaluate inclusion on the National Register of Historic
Places ("National Register"), or those that are individually listed on the National Register
or are a contributing property within an historic district listed on the National Register,
shall be incentivized by the guidelines outlined in this section. Among the buildings that
the National Register criteria for evaluation recognizes are those which have made a
significant contribution to history, are associated with significant persons or embody
distinctive characteristics. Applicants who feel that a building that does not meet these
criteria merits consideration under the adaptive reuse guidelines may submit a special
permit application for review by the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission
shall refer all adaptive reuse special permit applications to the Design Review Board for
its recommendation.
(1) Development standards. Building setbacks, coverage, frontage and height requirements
shall not apply to existing buildings but shall apply to building additions.
(2) Parking for adaptive reuse buildings in the TOD District.
(a) If a change in use results in more spaces being required than already exist, no
additional parking spaces are required.
(b) If a change in use results in fewer spaces being required than already exist, then only
the number of spaces necessary to fulfill the requirements need to be maintained.
(c) Existing parking in excess of the limits set forth in Table 213-2, TOD District On-Site
Parking Standards, may remain and be used for on-site or off-site parking purposes
for other property owners, subject to an agreement between the property owners.
(d) On-site parking shall be provided, according to Table 213-2, TOD District On-Site
Parking Standards, for all building additions and calculated based on newly
constructed gross leasable area.
§ 213-27 MERIDEN CODE § 213-27
1:576
(3) On-site loading.
(a) Residential uses are not required to have on-site loading spaces.
(b) Nonresidential uses shall retain existing on-site loading spaces unless the number on-site loading spaces exceeds the requirements in § 213-27J(1)(f), On-site loading
standards.
(4) Residential density. Residential density shall adhere to the maximum dwelling per acre requirements for each sub-district, as listed in Table 213-3, TOD District
Development Standards Summary, with the exception that, for lots less than 1/2 the density requirements shall be equal to those for half-acre lots. This is provided dwelling units adhere to the following minimum square footages:
(a) One-bedroom and efficiency units are a minimum of 500 square feet.
(b) Two-bedroom units are a minimum of 700 square feet.
(5) Mezzanines. New construction to add a mezzanine-level space in an existing story permitted, provided that the mezzanine area does not exceed 33% of the floor area space below and the space meets all applicable building codes.
(6) Building facades. Facades that maintain the architectural integrity of an existing building
are exempt from minimum transparency requirements set forth in Table 213-3. building facade is replaced or significantly modified, it must satisfy the requirements forth in Table 213-3.
Figure 213-22. Hall & Lewis Building [1910]
ADDITIONAL
REQUIREMENTS
FOR
TOD
SUBDISTRICTS
L. Development standards summary: TOD sub-districts.
(1) Development standards summary. Table 213-3 provides a summary of the development
standards and guidelines that apply to the individual TOD sub-districts as provided Subsections M through Q.
§ 213-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-27
1:577
Table 213-3
TOD District Development Standards Summary
TOD Sub-Districts
Historic-
Comm. Park Hanover Civic Gateway
Lot Dimensions
Minimum lot size for
new/reconfigured lots
(square feet)
4,000a 15,000 10,000 10,000 15,000
Minimum lot width for
new/reconfigured lots
(linear feet)
40a 80 80 80 100
Site Development
Building setback –
interior lot line:
Minimum when
abutting an existing
residence (feet)
0 0 10 10 0
Minimum when
contiguous to
residential zone
(feet)
10 10 10 10 10
Minimum, all other
conditions (feet)
0 0 10 10 10
Building setback –
street frontage -
minimum/maximum
for:
Primary street
(feet)
0/5b 0/10 0/10 15/25 5/25
Secondary street
(feet)
0/5b 0/15 0/10 15/25 10/15
Tertiary street (feet) 0/10 10/15 10/25 15/25 10/25
Street wall – minimum
building frontage as
percentage of lot
width:
Primary street 75%c 50% 75% 50% 50%
Secondary street 50%c 50% 50% 50% 50%
Tertiary street 0%d 0%d 0%d 0%d 0%d
§ 213-27 MERIDEN CODE § 213-27
1:578
Table 213-3
TOD District Development Standards Summary
TOD Sub-Districts
Historic-
Comm. Park Hanover Civic Gateway
Lot coverage –
minimum:
Multiple-family
dwellings
40% 35% 35% 0% 0%
All other permitted
uses
40% 35% 35% 35% 0%
Lot coverage –
maximum:
Multiple-family
dwellings
100% 75% 75% 70% 75%
All other permitted
uses
100% 90% 90% 80% 90%
Residential density –
maximum dwelling
units per acre:
TOD mixed-income
dwellingse
50 50 50 35 50
Multiple-family
dwellings
25 25 25 15 25
Building Form and
Scale
Building floors –
minimum/maximum:
TOD mixed-income
dwellingse
2/5 2/8 2/10 2/6 2/10
Multiple-family
dwellings
2/4 2/5 2/4 2/3 2/4
All other permitted
uses
2/5 2/5 2/5 2/4 2/5
Residential uses:
Ground-floor height
– minimum (feet)
N.A. 12 12 12 12
Ground-floor
transparency –
minimum
N.A. 30% 30% 30% 30%
§ 213-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-27
1:579
Table 213-3
TOD District Development Standards Summary
TOD Sub-Districts
Historic-
Comm. Park Hanover Civic Gateway
Upper-floor
transparency –
minimum
20% 20% 20% 20% 20%
All other permitted
uses:
Ground-floor height
– minimum (feet)
14 14 14 14 14
Ground-floor
transparency –
minimumf:
Primary street 60% 60% 50% 50% 50%
Secondary
street
60% 60% 30% 30% 30%
Tertiary street 30% 30% 30% 30% 30%
Upper-floor
transparency –
minimum
20% 20% 20% 20% 20%
(2) Notes. The following requirements apply to the specific circumstances indicated in Table
213-3:
(a) Minimum lot size for new/reconfigured lots north of Foster Street is 10,000 square
feet. Minimum lot width for new/reconfigured lots north of Foster Street is 80 linear
feet.
(b) The maximum building setback north of Foster Street is 10 feet.
(c) Buildings in the Historic-Commercial Sub-District must be sited at the "corners"
of lots that are located at street intersections that include a primary or secondary
street.
(d) For lots that have frontage only on tertiary streets, the minimum building frontage
required is 50% of the lot width.
(e) Includes mixed-use developments that incorporate TOD mixed-income dwellings.
(f) Buildings in the Park Sub-District with facades facing the public park located in
the block bounded by State Street, East Main Street, Pratt Street and Mill Street
shall have a minimum ground-floor transparency of 30% for all facades. Facades on
primary and secondary streets shall have a minimum ground-floor transparency of
60%.
M. Development standards: Historic-Commercial Sub-District.
§ 213-27 MERIDEN CODE § 213-27
1:580
Figure 213-23. Buildings Fronting the North Side of West Main Street
(1) Lot dimensions. The lot dimension standards in the Historic-Commercial Sub-District
shall be:
Minimum lot size for new/reconfigured lots (square feet) 4,000a
Minimum lot width for new/reconfigured lots (linear feet) 40a
NOTES:
a) Minimum lot size for new/reconfigured lots north of Foster Street is 10,000 square
feet. Minimum lot width for new/reconfigured lots north of Foster Street is 80
linear feet.
(2) Site development. The site development standards for the Historic-Commercial District shall be (see Figure 213-24, Figure 213-25, and Figure 213-26):
Building setback – interior lot line:
Minimum when abutting existing residence (feet) 0
Minimum when contiguous to residential zone (feet) 10
Minimum, all other conditions (feet) 0
Building setback – street frontage - minimum/maximum for:
Primary street (feet) 0/5b
Secondary street (feet) 0/5b
Tertiary street (feet) 0/10
Street wall – minimum building frontage as percentage of lot
width:
Primary street 75%c
Secondary street 50%c
Tertiary street 0%d
Lot coverage – minimum:
Multiple-family dwellings 40%
All other permitted uses 40%
§ 213-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-27
1:581
Lot coverage – maximum:
Multiple-family dwellings 100%
All other permitted uses 100%
Residential density – maximum dwelling units per acre:
TOD mixed-income dwellingse 50
Multiple-family dwellings 25
NOTES:
b) The maximum building setback north of Foster Street is 10 feet.
c) Buildings must be sited at the "corners" of lots that are located at street
intersections that include a primary or secondary street.
d) For lots that have frontage only on tertiary streets, the minimum building frontage
required is 50% of the lot width.
e) Includes mixed-use developments that incorporate TOD mixed-income dwellings.
[Note: "Preferred" site layout reflects the fact that buildings are located at the
hierarchically most important street corner and define the greatest extent of frontage
on Primary and Secondary Streets]
Figure 213-24. Frontage Diagrams
§ 213-27 MERIDEN CODE § 213-27
1:582
Figure 213-25. Setback Diagrams: Building[s] shall be located within 5' of lot line 75% of Primary Street frontage and 50% of Secondary Street frontage.
Figure 213-26. Minimum and Maximum Lot Coverage for all permitted uses
(3) Building form and scale. The site development standards for the Historic-Commercial
Sub-District shall be:
Building floors – minimum/maximum:
TOD mixed-income dwellingse 2/5
Multiple-family dwellings 2/4
All other permitted uses 2/5
Residential uses:
Ground-floor height – minimum N.A.
Ground-floor transparency – minimum N.A.
Upper-floor transparency – minimum 20%
All other permitted uses:
Ground-floor height – minimum (feet) 14
Ground-floor transparency – minimum:
Primary street 60%
Secondary street 60%
Tertiary street 30%
Upper-floor transparency – minimum 20%
§ 213-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-27
1:583
NOTES:
e) Includes mixed-use developments that incorporate TOD mixed-income dwellings.
N. Development standards: Park Sub-District.
Figure 213-27. Residential development similar to what might be found in the Park
Sub-district
(1) Lot dimensions. The lot dimension standards in the Park Sub-District shall be:
Minimum lot size for new/reconfigured lots (square feet) 15,000
Minimum lot width for new/reconfigured lots (linear feet) 80
(2) Site development. The site development standards for the Park Sub-District shall be (see
Figure 213-28, Figure 213-29, Figure 213-30, and Figure 213-31):
Building setback – interior lot line:
Minimum when abutting existing residence (feet) 0
Minimum when contiguous to residential zone (feet) 10
Minimum, all other conditions (feet) 0
Building setback – street frontage - minimum/maximum for:
Primary street (feet) 0/10
Secondary street (feet) 0/15
Tertiary street (feet) 10/15
Street wall – minimum building frontage as percentage of lot
width:
Primary street 50%
Secondary street 50%
Tertiary street 0%d
Lot coverage – minimum:
Multiple-family dwellings 35%
All other permitted uses 35%
Lot coverage – maximum:
Multiple-family dwellings 75%
All other permitted uses 90%
§ 213-27 MERIDEN CODE § 213-27
1:584
Residential density – maximum dwelling units per acre:
TOD mixed-income dwellingse 50
Multiple-family dwellings 25
NOTES:
d) For lots that have frontage only on tertiary streets, the minimum building frontage
required is 50% of the lot width.
e) Includes mixed-use developments that incorporate TOD mixed-income dwellings.
Figure 213-28. Frontage Diagrams
Figure 213-29. Setback Diagrams: Building[s] located within 10' of lot line for 50% Primary Street frontage and within 15' of lot line for 50% of Secondary Street frontage.
§ 213-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-27
1:585
Figure 213-30. Minimum and Maximum Lot Coverage for Multiple-Family Dwellings
Figure 213-31. Minimum and Maximum Lot Coverage for all permitted uses other than
Multiple-Family Dwellings
(3) Building form and scale. The site development standards for the Park Sub-District shall
be:
Building floors – minimum/maximum:
TOD mixed-income dwellingse 2/8
Multiple-family dwellings 2/5
All other permitted uses 2/5
Residential uses:
Ground-floor height – minimum (feet) 12
Ground-floor transparency – minimum 30%
Upper-floor transparency – minimum 20%
All other permitted uses:
Ground-floor height – minimum (feet) 14
Ground-floor transparency – minimum:f
Primary street 60%
Secondary street 60%
Tertiary street 30%
§ 213-27 MERIDEN CODE § 213-27
1:586
Upper-floor transparency – minimum 20%
NOTES:
e) Includes mixed-use developments that incorporate TOD mixed-income dwellings.
f) Buildings in the Park Sub-District with facades facing the public park located the block bounded by State Street, East Main Street, Pratt Street and Mill Street
shall have a minimum ground-floor transparency of 30% for all facades. Facades primary and secondary streets shall have a minimum ground-floor transparency 60%.
Figure 213-32. Six-story residential permitted if incorporates the criteria necessary be a TOD Mixed-income dwelling
O. Development standards: Hanover Sub-District.
Figure 213-33. Residential buildings similar to what might be found in the Hanover
Sub-District
(1) Lot dimensions. The lot dimension standards in the Hanover Sub-District shall be:
Minimum lot size for new/reconfigured lots (square feet) 10,000
Minimum lot width for new/reconfigured lots (linear feet) 80
(2) Site development. The site development standards for the Hanover Sub-District shall (see Figure 213-34, Figure 213-35, Figure 213-36, and Figure 213-37):
Building setback – interior lot line:
Minimum when abutting existing residence (feet) 10
Minimum when contiguous to residential zone (feet) 10
§ 213-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-27
1:587
Minimum, all other conditions (feet) 10
Building setback – street frontage - minimum/maximum for:
Primary street (feet) 0/10
Secondary street (feet) 0/10
Tertiary street (feet) 10/25
Street wall – minimum building frontage as percentage of lot
width:
Primary street 75%
Secondary street 50%
Tertiary street 0%d
Lot coverage – minimum:
Multiple-family dwellings 35%
All other permitted uses 35%
Lot coverage – maximum:
Multiple-family dwellings 75%
All other permitted uses 90%
Residential density – maximum dwelling units per acre:
TOD mixed-income dwellingse 50
Multiple-family dwellings 25
NOTES:
d) For lots that have frontage only on tertiary streets, the minimum building frontage
required is 50% of the lot width.
e) Includes mixed-use developments that incorporate TOD mixed-income dwellings.
Figure 213-34. Frontage Diagrams
§ 213-27 MERIDEN CODE § 213-27
1:588
Figure 213-35. Setback Diagrams: Building located within 10' of lot line for a minimum
of 75% of Primary Street frontage and a minimum of 50% of Secondary Street
frontage.
Figure 213-36. Minimum and Maximum Lot Coverage for Multiple-Family Dwellings
Figure 213-37. Minimum and Maximum Lot Coverage for all permitted uses other Multiple-Family Dwellings
(3) Building form and scale. The site development standards for the Hanover Sub-District
shall be:
Building floors – minimum/maximum:
TOD mixed-income dwellingse 2/10
Multiple-family dwellings 2/4
§ 213-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-27
1:589
All other permitted uses 2/5
Residential uses:
Ground-floor height – minimum (feet) 12
Ground-floor transparency – minimum 30%
Upper-floor transparency – minimum 20%
All other permitted uses:
Ground-floor height – minimum (feet) 14
Ground-floor transparency – minimum:
Primary street 50%
Secondary street 30%
Tertiary street 30%
Upper-floor transparency – minimum 20%
NOTES:
e) Includes mixed-use developments that incorporate TOD mixed-income dwellings.
P. Development standards: Civic Sub-District.
Figure 213-38. Buildings in the Civic Sub-District fronting on East Main Street
(1) Lot dimensions. The lot dimension standards in the Civic Sub-District shall be:
Minimum lot size for new/reconfigured lots (square feet) 10,000
Minimum lot width for new/reconfigured lots (linear feet) 80
(2) Site development. The site development standards for the Civic Sub-District shall be (see
Figure 213-39, Figure 213-40, Figure 213-41, and Figure 213-42):
Building setback – interior lot line:
Minimum when abutting existing residence (feet) 10
Minimum when contiguous to residential zone (feet) 10
Minimum, all other conditions (feet) 10
Building setback – street frontage - minimum/maximum for:
Primary street (feet) 15/25
§ 213-27 MERIDEN CODE § 213-27
1:590
Secondary street (feet) 15/25
Tertiary street (feet) 15/25
Street wall – minimum building frontage as percentage of lot
width:
Primary street 50%
Secondary street 50%
Tertiary street 0%d
Lot coverage – minimum:
Multiple-family dwellings 0%
All other permitted uses 35%
Lot coverage – maximum:
Multiple-family dwellings 70%
All other permitted uses 80%
Residential density – maximum dwelling units per acre:
TOD mixed-income dwellingse 35
Multiple-family dwellings 15
NOTES:
d) For lots that have frontage only on tertiary streets, the minimum building frontage
required is 50% of the lot width.
e) Includes mixed-use developments that incorporate TOD mixed-income dwellings.
[Note: "Preferred" site layout reflects the fact that the building's primary orientation
addresses the Primary Street frontage]
Figure 213-39. Frontage Diagrams
§ 213-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-27
1:591
Figure 213-40. Setback Diagrams: Building located within 15'-25' of lot line for a
minimum of 50% of Primary Street and Secondary Street frontages.
Figure 213-41. Maximum Lot Coverage for Multiple-Family Dwellings
Figure 213-42. Minimum and Maximum Lot Coverage for all permitted uses other than
Multiple-Family Dwellings
(3) Building form and scale. The site development standards for the Civic Sub-District shall
be:
Building floors – minimum/maximum:
TOD mixed-income dwellingse 2/6
Multiple-family dwellings 2/3
All other permitted uses 2/4
Residential uses:
Ground-floor height – minimum (feet) 12
§ 213-27 MERIDEN CODE § 213-27
1:592
Ground-floor transparency – minimum 30%
Upper-floor transparency – minimum 20%
All other permitted uses:
Ground-floor height – minimum (feet) 14
Ground-floor transparency – minimum:
Primary street 50%
Secondary street 30%
Tertiary street 30%
Upper-floor transparency – minimum 20%
NOTES:
e) Includes mixed-use developments that incorporate TOD mixed-income dwellings.
Q. Development standards: Gateway Sub-District.
Figure 213-43. The Pratt Street corridor is a gateway to the center of Meriden
(1) Lot dimensions. The lot dimension standards in the Gateway Sub-District shall be:
Minimum lot size for new/reconfigured lots (square feet) 15,000
Minimum lot width for new/reconfigured lots (linear feet) 100
(2) Site development. The site development standards for the Gateway Sub-District shall (see Figure 213-44, Figure 213-45, Figure 213-46, and Figure 213-47):
Building setback – interior lot line:
Minimum when abutting existing residence (feet) 0
Minimum when contiguous to residential zone (feet) 10
Minimum, all other conditions (feet) 10
Building setback – street frontage - minimum/maximum for:
Primary street (feet) 5/25
Secondary street (feet) 10/15
Tertiary street (feet) 10/25
§ 213-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-27
1:593
Street wall – minimum building frontage as percentage of lot
width:
Primary street 50%
Secondary street 50%
Tertiary street 0%d
Lot coverage – minimum:
Multiple-family dwellings 0%
All other permitted uses 0%
Lot coverage – maximum:
Multiple-family dwellings 75%
All other permitted uses 90%
Residential density – maximum dwelling units per acre:
TOD mixed-income dwellingse 50
Multiple-family dwellings 25
NOTES:
d) For lots that have frontage only on tertiary streets, the minimum building frontage
required is 50% of the lot width.
e) Includes mixed-use developments that incorporate TOD mixed-income dwellings.
Figure 213-44. Frontage Diagrams
§ 213-27 MERIDEN CODE § 213-27
1:594
Figure 213-45. Setback Diagrams: Building located within 5'-25' of lot line for minimum of 50% of Primary Street frontage and within 10'-15' of lot line for a
minimum of 50% of Secondary Street frontage.
Figure 213-46. Maximum Lot Coverage for Multiple-Family Dwellings
Figure 213-47. Maximum Lot Coverage for all permitted uses other than Multiple-
Family Dwellings
(3) Building form and scale. The site development standards for the Gateway Sub-District
shall be:
Building floors – minimum/maximum:
TOD mixed-income dwellingse 2/10
Multiple-family dwellings 2/4
All other permitted uses 2/5
Residential uses:
§ 213-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-27
1:595
Ground-floor height – minimum (feet) 12
Ground-floor transparency – minimum 30%
Upper-floor transparency – minimum 20%
All other permitted uses:
Ground-floor height – minimum (feet) 14
Ground-floor transparency – minimum:
Primary street 50%
Secondary street 30%
Tertiary street 30%
Upper-floor transparency – minimum 20%
NOTES:
e) Includes mixed-use developments that incorporate TOD mixed-income dwellings.
PROCEDURE
R. Site plan approval.
Application Summary Chart
Use
Type Review Body
Submittal
Requirements Applicable Criteria
Permitted Director of
Development and
Enforcement
• Site plan
requirements as
listed in § 213-27R
and S
• See § 213-27H through Q
• Site plan
requirements as
listed below in
§ 213-27R and S
• See § 213-27H through Q
Limited
Director of
Development and
Enforcement • Additional
requirements as
listed in
§ 213-27I(6)
• Additional criteria as listed
in § 213-27I(6)
• Special permit
requirements as
listed below in
§ 213-27R and S
• See § 213-27H through Q
Special
permit
Planning
Commission • Additional
requirements as
listed in
§ 213-27I(7)
• Additional criteria as listed
in § 213-27I(7)
(1) TOD District site plan approval required. The Meriden City Council in its capacity City's Zoning Authority/Commission, through the adoption of this regulation, has, pursuant § 213-27 MERIDEN CODE § 213-27
1:596
the Connecticut General Statutes, delegated to the Director of Planning and Enforcement authority to review and approve site plan applications for the TOD District. All for site plan approval shall be submitted to, reviewed and approved, modified and denied by the Director of Development and Enforcement.
(a) Applicability. For all uses of land or buildings in the TOD District, including of use, and for all expansions of existing uses which add 25% or more to the traffic generated, parking spaces or occupants of the site, a site plan approval Director of Development and Enforcement shall be required before any building be issued.
(b) Site plan objectives. In reviewing a site plan application, the Director of and Enforcement shall take into consideration the health, safety and welfare in general and the immediate neighborhood in particular and may prescribe conditions and safeguards to ensure the accomplishment of the following general [1] That the proposed site plan shall be in general conformance with the intent of Conservation and Development; however, the Plan of Conservation and shall not take precedence over specific provisions of the Zoning Regulations.
[2] That all buildings, structures, uses, equipment or material are readily accessible and police protection.
[3] That adequate on-site parking and loading spaces are provided to prevent traffic congestion; that all parking spaces and maneuvering areas identified; that entrances and exits are suitably identified and designed to radii; that the interior circulation system is adequately designed to provide convenient access to all structures, uses and/or parking spaces; that parking provided with suitable bumper guards, guardrails, islands, crosswalks, and similar safety devices when deemed necessary by the Director of Development Enforcement to adequately protect life and property; and that provision safe pedestrian movement within and adjacent to the property by the installation sidewalks.
[4] That all proposed traffic and pedestrian accessways do not create traffic are adequate but not excessive in number; adequate in width, grade, alignment visibility; adequate in distance from street corners, places of public assembly accessways; and adequate in design for other similar safety considerations.
[5] That the general landscaping of the site complies with the purpose and chapter; that existing trees are preserved to the maximum extent possible; parking, storage, refuse and service areas are suitably screened during all the view of adjacent residential areas and public rights-of-way.
[6] That lighting of the site shall be adequate at ground level for the protection of the public in regard to pedestrian and vehicular circulation and that glare installation of outdoor lights and illuminated signs is properly shielded from adjacent property and public rights-of-way.
[7] That all utility systems are suitably located, adequately designed and properly to serve the proposed uses and to protect the property and adjacent properties adverse air, water or land pollution.
[8] That the development of the site will preserve sensitive environmental land such as steep slopes, wetlands and large rock outcroppings, and will preserve public scenic views or historically significant features.
[9] That soil erosion and sediment controls are designed, installed and maintained minimize soil erosion and sedimentation resulting from development.
§ 213-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-27
1:597
[10] That the location and size of any proposed use, building or structure, as well nature and intensity of operations involved or conducted in connection therewith, be in general harmony with the character of the surrounding neighborhood and be hazardous or otherwise detrimental to the appropriate and orderly development use of any adjacent land, building or structure.
(c) Procedure.
[1] Application for a TOD District site plan approval shall be made to the Director Development and Enforcement in writing on a form prescribed by the Director Development and Enforcement and shall be accompanied by plans, elevations other data necessary to show the detail of the proposed use of land or buildings. application shall require a fee, in accordance with the Schedule of Fees of the Meriden116 to cover the cost of administration. Said fee shall be paid at the time the application.
[2] The Director of Development and Enforcement shall review the plans and documents which may be required. The Director of Development and Enforcement consider the traffic impact created by the proposed use as well as parking provided for the proposed use, the appropriateness of the proposed location structures, the installation of sidewalks, curbing, signs, water and sewer connections, stormwater drainage, the location of light standards or other methods illuminating the parking area and building, the location of traffic islands and any materials within said islands, the location, height and type of screening materials will be located along the property lines, general landscaping and, in general, conditions which might impair the welfare or safety of the general public using facilities. The Director of Development and Enforcement may require modifications special conditions to assure the safety and welfare of the community and conformance
with the general character of the neighborhood.
[3] The Director of Development and Enforcement may request advice recommendations from the Design Review Board – an existing advisory board – for related to the exterior of structures only.
[4] Before a site plan approval is issued by the Director of Development and Enforcement
under this section, the applicant may be required to post a bond with the Director Development and Enforcement in an amount approved by the Director of Development
and Enforcement as sufficient to guarantee conformity with the provisions of the issued hereunder. Said bond shall be submitted at a time to be determined Director. The estimated cost of measures required to control soil erosion sedimentation, as specified in the approved plan, that are a condition of certification any modified site plan may be required to be covered in a performance bond assurance acceptable to the Director in accordance with this provision.
[5] The applicant shall submit three hard copies of the plot plan or development plan project, along with one copy of elevations or preliminary drawings showing the type of building to be constructed, to the Director of Development and Enforcement
for review. In addition, a digital copy of all drawings shall be submitted. The of Development and Enforcement, upon approval of said development, shall site plan approval to the applicant along with one copy of the approved plot The Director of Development and Enforcement shall retain two copies of the approved
development plan in his files and shall transmit one approved copy of the plot plan with one copy of the site plan approval to the Building Department and one copy Engineering Division for their records.
§ 213-27 MERIDEN CODE § 213-27
1:598
[6] The Director of Development and Enforcement shall reject, approve or modifications the site plan application within 65 days of the date of receipt application, as defined in the Connecticut General Statutes. Failure of the Development and Enforcement to act within said period shall be deemed approval Director of Development and Enforcement of the proposal as submitted, and of Development and Enforcement shall issue said site plan approval.
(d) Soil erosion and sediment control certification. Approval of the plans by the Development and Enforcement shall constitute certification that the soil sediment control plan, as filed, complies with the requirements and objectives chapter.
(e) Inspection. Inspection shall be made by the Director of Development and Enforcement his designated agent during development to ensure compliance with the certified that control measures and facilities are performed or installed and maintained. may require the permittee to verify through progress reports that soil erosion control measures have been performed or installed according to the certified being operated and maintained.
(f) Expiration. Any approved TOD District site plan for which a building permit secured within one year from the date of issuance of the site plan approval considered not valid, unless an extension of time is applied for by the applicant actual expiration date and granted by the Director. All work in connection with site plan shall be completed within five years after the date of approval of the failure to complete all work within such five-year period shall result in automatic of the approval of such site plan unless the Director shall have granted an extension time to complete work in connection with such site plan. The Director may more extensions of the time to complete all or part of the work in connection plan, provided the total extension or extensions shall not exceed 10 years from approval of such site plan. The Director may condition the approval of such extension determination of the adequacy of any bond or other surety.
(g) Amendments or modification. Application for amendments to an approved site made in the same manner as the original application. Minor modification may by the Director of Development and Enforcement.
(h) Continuance. All conditions and improvements shown on an approved site plan with the property as long as the use indicated on the approved site plan is still The conditions and improvements shall continue in force regardless of any ownership of the property.
(i) Any person aggrieved by the action of the Director of Development and Enforcement appeal said action in accordance with the provisions of the Connecticut General (j) The Director of Development and Enforcement shall report all approved site Planning Commission at its next meeting.
(k) Site plan application requirements. For all uses requiring site plan approval, shall include seven sets of the following information, maps and plans. Except provided otherwise elsewhere in this section, all applications shall include an accurate A-2 survey of the property and improvements prepared by a land surveyor the State of Connecticut. All plans shall be prepared, signed and sealed by a engineer, architect or landscape architect, whichever is appropriate. shall be prepared at a scale of one inch equals not more than 20 feet or not less [1] General information.
116. Editor's Note: Said fee schedule is on file in the Clerk's office.
§ 213-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-27
1:599
[a] Name and address of the applicant and owner of record as listed on the tax rolls. If the applicant is not the owner of record, the latter shall also application.
[b] Date, North arrow and numerical and graphical scale on each map.
[c] A written description of the proposed use or uses.
[d] A table or chart indicating the proposed number or amount and types lot area, lot width, frontage, building height, coverage, floor area, parking landscaping and open spaces as they relate to the requirements of this chapter.
[2] Location map. An accurate scale map at a scale of one inch equals 1,000 feet submitted showing the subject property and all property and streets within 1,000 of any part of the subject property.
[3] Easement(s). Location, width and purpose of all existing and proposed easements rights-of-way on the property.
[4] Buildings and uses.
[a] Location, dimensions, area, height and setbacks of all existing and proposed
buildings, signs, fences and walls.
[b] Location of all existing and proposed uses and facilities not requiring a such as swimming pools, tennis courts, light standards, tanks, transformers dumpsters.
[5] Parking, loading and circulation.
[a] Location, arrangement and dimensions of automobile parking spaces, vehicular drives, fire lanes, entrances, exits and ramps.
[b] Location, arrangement and dimensions of loading and unloading areas.
[c] Location and dimensions of pedestrian walkways, entrances and exits.
[6] Signs and lighting.
[a] Location, size, height, orientation and plans of all signs.
[b] Location, size, height, orientation and design of any outdoor lighting.
[7] Utilities. Location and design of all existing and proposed sanitary sewer, drainage, water supply facilities and refuse collection areas, as well as underground and aboveground utilities. All public utilities shall be placed underground.
The Director of Development and Enforcement may waive this requirement engineering data substantiates that such underground placement of utilities impractical.
[8] Topographic map. The topographic map shall illustrate the existing and proposed
conditions of the property, including existing and proposed contours with intervals five feet, referred to the City of Meriden datum, and location of all existing areas, watercourses, wetlands, rock outcrops and other significant physical and, where appropriate, the wetlands boundary and the flood hazard area.
[9] A soil erosion and sediment control map and narrative shall be submitted development activities in which the cumulative disturbed area will be more acre. The plan shall conform with § 213-57 of this chapter.
[10] Open space and landscaping plan. The open space and landscaping plan shall illustrate
the existing and proposed landscape development of the property, including general layout, type and size of buffer or landscape areas, plant material, screening devices, decorative paving or other materials proposed.
[11] Staging plan map. In cases where the applicant wishes to develop in stages, an site and staging plan indicating ultimate development for the entire property submitted at the same scale as the site plan.
§ 213-27 MERIDEN CODE § 213-27
1:600
[12] Other information. The applicant shall submit any other information deemed Director of Development and Enforcement to be necessary to determine with the intent of this chapter.
(2) Special permits.
(a) Applicability. In all cases where this chapter requires approval by special permit, permit shall be issued by the Building Official except after approval of the special application and after public notice in accordance with the General Statutes of Connecticut.
(b) Special permit objectives. In evaluating a special permit application, the Commission shall take into consideration the health, safety and welfare of the general, and the immediate neighborhood, in particular, and may prescribe conditions and safeguards to ensure the accomplishment of the following objectives:
[1] Harmony with development. That the proposed use is of such location, size and that, in general, it will be in harmony with the appropriate and orderly development the district in which it is proposed to be situated, will not tend to depreciate property in the neighborhood, and will not be detrimental to the orderly development adjacent properties in accordance with the zoning classification of such properties.
[2] Site plan objectives. That the site plan submitted as part of the special permit will accomplish the site plan objectives described in § 213-27R(1)(b), particularly it will not create traffic or fire hazards and will not block or hamper the City pattern.
[3] Conformance to requirements. Unless otherwise specified, a special permit conform to all requirements of the TOD District. Where two or more special uses apply to the same premises, the minimum requirements shall be the requirements for each use as specified in this chapter or, in cases of two or permit uses in the same building, whichever requirements are more restrictive.
(3) Procedure. Application for a special permit shall be made to the Planning Commission at least 15 days prior to a regular meeting and shall be accompanied by the following items.
(a) A statement describing the existing and proposed use or uses.
(b) A site plan in accordance with § 213-27R(1)(b), if applicable.
(c) A list of all property owners required to be notified, together with addresses.
(d) Such other information as the Planning Commission may require in order to determine with the intent and purpose of this chapter.
(e) All applications shall be accompanied by a fee, as provided in the Fee Schedule Meriden to cover the cost of administration.117 Said fee shall be paid at the application.
(f) Public hearing and notice.
[1] The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on all applications shall publish a notice of said hearing in a newspaper of general circulation.
[2] In addition to published notice, the Planning Commission shall give notice least 10 days prior to the date of the hearing to the applicant filing the property owners whose property is located within, abutting and directly across boundaries of the property which is the subject of such hearing.
[3] Further, the petitioner shall erect or cause to have erected a sign on the proposed special permit at least 10 days prior to the public hearing on such shall be a minimum of four feet by five feet with black lettering no smaller 2 inch on a white background. Said sign shall be weather-resistant, securely § 213-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-27
1:601
clearly visible from the street closest to the affected property and be maintained day following the public hearing. The sign shall contain the following information:
Public Notice
A petition for a special permit has been filed with the Planning Commission. A be held on said petition on (date of hearing) in City Hall.
(g) A report from the Director of Development and Enforcement attesting to whether sign was erected and maintained as required shall be made part of the record hearing. Failure of a petitioner to comply with this requirement may be grounds for automatic of the proposed special permit with consideration being given to cases where weather acts of vandalism have destroyed a properly posted sign.
(h) The Commission may request advice and recommendations from the Design Review existing advisory board – for issues related to the exterior of structures only.
(i) The Planning Commission shall reject or issue a special permit within 65 days of the the public hearing on the application. Failure of the Planning Commission to act period shall be deemed approval of the proposal as submitted.
(4) Conditions and safeguards. Any condition or safeguards attached to the granting of a permit shall remain with the property as long as the special permit use is still in operation. conditions and safeguards shall continue in force regardless of any change in ownership property.
(5) Revocation. Any authorized special permit shall be subject to revocation by the Commission if any condition or safeguard imposed by the Planning Commission upon buildings,
structures, land or uses for said permit is not strictly adhered to by the applicant, user owner.
(6) Amendments or modifications. Applications for special permit amendments which necessitated by site conditions or which are deemed to be in the public interest shall be the same manner as the original application, except that amendments which are found to minor nature or which do not materially alter the special permit, as determined by the Commission, may be authorized with Planning Commission approval only without another hearing.
(7) Time period and expiration. In approving a special permit, the Planning Commission time limits on the permit and/or require periodic renewal of the permit without a public In the event that an appeal is taken from the Planning Commission's approval of a permit, then the time period shall commence on the date of final disposition of such litigation. expired special permit shall be considered not valid. All work in connection with a site plan be completed within five years after the date of approval of the plan, and failure to complete
all work within such five-year period shall result in automatic expiration of the approval such site plan unless the Planning Commission shall have granted an extension of the complete work in connection with such site plan. The Planning Commission may grant more extensions of the time to complete all or part of the work in connection with the site provided the total extension or extensions shall not exceed 10 years from the date of of such site plan. The Planning Commission may condition the approval of such extension determination of the adequacy of any bond or other surety.
(8) Continuance. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, when an amendment adopted to this chapter or boundaries of zoning districts, a special permit application 117. Editor's Note: Said fee schedule is on file in the Clerk's office.
§ 213-27 MERIDEN CODE § 213-27
1:602
been submitted to the Planning Commission and all previously approved special not be required to conform to such amendment.
S. Administration and enforcement.
(1) Enforcement. This chapter shall be enforced by the Director of Development and
Enforcement. The Director of Development and Enforcement is authorized to cause
any building, structure, place, premises or use to be inspected or examined and order in writing the remedying of any condition found to exist therein or thereon violation of any provision of this chapter.
(2) Zoning permit required. No building or structure shall be erected, added to or
structurally altered, no use shall be established and no existing building or land,
whether vacant or occupied, shall be converted to a different use until a zoning
permit has been issued by the Director of Development and Enforcement or other
authorized official. All applications for such permits shall be in accordance with
the requirements of this chapter. Where a site plan approval or special permit required, the zoning permit shall be issued automatically with such approval.
(a) Application. Every application for a zoning permit shall be accompanied by
such information and exhibits, i.e., certified plot plan, soils data, drainage
computations, etc., as are required herein or as may be reasonably required by
the Director of Development and Enforcement in order that the proposal of the
applicant may be adequately interpreted and judged as to its conformity with the
provisions set forth in this chapter.
(b) Plot plan. The application shall be accompanied by three copies of a plot plan
based on an "A-2" survey prepared by a land surveyor and/or engineer registered
in the State of Connecticut, drawn to scale, showing the actual dimensions the lot to be built upon, the size of the building to be erected, the location the building upon the lot, the dimensions of all open spaces, the setback lines
observed by buildings, the location of driveways and curb cuts and such other
information as may be necessary. The Director of Development and Enforcement
may waive any of the plot plan requirements in cases where they are not needed
to determine conformity with this chapter.
(3) Certificate of compliance required.
(a) No land shall be occupied or used, and no building hereafter erected or altered
shall be occupied or used in whole or in part for any purpose, until a certificate
of compliance shall have been issued by the Director of Development and
Enforcement or other authorized official, stating that the premises or building
complies with all the provisions of this chapter. Such a certificate is also required
for any change, extension or alteration in a use.
(b) Applications for a certificate of compliance shall be accompanied by a certified
plot plan of the lot and buildings involved, showing the exact placement of the
as-built structures on the lot. The as-built plot plan may be the same document
as is submitted for a certificate of occupancy, if all zoning data (i.e., setbacks,
etc.) are included. The Director of Development and Enforcement may waive the
requirement for a certified plot plan in cases where it is not needed to determine
conformity with this chapter. No such certificate of compliance shall be issued by
the Director of Development and Enforcement until all zoning requirements and
conditions, including site plan approval and/or special permits, have been met.
(4) Fees. All applications for zoning permits and certificates of compliance shall be
accompanied by a fee, in accordance with the Schedule of Fees of the City § 213-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-27
1:603
Meriden,118 to cover the cost of administration. Said fee shall be paid at the time of
filling the application.
(5) Conditions for approval and issuance of permits.
(a) Any maps, plans, documents, statements and stipulations submitted to and
approved by the Director of Development and Enforcement or the Planning
Commission in connection with site plan or special permit or other action of
said Director or Commission, as required by this chapter, and any conditions of
such approval(s) attached by said Director or Commission shall be conditions
for the approval of applications for and the issuance of a zoning permit and a
certificate of compliance by the Director of Development and Enforcement. Prior
to issuance of a zoning permit or a certificate of compliance, the applicant shall
obtain and submit all approvals required by any other municipal, state or federal
department, bureau or agency.
(b) No building permit or certificate of occupancy may be issued until all zoning
permits have been secured.
(6) Certificate of occupancy required.
(a) The occupancy and use of a building erected, reconstructed, restored, altered
or moved, or any change in use of an existing building, shall be unlawful until a
certificate of occupancy shall have been applied for and issued by the Building
Official.
(b) A certificate of occupancy is required for and shall be deemed to authorize both
initial occupancy and the continued occupancy and use of the building or land to
which it applies.
(c) No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any use requiring the granting
of a special permit, variance or site plan unless and until such permit approval
has been duly granted and the Director of Development and Enforcement and
Building Official have inspected the site to ascertain that all provisions of said
approval are complied with.
(d) A nonrenewable temporary certificate of occupancy for a part of a building may
be issued by the Director of Development and Enforcement for a period of not
more than six months.
(7) Records. A record of all zoning permits, certificates of compliance and certificates
of occupancy shall be kept in the office of the Director of Development and
Enforcement.
(8) Penalties for offenses. Any person or corporation, whether as owner, lessee,
architect, contractor or builder, or the agent or employee of any of them, who
violates or is accessory to the violation of any provision of this chapter or any
rule or regulation made under the authority conferred by this chapter or who shall
erect, construct, alter, enlarge, convert or move any building or structure or any
part thereof without a building permit or in violation of any statement or plans
submitted and approved under the provisions of this chapter or who shall use any
building, structure or land in violation of this chapter or any rule or regulation made
under the authority conferred by this chapter or in violation of the provisions of
any zoning permit, building permit or certificate of occupancy or without a zoning
permit, building permit, change of use permit or certificate of occupancy where
one is required by this chapter and who fails to abate said violation within 30 days
after written notice has been served upon him, either by mail or personal service,
shall be liable to a penalty in accordance with the General Statutes of the State of
Connecticut. Each day that a violation remains shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 213-27 MERIDEN CODE § 213-28
1:604
§ 213-28. Neighborhood commercial design district (NCDD).
[Added 12-5-1988]
A. Creation of district. Within any zoning district, the City Council may create
a neighborhood commercial design district (NCDD) in accordance with the
standards, criteria and procedures contained in this chapter. In concert with
this chapter, the Council may also adopt streetscape, signage and capital
improvements programs for each NCDD.
B. Purpose. The purpose of a neighborhood commercial design district (NCDD)
is to provide for a range of low-density commercial and residential uses
to serve the daily needs of the community surrounding the district. The
purpose of the NCDD is to establish criteria by which plans can be
developed and reviewed with an emphasis on density, scale, architectural
conformity, and streetscape.
C. Applicability. A commercial area may be designated by the City Council as
an NCDD if it:
(1) Contains three or more contiguous pieces of property which are
currently used for commercial purposes;
(2) Is recognized by the City Council and Planning Commission to be a
commercial area with an orientation towards the immediate
surrounding neighborhoods;
(3) Is comprised of small-scale commercial entities, of which the majority
conform with the permitted NCDD uses; or
(4) Is contiguous or will be contiguous to any existing NCDD.
D. Designation of a neighborhood commercial design district. The creation of
an NCDD shall be in accordance with § 213-77 of this chapter; provided,
however, that five copies of the following materials shall be submitted as
part of the petition for its creation:
(1) A description of the uses of the building and land contained in the
proposed district.
(2) A description of the types and locations of streets, sidewalks, utilities,
landscaping, parking, and other site improvements in the proposed
district.
(3) A map showing existing and proposed zoning of the project area as well
as all properties within 500 feet of the project area.
E. Planning Commission authority. Per § 213-72 of this chapter, any change
in use or any new construction within the NCDD will require a certificate
of approval from the Planning Commission. No structure or public facility
may be erected, demolished or moved, enlarged, reconstructed, restored or
structurally altered which is not first approved by the Planning Commission
through the certificate of approval process. The Director of Planning and
Chairman of the Planning Commission may waive the requirement for a
certificate of approval for a change of use if they determine that the change
will not affect the required parking and will have no effect on the building
facade or streetscape. The Planning Commission may also require a
certificate of appropriateness if it determines that the proposed change in
use will affect the exterior of a building within the NCDD. In anticipation
118. Editor's Note: Said fee schedule is on file in the Clerk's office.
§ 213-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-28
1:605
of this determination, an applicant may apply for a certificate of
appropriateness in conjunction with the certificate of approval application.
F. Permitted uses. No building or premises in a NCDD shall be used, in whole
or in part, for any purpose except those listed below.
(1) Uses permitted by right:
(a) Retail stores.
(b) Bakeries.
(c) Service businesses such as barbershops, beauty parlors, furniture
repair, tailors and dry cleaning stores, launderettes, dressmakers,
jewelry repair, shoe repair, travel agent, appliance repair,
photographer's studio, duplicating business, and real estate offices.
(d) Banks, including drive in windows.
(e) Restaurants.
(f) Single-, two- and three-family dwellings.
(g) Libraries, art galleries and museums.
(h) Child-care provider — Class I.
(i) Public facilities.
(j) Professional and business offices (minimum size of office 300
square feet per office).
(k) Arts and crafts studios and studios for teaching performing arts.
(l) Theaters.
(m) Bus and taxi stands.
(n) News and magazine stands.
(o) Veterinarians.
(p) Mortuary.
(q) Child-care provider — Class II, subject to the requirements of
§ 213-16B(1)(d). [Added 2-3-1992]
(r) Notwithstanding the general restriction on temporary sales as
stated in § 213-15 of this chapter, temporary sales are permitted
by nonprofit clubs, nonprofit organizations, as defined and licensed
by the State of Connecticut, and which were not created for the
purpose of selling goods, property or wares. No such temporary
sales shall be carried on for longer than a thirty-day period in any
given six months. All such temporary sales must be approved by the
Zoning Enforcement Officer as to safety issues and compliance with
this chapter. [Added 4-7-2008]
(2) Uses permitted subject to a special exception permit by the ZBA in
accordance with the requirements of § 213-72:
(a) Places of worship and public assembly, including parish houses,
parochial schools, meeting rooms and recreation facilities
customarily accessory to such uses.
(b) Buildings with mixed uses subject to the provisions of
§ 213-23B(2)(k) and subject to the requirement that the first floor be
used exclusively for commercial and/or office uses.119
(c) Child-care provider — Class III, subject to the requirements of
§ 213-19B(2)(j). [Amended 2-3-1992]
(d) Multiple-family dwellings in accordance with the requirements of
§ 213-25B(2)(l).
(e) Clinics.
§ 213-28 MERIDEN CODE § 213-28
1:606
(f) Membership and commercial clubs.
(g) Cocktail lounges, nightclubs and liquor stores.
(h) Recreation center.
(i) Hotel and motel.
(3) Accessory uses:
(a) Uses customarily accessory to permitted uses if constructed
concurrently with or subsequent to the main building.
(b) Signs as regulated in accordance with § 213-56 and/or special
guidelines per § 213-28A.
(c) Off-street parking in accordance with § 213-55 and/or special
guidelines per § 213-28A.
(d) Outdoor dining area per standards and procedures of § 213-23C(4).
[Amended 6-7-2004; 6-17-2013]
G. Application for a certificate of appropriateness.
(1) The Planning Commission may make such written regulations regarding
procedure and form of application as it may determine, provided they
are not inconsistent with this chapter.
(2) The application for a certificate of appropriateness shall be executed
by or on behalf of the owner and filed in duplicate with the Planning
Commission. A fee, in accordance with the City of Meriden Fee
Schedule, shall be submitted to the Planning Commission.
(3) The application for a certificate of appropriateness shall include such
items as the Planning Commission, by its regulations, may specify in
order to disclose identification and location of the project, including an
A-2, grading plan, utility/easement plan, and any other criteria required
for site plan approval, as well as architectural renderings of the site.
H. Nonapplicability. Nothing in these neighborhood commercial design district
regulations shall be construed to prevent:
(1) The ordinary maintenance or repair of any building exterior in the
district which does involve a change in design or the outward
appearance of the building, except where the total dollar value for all
labor and materials exceeds $5,000;
(2) The reconstruction or alteration of any feature which the Building
Inspector shall certify is required because of an unsafe or dangerous
condition;
(3) The construction, reconstruction, alteration or demolition of any feature
under the permit issued by any City inspector prior to the effective date
of establishment of the particular district.
I. General provisions.
(1) Within 65 days after official filing of the final application or within such
further time as the applicant may in writing allow for the issuance of
a certificate of appropriateness, the Planning Commission shall either
grant or deny the certificate of appropriateness.
(2) The Commission may from time to time adopt regulations which detail
the procedures for the issuance or denial of certificates of
appropriateness. In considering whether to grant a certificate of
appropriateness, the Commission must request advice and
119. Editor's Note: Former Subsection F(2)(c), which immediately followed this subsection, was
repealed 2-3-1992.
§ 213-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-28
1:607
recommendations from the Design Review Board. The Commission shall
provide the Board with a copy of the application and all accompanying
plans, specifications and supporting materials. The decisions of the
Design Review Board shall be made in writing and submitted to the
Planning Commission within the time prescribed by the Commission in
its request.
(3) If the Commission determines that the proposed development is
appropriate, or if the Commission fails to make a determination with
the time limit prescribed in this section, it shall issue to the applicant
a certificate of appropriateness. If the Commission determines that a
certificate of appropriateness should not be issued, it shall place on its
records the reasons for its determination, delivering to the applicant an
attested copy of its reasons for the determination.
(4) Predesign conference. The developer is encouraged to meet with the
Planning Commission staff before presenting any formal application in
order to provide an opportunity for the developer to receive from the
Planning Commission staff a full explanation of the City's requirements.
J. Lot and bulk requirements for NCDD. The following zoning requirements
shall be applied to development/redevelopment of property within the
NCDD, per § 213-12B:
Lot
Area
(square
feet)
Area
per DU
(square
feet)
Width
(feet) Coverage
Front
(feet)
Side
(feet)
Rear
(feet)
Height
(feet)
10,000 3,000 75 60%* 20 10 25 35
NOTE:
* Total lot coverage for principal and accessory buildings.
(1) Landscaping and buffer requirements:
(a) All portions of improved multifamily and nonresidential properties
which are not used for buildings, structures, off-street parking and
loading, permitted outdoor storage, driveways, walkways or similar
purposes shall be landscaped with grass, shrubs, trees and other
ground covers in such a manner as to minimize erosion and
stormwater runoff and to maintain or improve the aesthetics of such
development.
(b) All landscaping and walk areas within the front yard shall be in
accordance with the NCDD streetscape plan when adopted.
(c) A landscaped area of at least 10 feet shall be provided and
maintained between any residential district and an NCDD for the
purposes of visual and noise buffering.
K. Design criteria of NCDD. The following criteria shall be considered in
connection with any application for a certificate of appropriateness in each
design control district.
(1) Relation of building to environment. The proposed development shall
be related harmoniously to the terrain as well as to the use, scale and
architecture of the existing buildings in the vicinity.
§ 213-28 MERIDEN CODE § 213-28
1:608
(2) Preservation of the landscape. The landscape shall be preserved in
its natural state, insofar as practicable, by minimizing tree and soil
removal, and any grade changes shall be in keeping with the general
appearance of neighboring development areas.
(3) Open space. All open space, landscaped and usable, shall be so
designated as to add to the visual amenities of the vicinity by
maximizing its visibility for persons passing the site or overlooking
it from neighboring properties. Further, landscaping within the front
yard area should be in harmony with the streetscape plan for that
district.
(4) Vehicular and pedestrian circulation. With respect to vehicular and
pedestrian circulation, including entrances, ramps, walkways, drives
and parking, special attention shall be given to location and number
of access points to public street, to width of interior drives and access
points, general interior circulation, separation of pedestrian and
vehicular traffic, access to community facilities, and arrangement of
parking areas in a safe and convenient way so that insofar as
practicable they do not detract from the use and enjoyment of
proposed building structures and neighboring properties.
(5) Surface water drainage. Special attention shall be given to proper site
surface drainage so that removal of surface waters will not adversely
affect neighboring properties or the public storm drainage system.
(6) Advertising features. The size, location, design, color, texture, lighting
and materials of all permanent signs and outdoor advertising
structures or feeders shall not detract from the use and enjoyment of
proposed buildings and of the surrounding properties.
(7) Special features. All trash disposal areas shall be screened with a
permanent opaque structure. All accessory structures shall be limited
to such setbacks and screening requirements as are appropriate to
prevent visual conflict with abutting properties.
(8) Heritage. With respect to Meriden's heritage, the removal or
disruption of historic, traditional or significant uses, structures or
architectural elements shall be minimized insofar as practicable,
whether these exist on the site or on adjacent properties.
(9) Local climate. Any developer who proposes new structures, paved
areas or the installation of machinery which emits heat, vapor or fumes
shall endeavor to minimize, insofar as practicable, any adverse impact
on light, air and water resources or on noise and temperature levels of
the immediate environment.
(10) Architectural treatment. Where a new building or building addition
is planned, the exterior treatment of the building shall be in keeping
with building materials already prevalent in the commercial area.
Whenever possible, all buildings should be oriented to the street, with
the main facade parallel to the streetline.
(11) Vehicular and pedestrian circulation. Whenever practicable, parking
should be located to the rear of a building. Ramps, walkways, drives
and parking areas should be designed to promote safe pedestrian
areas and convenient vehicular circulation.
§ 213-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-28
1:609

ARTICLE VI
Industrial Districts
§ 213-29. M-1 Research, Development and Manufacturing District.
A. The purpose of this district shall be to provide areas for a wide range of
office, industrial and research activity at a low density that conforms to
a high level of performance standards, that can be located in proximity
to residential, institutional and commercial areas without objectionable
influence, and that can serve as a buffer in some cases between more
objectionable industrial activities and residential and/or certain
commercial areas.
B. Permitted uses. No building or premises may be used, in whole or in
part, for any purpose except those listed below.
(1) Permitted uses by right.
(a) Manufacturing, production and fabrication.
(b) Offices.
(c) Warehouses and distribution facilities.
(d) Research and development facilities.
(e) Veterinarian.
(f) Newspaper printing and job printing.
(g) Conference center hotel, provided that the same shall be located
on a minimum ten-acre site. [Added 11-19-1984]
(h) Child-care provider — Class I. [Added 7-5-1988; amended
2-3-1992]
(i) Child-care provider — Class II, subject to the requirements of
§ 213-16B(1)(d). [Added 2-3-1992]
(j) Conference hotel. [Added 10-1-2001]
(2) Uses permitted subject to issuance of a special exception permit by
the Zoning Board of Appeals in accordance with the requirements of
§ 213-73.
(a) Heliports, subject to the conditions of § 213-23B(2)(m).
(b) Mobile homes and mobile home parks, subject to the provisions
of § 213-19B(2)(c).
(c) Factory outlets for the purpose of merchandising products that
are manufactured on the premises along with the sale of
accessory and related items, subject to the following conditions:
[Added 10-21-1985]
[1] Said outlets shall be located in a factory structure.
[2] Said outlet shall not exceed 20% of the gross floor area of the
primary buildings on the lot.
(d) Child-care provider — Class III, subject to the requirements of
§ 213-19B(2)(j). [Added 7-5-1988; amended 2-3-1992]
C. Accessory uses.
(1) Uses customarily accessory to permitted uses if constructed
concurrently with or subsequent to the main building; accessory
uses that are for the convenience of employees and limited to use
by occupants and employees of the permitted use; and accessory
uses that are necessary to maintain and support the permitted use
§ 213-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-29
1:611
and not operated as a commercial facility with service to the general
public.
(2) Storage.
(3) Signs, as regulated in § 213-56.
(4) Off-street parking in accordance with the requirements of § 213-55.
D. Lot and bulk requirements. Lot and bulk requirements are found in
§ 213-12, Schedule of Land Use, Lot and Bulk Regulations.120
E. Performance standards. All uses in this district shall conform to the
performance standards set forth in § 213-54.
§ 213-30. M-2 Industrial District.
A. The purpose of this district shall be to provide areas for a wide range of
office, industrial and research activity at a higher density than that of the
M-1 District and to require conformance to a high level of performance
standards.
B. Permitted uses. No building or premises may be used, in whole or in
part, for any purpose except those listed below.
(1) Permitted uses by right:
(a) Manufacturing, production and fabrication.
(b) Offices.
(c) Warehouses and distribution facilities, except petroleum and
other highly flammable products.
(d) Research and development.
(e) Veterinarians.
(f) Newspaper printing and job printing.
(g) Industrial laundry for large bulk laundry and commercial/
industrial establishment's laundry. [Added 9-2-1986]
(h) Child-care provider — Class I. [Added 7-5-1988; amended
2-3-1992]
(i) Child-care provider — Class II, subject to the requirements of
§ 213-16B(1)(d). [Added 2-3-1992]
(2) Uses permitted subject to issuance of a special exception permit by
the Zoning Board of Appeals in accordance with the requirements of
§ 213-73:
(a) Heliports, subject to the conditions of § 213-23B(2)(m).
(b) Mobile homes and mobile home parks, subject to the provisions
of § 213-19B(2)(c).
(c) Factory outlets for the purpose of merchandising products that
are manufactured on the premises along with the sale of
accessory and related items, subject to the following conditions:
[Added 10-21-1985]
[1] Said outlets shall be located in a factory structure.
[2] Said outlets shall not exceed 20% of the gross floor area of
the primary buildings on the lot.
(d) Child-care provider — Class III, subject to the requirements of
§ 213-19B(2)(j). [Added 7-5-1988; amended 2-3-1992]
120. Editor's Note: Said schedule is includes at the end of this chapter.
§ 213-29 MERIDEN CODE § 213-30
1:612
(e) Repairer's garage, subject to the following requirements:
outdoor storage per § 213-47A and B; visibility per § 213-48F;
parking per § 213-55. [Added 3-5-1990; amended 6-5-2000]
C. Accessory uses.
(1) Uses customarily accessory to permitted uses if constructed
concurrently with or subsequent to the main building; accessory
uses that are for the convenience of employees and limited to use
by occupants and employees of the permitted use; and accessory
uses that are necessary to maintain and support the permitted use
and not operated as a commercial facility with service to the general
public.
(2) Storage.
(3) Signs, as regulated in § 213-56.
(4) Off-street parking in accordance with the requirements of § 213-55.
D. Lot and bulk requirements. Lot and bulk requirements are found in
§ 213-12, Schedule of Land Use, Lot and Bulk Regulations.
E. Performance standards. All uses in this district shall conform to the
performance standards set forth in § 213-54.
§ 213-31. M-3 Industrial District.
A. The purpose of this district shall be to provide opportunities for
industrial and related activities which meet the high performance
standards of the M-1 and M-2 Districts but which may be more intensive
than M-1 or M-2 and which may involve greater dependence upon trucks
and are potentially noisier or otherwise more objectionable as neighbors
to residential or institutional uses.
B. Permitted uses. No building or premises may be used, in whole or in
part, for any purpose except those listed below.
(1) Permitted uses by right:
(a) Manufacturing, production and fabrication.
(b) Offices.
(c) Warehouses and distribution facilities, including petroleum and
other highly flammable products, which shall require a special
exception permit in accordance with § 213-73 and the following
conditions:
[1] No such use is within 500 feet of a residence district or a
place of public assembly.
[2] The City of Meriden Fire Department shall approve all safety
measures.
(d) Research and development.
(e) Veterinarians.
(f) Newspaper printing and job printing.
(g) Industrial laundry for large bulk laundry and commercial/
industrial establishment's laundry. [Added 9-2-1986]
(h) Retail stores, banks, and service business, provided that not
more than 20% of the gross floor area of any building shall be
used for such purposes. [Added 4-6-1987]
(i) Recreation center. [Added 4-6-1987]
§ 213-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-31
1:613
(j) Child-care provider — Class I. [Added 7-5-1988; amended
2-3-1992]
(k) Child-care provider — Class II, subject to the requirements of
§ 213-16B(1)(d). [Added 2-3-1992]
(2) Uses permitted subject to issuance of a special exception permit by
the Zoning Board of Appeals in accordance with the requirements of
§ 213-73:
(a) Building materials and contractors' yards, feed and fuel storage,
lumberyards, junkyards, industrial and commercial equipment
sale, rental, service and storage, when conducted within a
building or surrounded by a solid fence or wall.
(b) Bituminous paving plants, manufacturing of bituminous
products, concrete batching plants, manufacturing or storage
of acid, lime, cement, explosives or fireworks, fertilizer, gas,
flammable fluids and storage of petroleum, oil or its products.
(c) Truck terminals, truck service facilities and repairer's garage,
subject to the requirements of § 213-30B(2)(e). [Amended
3-5-1990; 6-5-2000]
(d) Heliports, subject to the conditions of § 213-23B(2)(m).
(e) Mobile homes and mobile home parks, subject to the provisions
of § 213-19B(2)(c).
(f) Factory outlets for the purpose of merchandising products that
are manufactured on the premises along with the sale of
accessory and related items, subject to the following conditions:
[Added 10-21-1985]
[1] Said outlets shall be located in a factory structure.
[2] Said outlet shall not exceed 20% of the gross floor area of the
primary buildings on the lot.
(g) Child-care provider — Class III, subject to the requirements of
§ 213-19B(2)(j). [Added 7-5-1988; amended 2-3-1992]
(h) Indoor automotive sales and service. [Added 7-16-2018]
[1] All service, storage, or similar activities connected with
indoor automotive sales facilities shall be conducted entirely
indoors on the lot on which facilities are located. No outside
storage or dismantled vehicles shall be permitted.
[2] Temporary, same-day staging of a limited number of vehicles
for customer test drives may be approved as part of the
indoor automotive sales and service use. All vehicles must be
returned to indoor storage prior to the close of business the
same day.
C. Accessory uses.
(1) Uses customarily accessory to permitted uses if constructed
concurrently with or subsequent to the main building; accessory
uses that are for the convenience of employees and limited to use
by occupants and employees of the permitted use; and accessory
uses that are necessary to maintain and support the permitted use
and not operated as a commercial facility with service to the general
public.
(2) Storage.
§ 213-31 MERIDEN CODE § 213-31
1:614
(3) Signs, as regulated in § 213-56.
(4) Off-street parking, in accordance with the requirements of § 213-55.
D. Lot and bulk requirements. Lot and bulk requirements are found in
§ 213-12B.
E. Performance standards. All uses in this district shall conform to the
performance standards set forth in § 213-54.
§ 213-32. M-4 Planned Industrial District.
A. The purpose of this district shall be to allow for the creation of an
integrated industrial development in which buildings, structures and
facilities may be constructed and used for different and mixed uses,
to include use for industrial, institutional, public, municipal, office and
commercial. Any development and use of land in a Planned Industrial
M-4 District shall be in accordance with the standards set forth in this
section. The primary purpose of this district is to encourage well-planned
integrated developments of industrial and office use with supportive
commercial uses. It is further the intent that all of the land in each
such district shall be considered as a single unit of development for
the purposes of site planning and utilities so that the integrated nature
of the development will be promoted and maintained even though lots
in such district may be individually owned. Further, the mapping of
this district shall occur only upon approval of an overall plan for the
development of the site by the City Council, and said approved plan shall
serve as the detailed zoning for this site.
B. Permitted uses. No building or premises may be used, in whole or in
part, for any purpose except those listed below.
(1) Permitted uses by right:
(a) Manufacturing, production and fabrication.
(b) Offices, banks, institutional, public and municipal buildings,
including facilities to house data processing equipment.
(c) Warehouses and distribution facilities.
(d) Research and development facilities.
(e) Hotels, motels and convention centers.
(f) Shops and stores and service establishments, limited to the
following: apparel, bakery, barber, beauty, book, dry-cleaning,
confectionery, drug, florist, specialty food, gift, laundry, jewelry,
millinery, print and newspaper, tailor, ice cream and sandwich
shops and caterers, photographers and photo supplies,
restaurants, theaters, clinics, cocktail lounges, public and
private substations and transportation terminals, provided that
not more than 20% in the aggregate of the land area of any one
M-4 District shall be used for such purposes.
(g) Child-care provider — Class I. [Added 7-5-1988; amended
2-3-1992]
(h) Child-care provider — Class II, subject to the requirements of
§ 213-16B(1)(d). [Added 2-3-1992]
(2) Uses permitted subject to issuance of a special permit by the
Planning Commission.
§ 213-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-32
1:615
(a) Any use permitted in the Central Commercial C-1 District, not
mentioned in § 213-32B(1) above, provided that the City Council
also approves and that the Planning Commission shall find other
uses will not tend to depreciate the value of the property in
the neighborhood or be otherwise detrimental or aggravating to
the neighborhood or its residents or alter the neighborhood's
essential characteristics.
(b) Heliports, subject to the conditions of § 213-23B(2)(m).
(c) Child-care provider — Class III, subject to the requirements of
§ 213-19B(2)(j). [Added 7-5-1988; amended 2-3-1992]
C. Accessory uses.
(1) Cafeterias, restaurants and similar facilities, when for the
convenience of occupants and employees of the permitted use.
(2) Recreational facilities, both indoor and outdoor, such as recreation
buildings, swimming pools, golf courses and facilities for group
activities.
(3) Facilities for housing employees, visitors and others for training
purposes.
(4) Maintenance and machine shops, sources of energy, keeping of
animals for research purposes, antennas and other similar
equipment, garages for vehicles used in connection with the activity
of the permitted use on the lot and security fences.
(5) Drive-in facilities subordinate and related to a permitted use.
(6) Signs, as regulated in § 213-56.
(7) Off-street parking and loading, in accordance with the requirements
of § 213-55.
D. Lot and bulk requirements. Lot and bulk requirements are found in
§ 213-12B, except as follows:
(1) Not less than 20% of the gross land area shall be preserved in its
natural state and/or landscaped or suitably planted.
(2) Accessory structures, such as antennas, stacks, towers and other
similar uses may be erected to a reasonable and necessary height
but not greater than the lesser of 120 feet or the distance of such
structure from the property line.
(3) No required yard shall be used for any purpose other than:
(a) Parking for visitors in yards adjacent to existing and proposed
streets and roadways, provided that such parking shall not be
less than 30 feet from the street line or roadway boundary and
10 feet from any property lines.
(b) Driveways and walkways, solid walls and fences with necessary
gates, not more than four feet in height, and chain-link or other
open-type fencing for security purposes of a reasonable and
necessary height.
(c) Guard and watchman stations, having a reasonable height and
floor area.
(d) Signs, as provided herein.
(4) No building on a lot in a M-4 District which abuts an R-R, S-R, R-1,
R-2, R-3 or R-4 District or a residential lot may be closer than 50 feet
to the boundary of the residential district or lot, and no parking area
§ 213-32 MERIDEN CODE § 213-32
1:616
may be closer than 25 feet to such boundary, and at least 20 feet
of the required yard shall be landscaped, seeded and planted with
a suitable number of evergreen and/or deciduous trees and shrubs
and/or left in its natural state.
E. Performance standards. All uses in this district shall conform to the
performance standards set forth in § 213-54.
§ 213-33. Unified industrial district (UID).
A. Purpose. Per its Land Use Plan of Development, the City, confronted with
decreasing supply of suitable land for economic development, recognizes
the need to provide for carefully planned and unified industrial projects
which will maximize the use of this scarce resource. This section intends
to encourage:
(1) Flexibility and efficiency in land development for industrial
purposes.
(2) The more efficient use of public facilities required to support
industrial development.
B. Definition. A "unified industrial district" shall mean a parcel of land
owned, developed and maintained as an entity to be used for industrial
and related purposes.
C. Applicability. The provisions of this section can be applied to any parcel
of land which is in single ownership, four acres or more in size and not in
excess of nine acres. The entire parcel designated as a unified industrial
district shall be located in an industrial district.
D. Permitted uses. Uses permitted in a unified industrial district may
include all those uses permitted by right within the zoning district in
which it is located. Different industrial and related uses are allowed
in the same or separate buildings on a parcel designated as a unified
industrial district.
E. Requirements. The following shall be met for approval by the Planning
Commission:
(1) All density requirements, including lot area, lot coverage and
height requirements of the zoning district, must be met.
(2) The minimum setbacks required for the district shall apply to the
periphery of the district designated as a unified industrial district.
(3) A minimum distance of 30 feet must be maintained between all
buildings within the unified industrial district.
(4) No portion of the parcel designated as a unified industrial district
shall be of less width than required by the zoning district.
(5) The parcel must have the required width on a City-accepted street.
(6) The entire unified district must be serviced by public water and
sewer.
(7) Roads within the unified industrial district are to be private and
shall not be the maintenance responsibility of the City of Meriden.
Said interior roads are to be built to City standards unless such
standards are specifically waived by the Planning Commission.
(8) Meet all parking requirements of § 213-55, including but not
limited to the requirement that accessory parking shall be located
within 400 feet of the main use.
§ 213-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-33
1:617
(9) All performance standards of § 213-54 must be complied with.
(10) The proposed development shall be in harmony with the Plan of
Development.
(11) The application for designation as a unified industrial district shall
specify reasonable periods within which development of each
section of the UID may be started and shall be completed.
F. Application procedure. [Added 8-3-1987]
(1) The application for a unified industrial district will be a request for
such designation on the same application with the same site plan
requirements (§ 213-72) and done simultaneously with a certificate
of approval application. The Planning Commission shall review and
grant or deny this request for the designation of "unified industrial
district" as to the application's compatibility with the specific
regulations as stated in this section of the chapter. Upon the granting
of designation of "unified industrial district," said designation shall
be noted on the Zoning Map.
(2) The designation of a parcel as a UID is not the granting of a
certificate of approval for a specific building. The Commission must
act separately on the certificate of approval application.
(3) When subdividing a lot and/or lots from or within a parcel designated
as a UID, said lot and/or lots must meet all subdivision and zoning
regulations (of the underlying zoning district), including but not
limited to frontage on a City-accepted street, setback requirements,
etc. The remaining parcel which continues to be designated a UID
must meet all the UID regulations, including, but not limited to,
minimum setbacks around the periphery of the district, etc.
§ 213-33 MERIDEN CODE § 213-33
1:618
ARTICLE VII
Special Districts
§ 213-34. Planned residential development district (PRD).
A. Purpose.
(1) The City, being confronted with increasing urbanization and acknowledging that
the technology of land development and the demand for housing are undergoing
substantial and rapid changes, and recognizing the applicability of the objectives set
forth in this section, intends to encourage:
(a) Variety and flexibility in land development for residential purposes and uses
ancillary thereto that are necessary to meet those changes in technology and
demand and that will be consistent with the best interests of the entire City.
(b) The more efficient allocation and maintenance by private initiative of common
open space ancillary to new residential areas.
(c) The more efficient use of those public facilities required in connection with new
residential development.
(d) It is further the intent to encourage innovations in residential development so
that the growing demands for housing of different types at all economic levels
may be met by greater variety in type, design and siting of dwellings, and to
encourage the maximum reasonable conservation and the most efficient possible
use of large tracts of land. These purposes cannot be achieved through the use
of rigid and uniform traditional bulk and use zoning and subdivision regulations.
(2) Therefore, the planned residential development section is adopted pursuant to
Chapter 124 of the Connecticut State Statutes. [Amended 8-17-1987]
B. Planning Commission authority. The Planning Commission is hereby designated as the
agency to administer and enforce this section.
C. Statement of objectives.
(1) Planned residential development, including clustering of detached dwelling units,
may receive favorable consideration where the following conditions are present and
the following objectives are achieved:
(a) There is minimal adverse impact on adjacent properties.
(b) There is or can be sufficient capacity in sanitary sewer, water supply or other
utility systems over the life of the development.
(c) There is access to a major street or highway.
(d) Exceptional developed recreation facilities and other amenities are provided by
the developer.
(e) There is a diversity of dwelling-unit types.
(f) Creative design and careful land planning are accomplished.
(g) Appropriate screening and landscaping is provided.
(h) Water resources and natural features are protected and enhanced.
(i) Soil erosion and sedimentation that occur as a result of the development are
minimized during construction and completely stabilized after the development
is complete. [Added 2-3-1986]
(j) Other necessary facilities are provided for the convenience and welfare of the
residents.
(2) If any of the conditions noted in § 213-34C(1) are not present when a developer
submits an application for preliminary approval, the Planning Commission may
decide not to give further consideration to the application unless the developer
presents adequate evidence of his ability and willingness to correct any condition
§ 213-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-34
1:619
not meeting these objectives or the official action of a municipal or state agency
which will satisfy the condition within a time period acceptable to the Planning
Commission. Planned residential development is not to be used as a device by
developers to create apartment development in areas not presently zoned for
apartments. Unless all provisions of § 213-34C(1) and other provisions of this
chapter have been adhered to, the Planning Commission shall not approve any
application for planned residential development.
(3) This statement of objectives shall not be subject to variance or exception by any City
agency.
D. Applicability of planned residential development. The provisions of this section shall
apply only to a tract of land of five or more acres, which tract is under single ownership
and zoned for "multiple-family residential" uses only and for which an application for a
planned residential development is made as hereinafter provided. These zones include
R-2, R-3, R-4, C-1 and C-2. [Amended 8-17-1987]
E. Permitted uses. Uses permitted in a planned residential development may include and
shall be limited to:
(1) Dwelling units in detached, semidetached, attached or multistoried structures, or
any combination thereof.
(2) Nonresidential uses of a religious, cultural, recreational and commercial character
to the extent they are designed and intended to serve the residents of the planned
residential development.
F. Standards and criteria for planned residential developments.
(1) A plan must be consistent with:
(a) The purpose of planned residential development.
(b) The statement of objectives for planned residential development.
(c) The general standards established in this chapter.
(d) The specific rules and regulations for planned residential developments adopted from to time and placed on public record by the Planning Commission.
(2) A plan shall be consistent with the following general standards for use of land and the use, bulk, design and location of buildings, the density or intensity of uses, common open public facilities and development by geographic division of the area:
(a) The plan may provide for a variety of housing types, including single-family detached townhouses, garden apartments or high-rise elevator apartments, whether in individual condominium, cooperative, municipal or other type of ownership. High-rise apartments permitted only in a planned residential development located within an R-4, C-1, District.
(b) The total ground area occupied by buildings, structures and required parking area 20% of the total ground area of the planned residential development.
(c) The height of particular buildings shall not exceed 75 feet, except that the Planning may authorize construction of high-rise apartment buildings exceeding 75 feet, provided [1] They are located in the zones outlined in Subsection F(2)(a) above.
[2] The Planning Commission determines that adequate fire protection and water provided to serve each building.
[3] An additional setback of one foot for each five additional feet of building height [4] Sufficient developed recreation space is provided on the site.
(d) Structures may be further restricted by the Planning Commission to provide for adequate light and air, and to maintain the neighborhood character. Structures shall and located to be consistent with the reasonable enjoyment of neighboring property efficiency of public services. Buildings located at the perimeter of a planned residential § 213-34 MERIDEN CODE § 213-34
1:620
shall be set back a minimum of 1 1/2 feet of horizontal distance for each one foot height.
(e) The architectural style of the buildings shall be consistent with the best practices profession and shall not conflict with development of any area designated by a historical area. Adequate provisions shall be made for visual and acoustical dwelling units. Fencing, insulation within buildings, walks, barriers and landscaping to the greatest extent for the protection and aesthetic enhancement of property occupants.
(f) Nonresidential uses are permitted and shall be designed and intended for the use the planned residential development only, and the burden shall be on the owner areas will primarily serve persons residing in the planned residential development. allocated to commercial establishments shall not exceed 5% of the total residential area, and the total area of commercial establishments and their required parking collectively occupy more than 5% of the total ground area of the planned residential No building designed or intended to be used, in part or in whole, for retail shall be constructed prior to the completion of not less than 60% of the dwelling however, the Planning Commission, at its discretion, upon the completion of may permit commercial development. Convenience commercial uses may be development but shall be limited to the following shops and stores: apparel, beauty, cocktail lounge, drug, food, gift, hardware, ice cream or sandwich shop, or dry cleaning (pickup only), professional office, package store or restaurant. contain more than 2,000 square feet of sales area, except a food store, which shall than 5,000 square feet of sales area.
(g) Density. [Amended 8-17-1987].
[1] A plan may provide for a greater number of dwelling units per acre over permitted by this chapter but shall not exceed a maximum density as indicated At Least
(acres)
But Less Than
(acres) 5 10 10 20 20 30 30 No limit [2] In no case shall the density exceed 20 dwelling units per acre. The owner of showing that such excess will not have an undue adverse effect on public reasonable enjoyment of neighboring property. In determining the reasonableness dwelling units per acre, recognition shall be given that increased density by additional private amenities and by increased efficiency in public services [a] The amount, location, design and proposed use of common open space.
[b] The location, design and type of dwelling units.
[c] Provision or dedication of space or land for public facilities.
[d] Physical characteristics of the site.
(h) The amount, characteristics and location of common open space shall be declared function of the common open space and set forth in the application for development, and there shall be such provisions for ownership and maintenance open space so as to assure its continuity and conservation.
§ 213-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-34
1:621
(i) The plan shall contain such proposed covenants, easements and other provisions relating location and density of residential units, nonresidential uses and public facilities as are the welfare of the planned residential development and are consistent with the best neighborhood and the entire City. Said covenants, easements and other provisions enforced, removed or released only with the written approval of the Planning Commission.
(j) The Planning Commission may approve divisible geographic sections of the entire developed as a planned residential development and shall, in each case, specify reasonable within which development of each section must be commenced and may permit deviations from the number of dwelling units per acre established for the entire planned development, provided that such deviation shall be adjusted for in other sections of so that the number of dwelling units per acre authorized for the entire planned development is not affected. The Planning Commission may also establish completion section, based on data and a projected schedule of completion provided by the developer.
(k) Completion of development.
[1] The development shall be initiated within 12 months of final approvals. The development from the commencement date for each section thereof may be modified time by the Planning Commission upon the showing of good cause by the owner, case shall each extension of time exceed 12 months. The total development shall accordance with the following schedule.
Number of Acres Number of Years
5 to 200 10
201 to 300 15
301 and over 20
[2] The above shall be the maximum period of time for completion of a planned residential [3] The developer shall furnish such performance bond or bonds that may be Planning Commission to be reasonably required to assure performance in construction utilities, streets and other public facilities in accordance with the approved plan public interest in the event of abandonment of said plan before completion of the [4] The estimated costs of measures required to control soil erosion and sedimentation, in the approved plan, may be covered in a performance bond or other assurance Commission in accordance with the provisions specified above. [Added 2-3-1986]
(l) Restrictions shall not be placed on the rental, sale or lease of any property or dwelling such development or membership in any association of residents in such development of race, religion, creed or national origin.
(m) Parking areas shall be so designed and landscaped as to provide for minimal adverse total livability of the planned residential development. Parking spaces shall be in the required number of spaces for similar uses as noted in § 213-55 of this chapter. buildings is to be encouraged.
(n) Utilities shall be designed so that in all cases in a planned residential development installation of utilities, including electricity and telephone, in both public streets and property, is accomplished.
(o) A plan for soil erosion and sediment control shall be designed in accordance with Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control (1985), as amended. Soil erosion control plans shall result in a development that minimizes erosion and sedimentation construction, is stabilized and protected from erosion when completed and does not erosion and sedimentation. The appropriate method from Chapter 9 of the Connecticut for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control (1985), as amended, shall be used in determining § 213-34 MERIDEN CODE § 213-34
1:622
rates and volumes of runoff unless an alternative method is approved by the 2-3-1986]
(p) The pedestrian circulation system and its related walkways shall be so designed wherever possible, for separation between pedestrian and vehicular traffic, underpasses or overpasses, in the vicinities of schools, playgrounds, shopping or uses which generate a considerable amount of pedestrian traffic.
G. Application for tentative approval of planned residential development.
(1) Before exercising the powers of this section, the Planning Commission shall make
such written regulations regarding procedure and form of applications as it may
determine, provided that they are not inconsistent with this chapter.
(2) The application for tentative approval shall be executed by or on behalf of the owner
and filed in duplicate with the Planning Commission. A filing fee in accordance with
the City of Meriden Fee Schedule121 shall be submitted to the Planning Commission.
Said filing fee shall be in addition to the cost of any public hearing and advertising
and publication costs.
(3) The application for tentative approval shall include such items as the Planning
Commission, by its regulations, shall specify in order to disclose:
(a) The location and size of the area involved and the nature of the owner's interest
in the land proposed to be developed.
(b) The location, function, ownership and manner of maintenance of common open
space and recreation facilities.
(c) The density, approximate height, ground area covered by buildings, general
location and basic design and type of buildings and other structures, and
numbers of dwelling units and distribution of bedrooms.
(d) The proposals for the disposition of sanitary waste and stormwater.
(e) The proposals for supplying the development with fresh water.
(f) The substance of covenants, grants of easements or other restrictions to be
imposed upon the use of the land, buildings and structures, including proposed
easements for utilities.
(g) The provisions for parking of vehicles and the location and width of proposed
streets and public ways, and the relationship of proposed streets and other
public facilities to similar public facilities in proximity to the proposed planned
residential development.
(h) Evidence of financial ability to assure completion of the development as
proposed. Such evidence may take the form of price/earnings reports, letters
from financial institutions or other information that illustrates the long-term
financial capacity of the company.
(i) In the case of plans which call for development over a period of years, a schedule
showing the time within which applications for final approval of all parts of the
planned residential development are intended to be filed.
(j) The proposals for soil erosion and sediment control and stormwater facilities,
including but not limited to the existing and proposed topography, soil types,
wetlands, watercourses and water bodies, areas of clearing, the location of
and design details for all proposed erosion and sediment control measures and
stormwater management facilities, the sequence of grading and construction
activities, installation of erosion and sediment control measures and final
stabilization of the site. The plans shall conform to § 213-57 of this chapter.
[Added 2-3-1986]
§ 213-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-34
1:623
(4) Said application shall also be accompanied by a written statement by the owner
setting forth the reasons why, in his/her opinion, the planned residential
development would be in the public interest and would be consistent with the
standards and criteria of this chapter and with the regulations published by the
Planning Commission.
(5) Informal consultations between the owner and the Planning Department prior to
the filing of an application for tentative approval are to be encouraged; provided,
however, that no statement or representation by a member of the Department shall
be binding upon the Planning Commission.
H. Public hearing.
(1) Within 65 days after filing an application for tentative approval of a planned
residential development, the Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on
said application. Notice of said hearing shall be given in the manner required by
§ 213-79A and B. [Amended 8-17-1987]
(2) A transcript of the hearing shall be caused to be made by the Planning Commission,
copies of which shall be made available at cost to any party to the proceedings, and
all exhibits accepted in evidence shall be identified and duly preserved. The original
transcript shall be paid for by the applicant.
I. Action of Planning Commission after hearing.
(1) Prior to acting on the application, the Planning Commission shall solicit advice and
comment from the City Engineer, Board of Education, Fire and Police Departments
or any other public agency which has programs or activities which might be affected
by the development of a planned residential development.
(2) The Planning Commission shall, by resolution, within 65 days following the
conclusion of the public hearing, either:
(a) Grant tentative approval of the plan as submitted.
(b) Grant tentative approval subject to specified conditions not included in the plan
as submitted.
(c) Deny approval of the plan, stating in writing its reasons for said disapproval.
(3) Failure of the Planning Commission to act within said period shall be deemed to be
a grant of tentative approval of the plan as submitted.
(4) The resolution granting or denying tentative approval shall include conclusions and
findings of fact on all the following:
(a) In what respects the plan is or is not consistent with the statement of objectives.
(b) In what respects the plan is or is not in the public interest.
(c) The nature and extent of the common open space.
(d) The reliability of the proposals for maintenance and conservation of the
common open space.
(e) The adequacy of the amount and function of the open space in terms of the
densities and dwelling types proposed in the plan.
(f) The manner and adequacy of plans for public services, control over vehicular
traffic and furthering the amenities of light and air, recreation and visual
enjoyment.
(g) The relationship of the proposed development upon the neighborhood in which
it is proposed to be established.
(h) The sufficiency of terms and conditions proposed to protect the interests of the
public and the residents of the development.
121. Editor's Note: Said fee schedule is on file in the Clerk's office.
§ 213-34 MERIDEN CODE § 213-34
1:624
(i) The adequacy of plans for protecting natural resources.
(j) The adequacy of plans for flood control or stormwater retention and storage.
(k) The compatibility of the proposed land uses with existing or proposed land uses
on adjacent properties.
(l) The consistency of the plan with the Planning Commission's adopted
Comprehensive Plan of Development in effect at the time of application for
tentative approval.
(m) The adequacy of plans for temporary and permanent soil erosion and sediment
control. [Added 2-3-1986]
(5) If a protest against a proposed planned residential development is filed within 15
days following tentative approval by the Planning Commission, signed by the owners
of 20% or more of the area of the lots within 500 feet in all directions of the
property proposed for the planned residential development, the planned residential
development shall be referred to the City Council for tentative approval.
(6) Action by City Council.
(a) The City Council, sitting as the Zoning Commission, upon receipt of the petition
and tentative approval by the Planning Commission, shall refer said matter
to the appropriate Council committee, which shall hold a public hearing on
said application within 65 days of said receipt. Notice of said hearing shall be
given in the manner required by § 213-79A and B. All interested parties may
attend said public hearing and speak for or against said application and submit
appropriate evidence. The Council shall consider the proposal in light of the
purpose of this section of the chapter and the effects of such development on the
surrounding neighborhood and the total City. Within 65 days of public hearing,
the Council, sitting as the Zoning Commission, shall either grant tentative
approval as submitted or deny approval of the plan, stating its reasons for
said disapproval. Notice shall also be posted in the Meriden Public Library.
[Amended 8-17-1987]
(b) Failure of the City Council to act within said period shall be deemed to be a grant
of tentative approval as submitted.
(c) The City Council shall then transmit its decision to the owner and the Planning
Commission within 15 days of its action.
(7) If tentative approval is granted by the Planning Commission and, where there is protest by property owners, by the City Council, such approval shall be noted on the
Zoning Map maintained in the office of the Planning Commission.
J. Status of plan after tentative approval.
(1) Tentative approval of a plan shall not qualify a plan for recording in the land records.
(2) A plan which has been given tentative approval shall not be modified or revoked nor
otherwise impaired by action of any City agency or ordinance pending an application
for final approval, except by failure of the owner to file an application for final
approval within the specified time.
(3) If tentative approval is granted, subject to conditions, the owner shall, not later than
65 days after receiving a copy of such resolution, notify the Planning Commission
of his acceptance or refusal to accept all such conditions. If the owner refuses to
accept all such conditions, the application shall be deemed to have been denied. If
the owner does not notify the Planning Commission of his acceptance or refusal of
all such conditions within said period, tentative approval shall stand as granted.
K. Application for final approval.
§ 213-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-34
1:625
(1) An application for final approval may be filed for all the land included in a plan or
for a section thereof after approval of a tentative plan by the Planning Commission.
Said application shall be filed with the Planning Commission at least 15 days prior
to a regular Planning Commission meeting and within one year of tentative plan
approval. Failure to submit the plan within this time shall void previous approval
unless an extension of up to one year is granted by the Planning Commission.
The application shall be filed with such drawings, specifications, documents,
information, covenants and easements as the Planning Commission shall have
specified at the time of tentative approval. No such application shall be filed for
any plan which has not received tentative approval from the Planning Commission
or the City Council, sitting as the Zoning Commission, as may be appropriate. No
application shall be filed for any property for which the same or a similar application
for final approval has been denied by the Planning Commission. Any application filed
in contravention of this section shall be deemed to be denied, within the meaning of
§§ 8-3 and 8-7d of the Connecticut General Statues, and returned to the applicant.
The Commission may require the fulfillment of special conditions and the posting
of a performance bond to assure completion of each section of the development as
approved. The applicant shall file all required documents and submit a filing fee per
dwelling unit as indicated in the Land Use Fee Schedule. [Amended 8-17-1987;
8-2-1988; 12-1-2008122]
(2) Each section shall contain a proportionate amount of the required open space
and other public facilities, except that the Planning Commission may accept a
performance bond in lieu of such facilities for the first section. In accordance with
the schedule proposed in the application for tentative approval, the owner may elect
to have final approval of a geographic section or sections of the land included in the
plan and may delay application for the final approval of other sections.
(3) A public hearing shall not be required for a final plan submitted for final approval
which is in substantial compliance with the plan given tentative approval. Minor
changes in the locating, siting, height and design of buildings or structures may be
authorized by the Planning Commission.
(a) The plan shall be deemed to be in substantial compliance with the plan
previously approved, provided that no modification:
[1] Increases the gross residential density or intensity of use.
[2] Reduces the area set aside for common open space or recreation facilities or
provides for a substantial relocation of such area.
[3] Varies the floor area for nonresidential uses by more than 10%.
[4] Varies the total ground area covered by buildings by more than 5% or
involves a substantial change in the heights of buildings.
(b) Notwithstanding the above, however, a public hearing shall be required if the
Planning Commission at the time of tentative approval has set any condition
which is substantial in nature, either as set forth above or as determined
by the Planning Commission at the time of tentative approval. Additionally,
the Planning Commission may order that a public hearing be held for any
application for final approval as it, in its sole discretion, determines necessary
or desirable. [added 8-2-1988]
(4) The Planning Commission may require evidence of financial ability to assure
adequate project financing.
(5) (Reserved)123
§ 213-34 MERIDEN CODE § 213-34
1:626
(6) The burden shall be upon the owner to show the Planning Commission good cause
for any variation between the plan given tentative approval and the final plan.
L. Action of Planning Commission on final plan.
(1) Final approval.
(a) If a public hearing is not required and has not been determined necessary or
desirable, and the application for final approval has been filed together with
all materials as specified by the Planning Commission at the time of tentative
approval, the Planning Commission, within 65 days of such filings, shall either:
[Amended 8-2-1988]
[1] Grant final approval of the plan as submitted with whatever conditions it
deems necessary;
[2] Deny final approval; or
[3] Refuse to grant final approval if the plan as submitted contains variations
from the plan given tentative approval but remains in substantial compliance
with such plan; in which case the applicant, within 30 days from the date
of notification of such decision, may refile his application for final approval
without such variations. If the applicant does not so refile, the refusal of final
approval shall be deemed to be a denial. Failure of the applicant to comply
with conditions set at the time of tentative approval shall not be considered
to be variations within the meaning of this section.
(b) If the owner does not proceed with development within the time period of this
chapter, the plan shall be considered to have been abandoned, and the plan shall
be null and void, and the development of the property shall be in accordance
with the assigned zoning classification.
(2) Plans not in substantial compliance.
(a) If the plan submitted for final approval is not in substantial compliance with the
plan given tentative approval, the Planning Commission shall, within 65 days of
the date of the filing of the application for final approval, so notify the owner in
writing, setting forth the ways in which the plan is not in substantial compliance.
The owner may:
[1] Treat said notification as a denial of final approval.
[2] Refile his plan in a form which is in substantial compliance with the plan
given tentative approval.
[3] File a written request with the Planning Commission that it hold a public
hearing on his application for final approval.
(b) If the owner acts in accordance with Subsection L(2)(a)[2] or [3], he shall
take such action on or before the last day of the time authorized for filing the
application for final approval or 30 days from the date on which he receives
notice of said refusal, whichever is later.
(3) Any such public hearing shall be held within 30 days after the request is received by
the Planning Commission. Notice of such hearing and conduct of the hearing shall
be in accord with Subsection H.
(4) Within 65 days after the conclusion of such hearing, the Planning Commission shall
by resolution either grant or deny final approval of the plan.
M. Status of plan after final approval.
122. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
123. Editor's Note: Former Subsection K(5), regarding filing of documents and a filing fee, was
repealed 12-1-2008. See now Subsection K(1).
§ 213-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-34
1:627
(1) A certified copy of the approved final plan shall be filed in the land records and
the office of the City Clerk. Approval of the final plan shall constitute certification
that the soil erosion and sediment control plan complies with the applicable
requirements of this chapter. [Amended 2-3-1986]
(2) Upon the filing and recording of the approved final plan, the zoning and subdivision
regulations otherwise applicable to the land included in such plan shall cease to
apply thereto.
(3) If the owner fails to commence construction of the planned residential development
within one year after notification of final approval by the Planning Commission, said
approval shall be null and void, and no further development shall take place on the
property, except as otherwise authorized in this chapter.
(4) The Planning Commission shall review at least once every six months all building
permits issued for the planned residential development and make a comparison
of the overall development and its activity towards completion in relation to the
approved plan and scheduling of the planned residential development.
(5) The Planning Commission or its designated agency shall make periodic inspections
of the development activities to assure that temporary sediment and erosion control
measures are adequate and maintained until site stabilization is complete and that
permanent measures are properly installed. [Added 2-3-1986]
(6) If the Planning Commission shall find substantial variations of any terms, conditions
or restrictions upon which approval of the final plan was granted, the Planning
Commission may rescind and revoke such approval upon written notice to the owner.
(7) Penalties for violation of provisions of this section shall be enforceable under
§ 213-71 of this chapter.
N. Appeal. Any person aggrieved by the action of the Planning Commission in granting final
approval of a planned residential development may appeal said action within 15 days to
the Court of Common Pleas of New Haven County.
O. Precedence over inconsistent provisions of the Zoning Ordinance. This section shall
supersede all sections of this chapter where they may conflict.
P. Definitions. For the purposes of this section of the chapter, the following words shall
have the indicated meanings:
COMMON OPEN SPACE — A parcel or parcels of land, or an area of water, or a
combination of land and water, within the site designated for a planned residential
development and designed and intended for the use and enjoyment of residents of
the planned residential development. Said open space shall not include areas devoted
to residential or commercial buildings and structures or parking areas. Such open
space shall be for the exclusive use for recreation or leisure activities, with appropriate
complementary structures and improvements.
OWNER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of all the land proposed to be
included in the planned residential development and the holder of an option or contract
to purchase or other person having an enforceable interest in such land shall be deemed
to be the "owner."
PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT — An area of land controlled by an owner to
be developed as a single entity for a number of dwelling units, the plan for which does
not correspond in lot size, bulk, type of dwelling, density, lot coverage and required open
space to the regulations in the zoning district for which said development is proposed.
§ 213-34 MERIDEN CODE § 213-34
1:628
STATEMENT OF OBJECTIVES — A written statement of the goals of the City of Meriden
with respect to land use for residential purposes, density, direction of growth, location
and function of streets and other public facilities, common open space for recreation and
other factors which the Planning Commission may find relevant in determining whether
a planned residential development shall be permitted.
§ 213-35. Planned executive office development district (PEOD).
[Added 6-18-1984]
A. Purpose. The primary purpose of this district is to further the economic base of the City
by encouraging well-planned, integrated developments of executive offices, corporate
high-tech facilities and other supportive uses in an attractive, efficient, environmentally
sensitive campus setting. [Amended 5-7-1990]
B. Planning Commission authority. The Planning Commission is hereby designated as the
agency to administer and enforce this section and shall make such written regulations
regarding procedure and form of applications as it may determine.
C. Statement of objectives. A PEOD district shall be designed to meet the following
objectives: [Amended 2-3-1986; 5-7-1990]
(1) Application of creative design techniques to foster attractive, functionally efficient
and well-planned developments which will be aesthetically integrated with adjacent
areas so that there will be minimal adverse impact on the adjacent properties and
streets.
(2) Sufficient capacity in sanitary sewer, water supply and other utility systems will be
available over the life of the development.
(3) All water resources and natural land features shall be protected to the fullest extent
possible.
(4) Appropriate screening and landscaping is provided.
(5) Soil erosion and sedimentation that occur as a result of the development are
minimized during construction and completely stabilized after development complete.
D. Applicability of PEOD district. The PEOD district designation shall apply only to a tract
of land of 16 or more acres, which tract, at the time of application for such designation,
is zoned for residential use and is under single ownership. [Amended 5-7-1990]
E. Permitted uses:
(1) Executive offices, including facilities to house data processing equipment.
"Executive offices" are defined as establishments engaged in management and
general administrative functions, such as executive, personnel, finance and sales
activities, performed centrally for other establishments of the same company, which
services shall not be offered to the general public. Further, such offices shall be
suites of at least 5,000 square feet. Such a "suite" shall be defined as a room or
group of rooms functioning as a unit which are in the same leasehold or ownership
for conducting the administrative affairs of one business or corporate entity.
(2) State and federal governmental administrative offices (other than offices which
provide a significant amount of in-person service to the general public, e.g.,
department of motor vehicles, courthouse) engaged in the executive, legislative and/
or judicial functions. [Added 5-7-1990]
(3) High-tech research and development facilities. For purposes of this subsection
and all other provisions of § 213-35, the term "high-tech" shall mean the use of
sophisticated, state-of-the-art or highly specialized computer/electronic equipment
as an integral part of the research/development conducted or the service provided.
§ 213-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-35
1:629
No such research and development facility shall conduct activities which are
conducted at a northeastern manufacturing plant, or which involve abnormally high
risk of bodily injury or disease to employees or others situated in or around the
facility, or which create or discharge environmental pollutants or hazardous waste.
[Added 5-7-1990]
(4) High-tech medical research, development and testing laboratories which offer no
patient care or which offer patient care that is only incidental to their research
purposes and not significant in amount. No such medical research, development
or testing laboratory shall conduct activities which involve abnormally high risk of
bodily injury or disease to employees or others situated in or around the laboratory,
or which create or discharge environmental, pollutants or hazardous waste. [Added
5-7-1990]
(5) High-tech businesses that provide services through the use of sophisticated, stateof-
the-art equipment; provided, however, that such businesses do not provide a
significant amount of in-person services to the general public. Examples of such
businesses might include telecommunications, regional banking and/or credit card
processing centers, and computer graphics. These uses shall not include direct
sales; provided, however, sales performed centrally for other establishments of
the same business entity are permitted. No such high-tech business shall conduct
activities which involve abnormally high risk of bodily injury or disease to employees
or others situated in or around the facility, or which create or discharge
environmental pollutants or hazardous waste.
(6) Among other uses, the following uses are expressly prohibited uses: retail in-person
sales, warehousing, distribution, conventional manufacturing and outside storage.
In addition, the Planning Commission shall review each proposal (and subsequent
use) as to hours of operation and the impact thereof on adjacent properties. [Added
5-7-1990]
(7) A facility or a college or university accredited by the State of Connecticut, provided
that the gross leasable area of such facility shall not be greater than 25% of the total
gross leasable area within the PEOD district where the facility is located. [Added
8-21-2006]
F. Accessory uses. [Amended 5-7-1990]
(1) Accessory uses may be permitted, provided that they are incidental and subordinate
to the principal use of the land or building and located on the same lot with such
principal use, and provided that they are in accordance with all PEOD district
standards and criteria.
(2) Accessory uses within the PEOD district shall be limited to those uses that are
for the convenience of employees, e.g., coffee shop, newspaper, candy stand, or
child day-care centers for offspring of employees, and limited to use by occupants
and employees of the permitted use or to uses that are necessary to maintain and
support the permitted uses. Accessory uses shall not be operated as commercial
facilities nor provide services to the general public.
(3) Storage of the high-tech equipment and parts for permitted uses conducted on site.
(4) Any accessory use not approved by the Planning Commission, upon initial approval
of a PEOD district, must be approved by the Planning Commission as an amendment
to the approval at a regularly scheduled meeting. Such amendment shall only be
obtained in accordance with the procedures stated in Subsections H through O of
this section.
G. Standards and criteria for a PEOD district. [Amended 2-3-1986; 5-7-1990]
§ 213-35 MERIDEN CODE § 213-35
1:630
(1) A plan shall be consistent with the following standards for use of land; the use, type, and locations of buildings; the density or intensity of uses; and development by divisions of the area:
(a) Minimum area required for PEOD district designation shall be 16 acres.
(b) Minimum lot area within the PEOD district shall be eight acres.
(c) The plan shall provide a forty-foot landscaped buffer around the entire perimeter, portion of the perimeter on a site which abuts Interstate 91, Route 15 or Interstate drives, landscaping and utilities shall be permitted within this buffer area.
(d) The building setbacks for the underlying zone shall begin at the edge of the forty-that portion of the property which abuts Interstate 91, Route 15 or Interstate all buildings within the interior. No parking or structures shall be allowed within (e) Lot coverage for principal and accessory buildings and paved areas shall not exceed land area of each lot within the PEOD district.
(f) All buildings in the PEOD district shall be of similar architectural design, color, (g) Maximum height of buildings shall be three stories, not to exceed 40 feet, elevator stacks and other similar uses may be erected to a reasonable and necessary greater than 10 feet above any roofline. All roof structures shall be integrated design of the buildings so as to be concealed and inconspicuous.
(h) Structures may be further restricted by the Planning Commission to provide adequate light and air and to maintain the neighborhood character and shall be to be consistent with the reasonable enjoyment of neighboring property and the services as more specifically set forth herein.
(i) The plan shall contain such proposed covenants, easements and other provisions location, density and public facilities which are consistent with the best interests and the entire City, as more specifically set forth herein. Said covenants, provisions may be modified, enforced, removed or released only with the written Planning Commission.
(j) The Planning Commission may approve divisible geographic sections of the entire all lot and bulk requirements are in conformance with the PEOD district.
(k) The applicant shall provide a phasing plan stating the anticipated time frames of the entire PEOD district.
(l) Streets shall be built to City standards but shall not be accepted by the purposes.
(m) All PEOD districts shall be adequately served by water and sanitary facilities.
(n) All PEOD districts shall have a minimum of 400 feet of frontage on a City street.
(o) Outdoor lighting shall be directed or shielded so that the light source is not glare or direct light is cast on adjacent properties. Indirect light falling on adjacent of low intensity. Normally, no luminaries shall be more than 10 feet above ground (p) Signs.
[1] Only one freestanding sign pertaining to the use of the entire PEOD district, identifying the development, may be erected. Such sign shall not exceed nor a height of eight feet. Such sign shall be placed within the property boundaries district. Such sign may be illuminated but may not be animated, flashing or is illuminated shall be shielded so that no glare may be visible from the street.
[2] Only one freestanding sign pertaining to the business, for the purpose of of the business, may be erected on any lot in the PEOD district. Such signs respects to the requirements of the preceding Subsection G(2)(p)[1] of this [3] Directional signs may be maintained on any lot, provided that no such sign four square feet in area nor exceed a height of four feet.
§ 213-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-35
1:631
[4] On a site which abuts Interstate 91, Route 15 or Interstate 691, two additional permitted, per building, on the side of the building facing the public parking approval of the Planning Commission. Two additional signs, per building, may be side of the building adjacent to the highway, subject to the approval of the Planning and Department of Transportation. Said additional signs shall be wall signs and located on the roof of any building or on any exterior wall so as to project above exterior wall at the location of the sign. Each sign shall not exceed 40 square feet. horizontal and on the same reading plane. A sign may be illuminated if illumination to, or directed to, the surface of the sign, such as a halo-lit sign. Flashing, rotating illumination or neon illumination or other similar exposed illumination, including incandescent, LED or fluorescent bulbs, shall not be permitted. [Amended 8-23-(q) Soil erosion and sediment controls shall be developed using the principles outlined and 4 of the Connecticut Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control (1985), Soil erosion and sediment control plans shall result in a development that minimizes sedimentation during construction, is stabilized and protected from erosion when does not cause off-site erosion and/or sedimentation. The appropriate method from Connecticut Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control (1985), as amended, determining peak flow rates and volumes of runoff unless an alternative method is Commission.
(r) The development of each lot designated as a development lot in an application under shall be initiated (building permit secured) within 12 months of final approval. Upon showing of good cause, the Planning Commission may grant one extension development. Said extension of time shall not exceed 12 months.
[1] The development of a PEOD district, including all areas treated as subdivisions application for a PEOD district designation, shall be completed in accordance schedule (as measured from the date the first building permit with respect to such Number of Acres Number of Years
16 to 24 4
25 to 56 7
Over 56 10
[2] If construction is not completed in accordance with the above schedule, any within the area designated a PEOD district shall require another application per [3] The developer shall furnish such performance bond or bonds that may be determined Commission to be reasonably required to assure performance in construction streets and other public facilities in accordance with the approved plan and interest in the event of abandonment of said plan before completion of the The estimated cost of measures required to control soil erosion and sedimentation, the certified plan, may be covered in a performance bond or other assurance Commission.
(2) Utilities shall be designed so that in all cases in a PEOD district underground installation utilities, including electricity and telephone in both public streets and under private property, accomplished.
H. Application for tentative approval of a PEOD district. [Amended 2-3-1986; 5-7-1990]
(1) Before exercising the powers of this section, the Planning Commission shall make
such written regulations regarding procedure and form of applications as it may
determine, provided that they are not inconsistent with this section.
§ 213-35 MERIDEN CODE § 213-35
1:632
(2) The application for tentative approval shall be for the entire area of the proposed
PEOD district and shall be executed by or on behalf of the owner and filed in
duplicate with the Planning Commission. A filing fee in accordance with the City
of Meriden Fee Schedule124 shall be submitted to the Planning Commission. Said
filing fee shall be in addition to the cost of any public hearing and advertising and
publication costs.
(3) The application for tentative approval shall include such items as the Planning
Commission, by its regulations, shall specify in order to disclose:
(a) The location and size of the area involved and the nature of the owner's interest
in the land proposed to be designated a PEOD district.
(b) The location, function, ownership and manner of maintenance of common open
space and accessory facilities.
(c) The approximate density, location, height and style, and ground area covered by
buildings and other structures.
(d) The proposals for the disposition of sanitary waste and stormwater.
(e) The proposals for supplying the development with fresh water.
(f) The substance of covenants, grants of easements or other restrictions to be
imposed upon the use of land, buildings and structures, including proposed
easements for utilities.
(g) The provisions for parking of vehicles and the approximate location and width
of proposed streets and public ways and the relationship of proposed streets
and other public facilities to similar public facilities in proximity to the proposed
PEOD district.
(h) A traffic study which addresses the impacts of the proposed development on the
road network in the surrounding area and the character and general harmony of
the surrounding neighborhood.
(i) The proposals for soil erosion and sediment control, including but not limited
to the existing and proposed topography, soil types, wetlands, watercourses
and water bodies, areas of clearing, the location of and design details for all
proposed erosion and sediment control measures and stormwater management
facilities, the sequence of grading and construction activities, installation of
erosion and sediment control measures and final stabilization of the site. The
plans shall conform to § 213-57 of this chapter.
(j) Evidence of financial ability to assure completion of the development as
proposed. Such evidence may take the form of profit/earning reports, letters
from financial institutions or other information that illustrates the long-term
financial capacity of the company.
(k) In the case of plans that call for development over a period of years, a schedule
showing the time within which applications for final approval of all parts of the
planned executive office development are intended to be filed.
(4) Said application shall also be accompanied by a written statement by the owner
setting forth the reasons why, in his/her opinion, the PEOD district designation
would be in the public interest and would be consistent with the standards and
criteria of this section and with the standards and criteria of this section and with
the regulations published by the Planning Commission.
(5) Informal consultations between the owner and the Planning Department prior to
the filing of an application for tentative approval are to be encouraged; provided,
however, that no statement or representation by a member of the Department shall
be binding upon the Planning Commission.
§ 213-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-35
1:633
(6) Said application shall include a list of abutting property owners within 500 feet of
the perimeter of the proposed planned executive office development. All abutters
will be notified of the public hearing and their right of appeal to the City Council per
Subsection J(5).
(7) If any of the standards and criteria are not met at the time that the developer
submits an application for tentative approval, the Planning Commission shall not
give further consideration to the application unless:
(a) The developer presents adequate evidence of his ability and willingness to
correct any condition not meeting these standards; or
(b) The Planning Commission receives adequate documentary evidence of an official
action of a municipal or state agency which will satisfy the condition within a
time period acceptable to the Planning Commission.
I. Public hearing.
(1) Within 65 days after filing of an application for tentative approval of a planned
executive office development, the Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing,
and public notice shall be published at least twice at intervals of not less than two
days, the first notice being not less than 10 days nor more than 15 days and the last
notice being not less than two days before such hearing. A copy of the application
shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk at least 10 days prior to the scheduled
hearing date. All maps, reports and other documents required to be submitted with
the application shall be on file in the office of the City Planning Commission and open
to public inspection at least 10 days prior to the scheduled hearing date.
(2) A transcript of the hearing shall be made by the Planning Commission, copies of
which shall be made available at cost to any party to the proceedings, and all exhibits
accepted in evidence shall be identified and duly preserved. The original transcript
shall be paid for by the applicant.
J. Action of Planning Commission after hearing.
(1) Prior to acting on the application, the Planning Commission shall solicit advice and
comment from the City Engineer, Board of Education, Fire and Police Departments
and any other public agency which has programs or activities which might be
affected by the development of a planned executive office development.
(2) The Planning Commission shall, by resolution, within 65 days following the
conclusion of the public hearing, either:
(a) Grant tentative approval of the plan as submitted;
(b) Grant tentative approval subject to specified conditions not included in the plan
as submitted; or
(c) Deny the approval of the plan, stating in writing its reasons for said disapproval.
(3) Failure of the Planning Commission to act within said period shall be deemed to be
a grant of tentative approval of the plan as submitted.
(4) The resolution granting or denying tentative approval shall include conclusions and
findings of fact on the following:
(a) In what respect(s) the plan is or is not consistent with the statement of
objectives.
(b) In which respect(s) the plan is or is not in the public interest.
(c) The adequacy of plans for public services, control over vehicular traffic and
furthering the amenities of light and air, recreation and visual enjoyment.
124. Editor's Note: Said schedule is on file in the Clerk's office.
§ 213-35 MERIDEN CODE § 213-35
1:634
(d) The impact of the proposed development upon the neighborhood in which it proposed to be established.
(e) The sufficiency of terms and conditions proposed to protect the interests of the
public.
(f) The adequacy of plans for protecting natural resources.
(g) The adequacy of plans for flood control or stormwater retention and storage.
(h) The compatibility of the proposed land uses with existing or proposed land uses
on adjacent properties.
(i) The consistency of the plan with the Planning Commission's adopted
Comprehensive Plan of Development in effect at the time of application for
tentative approval.
(j) The adequacy of plans for temporary and permanent soil erosion and sediment
control. [Added 2-3-1986]
(5) If a protest against a proposed PEOD district is filed with the Council within 15 days
following tentative approval by the Planning Commission, signed by the owners of
20% or more of the area of the lots within 500 feet in all directions of the perimeter
of the property proposed for the PEOD district, the application and the Planning
Commission's tentative approval shall be referred to the City Council for tentative
approval. [Amended 5-7-1990]
(6) Action by City Council.
(a) The City Council, upon receipt of the petition and the Planning Commission's
tentative approval, shall consider tentative approval at its next regularly
scheduled meeting. The Council shall consider the proposal in light of the
purpose of this section of the chapter, the effects of development on the
surrounding neighborhood and the total City. Within 65 days of the meeting at
which the City Council receives the proposal, it shall either:
[1] Grant tentative approval as submitted; or
[2] Deny approval of the plan stating its reasons for said disapproval.
(b) Failure of the City Council to act within said period shall be deemed to be a grant
of tentative approval as submitted.
(c) The City Council shall then transmit its decision to the owner and the Planning
Commission within 15 days of its action.
(7) If tentative approval is granted by the Planning Commission and if there is not protest by property owners to the City Council, in accordance with Subsection J(5)
hereof, such approval shall be noted on the Zoning Map maintained in the office of
the Planning Commission. [Amended 5-7-1990]
K. Status of plan after tentative approval.
(1) Tentative approval of a plan shall not qualify a plan for recording in the land records.
(2) A plan which has been given tentative approval shall not be modified or revoked nor
otherwise impaired by action of any City agency or ordinance pending an application
for final approval, except by failure of the owner to file an application for final
approval within the specified time.
(3) If tentative approval is granted subject to conditions, the owner shall, not later than
65 days after receiving a copy of such resolution, notify the Planning Commission
of his acceptance or refusal to accept all such conditions. If the owner refuses to
accept all such conditions, the application shall be deemed to have been denied. the owner does not notify the Planning Commission of his acceptance or refusal of
all such conditions within said period, tentative approval shall stand as granted.
L. Application for final approval.
§ 213-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-35
1:635
(1) An application for final approval may be filed for all the land included in a plan or
for a section thereof after tentative approval of a plan by the Planning Commission.
Said application shall be filed with the Planning Commission at least 15 days prior
to a regular Planning Commission meeting and within one year of tentative plan
approval. Failure to submit the plan within this time shall void previous approval
unless an extension of up to one year is granted by the Planning Commission. The
application shall include such drawings, specifications, covenants and easements as
may be required by the Planning Commission.
(2) In accordance with the schedule proposed in the application for tentative approval,
the owner may request to have final approval of a geographic section or sections of
the land included in the plan and may request a delay in the application for the final
approval of other sections. The Planning Commission may grant such a request for a
delay, subject to specified conditions not in the submitted plan.
(3) A public hearing shall not be required for a plan submitted for final approval which
is in substantial compliance with the plan given tentative approval.
(a) The plan shall be deemed to be in substantial compliance with the plan
previously approved, provided that no modification:
[1] Significantly increases the gross density or intensity of use.
[2] Varies the total ground area covered by buildings by more than 5% or
involves a substantial change in the heights of buildings.
[3] Reduces the area of the required buffer zones.
(b) Minor changes in the siting, height and design of buildings or structures may be
authorized by the Planning Commission.
(4) The Planning Commission shall require evidence of financial ability to assure
adequate project financing.
(5) The applicant shall file all required documents and a filing fee of $50.
(6) The burden shall be upon the owner to show the Planning Commission good cause
for any variation between the plan given tentative approval and the final plan.
M. Action of Planning Commission on final plan.
(1) If a public hearing is not required for final approval and the application for final
approval has been filed, together with all drawings, specifications and other
documents in support thereof, the Planning Commission shall, within 65 days of such
filing, grant final approval of the plan as submitted; provided, however, that if the
plan as submitted contains variations from the plan given tentative approval but
remains in substantial compliance with the plan as submitted for tentative approval,
the Planning Commission may approve or refuse to grant final approval and shall,
within 35 days from the filing of the application for final approval, so advise the
owner in writing of said refusal, setting forth in said notice of refusal the reasons
why such variations are not in the public interest.
(a) In the event of such refusal, the owner may:
[1] Refile his application for final approval without such variations on or before
the last day of the time within which he was authorized by the resolution
granting tentative approval to file for final approval or within 35 days from
the date he received notice of said refusal, whichever is later; or
[2] Treat the refusal as a denial of final approval and so notify the Planning
Commission.
(b) If the owner does not proceed with development within the time period of this
section, the plan shall be considered to have been abandoned, and the plan shall
§ 213-35 MERIDEN CODE § 213-35
1:636
be null and void, and the development of the property shall be in accordance
with the assigned zone classification.
(2) If the plan submitted for final approval is not in substantial compliance with the
plan given tentative approval, the Planning Commission shall, within 65 days of the
date of the filing of the application for final approval, so notify the owner in writing,
setting forth the ways in which the plan is not in substantial compliance.
(a) The owner may:
[1] Treat said notification as a denial of final approval.
[2] Refile his plan in a form which is in substantial compliance with the plan
given tentative approval.
[3] File a written request with the Planning Commission that it hold a public
hearing on his application for final approval.
(b) If the owner acts in accordance with Subsection M(2) or (3), he shall take such
action on or before the last day of the time authorized for filing the application
for final approval of 35 days from the date on which he receives notice of said
refusal, whichever is later.
(3) Any such public hearing shall be held within 35 days after the request is received by
the Planning Commission. Notice of such hearing and conduct of the hearing shall
be in accord with Subsection H of this section.
(4) Within 65 days after the conclusion of such hearing, the Planning Commission shall,
by resolution, either grant or deny final approval of the plan.
(5) The Commission may require the fulfillment of special conditions and the posting
of a performance bond to assure completion of each section of the development as
approved.
N. City Council review when a plan is not in substantial compliance with the plan granted
tentative approval.
(1) This subsection shall only apply if final approval is granted after a hearing required
under Subsection M(2)(a)[3] and a protest against a proposed PEOD district is filed
with the Council within 15 days following final approval by the Planning Commission,
signed by the owners of 20% or more of the area of the lots within 500 feet in
all directions of the perimeter of the property proposed for the PEOD district.
[Amended 5-7-1990]
(2) The City Council, upon receipt of the petition and the Planning Commission's final
approval, shall consider final approval at its next regularly scheduled meeting. The
Council shall consider the proposal in light of the purpose of this section of the
chapter, the effects of development on the surrounding neighborhood and the total
City. Within 65 days of the meeting at which the City Council receives the proposal,
it shall either:
(a) Grant final approval as submitted; or
(b) Deny approval of the plan, stating its reasons for said disapproval.
(3) Failure of the City Council to act within said period shall be deemed to be a grant of
final approval as submitted.
(4) The City Council shall then transmit its decision to the owner and the Planning
Commission within 15 days of its action.
O. Status of plan after approval.
(1) A certified copy of the approved final plan shall be filed in the land records and the
office of the City Clerk. Approval of the final plan shall constitute certification that
the soil erosion and sediment control plan complies with the applicable requirements
of this chapter. [Amended 2-3-1986]
§ 213-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-35
1:637
(2) Upon the filing and recording of the approved final plan, the zoning and subdivision
regulations otherwise applicable to the land included in such plan shall cease to
apply thereto.
(3) If the owner fails to commence construction of the planned executive office
development within one year after notification of final approval by the Planning
Commission, said approval shall be null and void, and no further development shall
take place on the property, except as otherwise authorized in this section.
(4) The Planning Commission shall review, at least once every six months, all building
permits issued for the planned executive office development and make a comparison
of the overall development and its activity towards completion in relation to the
approved plan and scheduling of the planned executive office development.
(5) The Planning Commission or its designated agent shall make periodic inspections
of the development activities to assure that temporary sediment and erosion control
measures are adequate and maintained until site stabilization is complete and that
permanent measures are properly installed. [Added 2-3-1986]
(6) If the Planning Commission shall find substantial variations of any terms, conditions
or restrictions upon which approval of the final plan was granted, the Planning
Commission may rescind and revoke such approval upon written notice to the owner,
at which time a new application per Subsection H would be required.
(7) Penalties for violation of provisions of this section shall be enforceable under
§ 213-71 of this chapter.
(8) No improvements shall be constructed and no use shall be conducted in a PEOD
district at any time (whether before or after final completion of the total
development of the district) unless: [Added 5-7-1990]
(a) Such improvement, or the specific nature of such use, was approved in the
approved final plan, or
(b) Application for such improvement or use is subsequently made and approved in
the same manner and subject to the same criteria, to the extent applicable, as
pertain to initial applications for tentative and final approval hereunder.
P. Appeals. Any person aggrieved by the action of the Planning Commission in granting
final approval of a planned executive office development may appeal said action within
15 days to the Superior Court for the Judicial District of New Haven.
Q. Precedence over inconsistent provisions of the Zoning Ordinance. This section shall
supersede all sections of this chapter of the City of Meriden where they may conflict.
R. Definitions. For the purposes of this section of the chapter, the following words shall
have the indicated meanings:
OWNER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of all the land proposed to be
included in the planned executive office development and the holder of an option or
contract to purchase or other person having an enforceable interest in such land shall
be deemed to be the "owner."
PLANNED EXECUTIVE OFFICE DEVELOPMENT (PEOD) DISTRICT — An area of land
not less than 16 acres in area, to be developed as a campus-like setting with executive
office buildings, selected corporate high-tech uses and accessory uses as defined herein.
This development will be designed using creative landscaping and site design methods
to eliminate any adverse impact on surrounding areas.[Amended 5-7-1990]
STATEMENT OF OBJECTIVES — A written statement of the goals of the City of Meriden
with respect to land use for office purposes, location and function of streets and
other public facilities, design and land planning principles and other factors which the
§ 213-35 MERIDEN CODE § 213-35
1:638
Planning Commission may find relevant in determining whether a PEOD district shall be
permitted.[Amended 5-7-1990]
S. Off-site improvements. [Added 5-7-1990]
(1) Approval prerequisites. Prior to receiving a building permit for any PEOD district
proposal, the developer shall pay his pro rata share of the cost of providing any
reasonable and necessary street improvement and water, sewerage and drainage
facilities, and easements therefor, located outside the property limits of the
development. All payments shall be in the manner provided herein, it being the
intent of this section that the developer bear that portion of the cost which related to improvements that benefit the development as determined by the Planning
Commission.
(2) Determination of nature of improvement.
(a) Consistent with the provisions of this section, the Planning Commission, with
the approval of the City Council and with the assistance of appropriate City
departments, shall, prior to the imposition of any conditions on an applicant for
a development, determine whether the off-site improvement is to be constructed
by the City as a general improvement or whether such improvement is to be
constructed by the developer in accordance with Subsection S(1) above.
(b) Once the foregoing determination has been made, the Planning Commission
shall estimate, with the aid of the City Engineer and such other persons having
pertinent information or expertise:
[1] The cost of the improvement; and
[2] The portion of the total cost of the improvement that is attributable to the
development under the provisions of Subsection S(1).
(c) If the improvement is to be constructed by the applicant, a bond or cash deposit
in an amount equal to the estimated cost of the improvement may be required as
a condition of approval.
(d) In the event that the developer shall not be required to install off-site
improvements by virtue of the provisions of this section, then he shall pay to
the City his share of the finally determined cost of the off-site improvement. All
moneys received by the City in accordance with the provisions of this section
shall be deposited in an interest-bearing account, and such funds shall be used
only for the improvements for which they are deposited or improvements serving
the same purpose. If the improvements are not initiated for a period of 15
years from the date of payment, or other mutually agreeable period of time, all
deposited funds shall be returned to the developer, together with accumulated
interest.
§ 213-36. Regional development district (RDD). [Added 10-21-1985]
A. Purpose. The stated purpose of such a district is to further the economic base of the
City by providing for development of a regional scale along the interstate highway
system in an attractive, efficient, environmentally sensitive campus setting.
B. Statement of objectives. All development in a regional development district shall be
designed to meet the following primary objectives:
(1) Provision of adequate facilities for sanitary sewerage, water supply, stormwater
drainage and other utilities for the life of each development.
(2) Application of creative design techniques to foster attractive, functionally
efficient and well-planned developments which will be aesthetically integrated
with adjacent areas.
§ 213-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-36
1:639
(3) Provision of appropriate landscaping, screening and buffers.
(4) Provision of all appropriate off-site roadway and utility improvements
necessitated by each development.
C. Uses.
(1) Permitted uses. No building or premises may be used, in whole or in part, for any
purpose except those listed below.
(a) Permitted uses by right:
[1] Conference center hotel.
[2] Executive offices, as defined in § 213-35 of this chapter.
[3] Research and development.
[4] Medical centers.
[5] A college or university accredited by the State of Connecticut.
[6] Distribution facility combined with the permitted uses in Subsection
C(1)(a)[2] and [3].
(b) Uses permitted subject to issuance of a special exception permit by the
Zoning Board of Appeals in accordance with the requirements of § 213-73:
[1] Heliports, subject to the conditions of § 213-23B(2)(m).
[2] Coliseums, arenas or stadiums shall be permitted only where direct
access to Interstate Route I-691 or I-91 will be provided.
(2) Accessory uses.
(a) Uses incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the land or building
and located in the same lot with such principal use, provided that they are in
accordance with all other regional development district standards. Accessory
uses within the regional development shall be limited to those uses that
are for the convenience of employees and limited to use by occupants and
employees of the principal permitted use or to uses that are necessary to
maintain and support the principal use. Accessory uses shall not be operated
as commercial facilities nor provide services to the general public. Any
accessory use not approved by the Planning Commission, upon approval
of a site plan in a regional development district, must be approved by
the Planning Commission as an amendment to the approval at a regularly
scheduled meeting.
(b) Light assembly and storage may be permitted as an accessory use.
(c) Corporate training facility may be permitted as an accessory use to an
executive/office development or a research and development facility.
(d) A restaurant may be permitted as an accessory use to a hotel/motel. Such
restaurant may be open to the general public, provided that the hotel/motel
use is in operation.
(e) Signs, as regulated herein and in § 213-56.
(f) Off-street parking in accordance with the requirements of § 213-55.
(g) High-tech processing of goods and materials as an accessory use, provided
that:
[1] The proposed processing methods and operations will comply with the
following definition of "high tech:" The complex, automated processing
or the conversion of goods utilizing computer and/or electronically driven
sophisticated, highly specialized equipment.
[2] No more than 30% of the building area on a lot shall be so used and shall
be located in the same building as one of the permitted uses.
§ 213-36 MERIDEN CODE § 213-36
1:640
[3] The following performance standards shall be met at all times by this
accessory use:
[a] Noise. Noise from the processing operation shall not be discernible
at any point where the regional development district zone abuts a
residential zone or use.
[b] Vibration. No vibration shall be transmitted and, therefore, felt
outside the lot from which it originates.
[c] Emissions. Emissions of dust, fumes, smoke, vapor, gas, and odorous
substance into the outdoor atmosphere shall be made only in
compliance with the standards of all applicable federal, state and
local laws and regulations. Outside air stacks for control of heat and
exhaust in compliance with § 213-36D(6)(a) shall be permitted on the
building in which the accessory use is located in compliance with the
above federal, state and local laws.
[d] Hazardous materials. The use, storage and disposal of hazardous
and/or dangerous materials (as defined in federal and state law and
local ordinances and regulations) shall be in accordance with the
regulations of the United States Environmental Protection Agency
and Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection and
applicable local and state fire regulations.
[e] Odor. There shall not be a discernible odor to any objectionable
degree from the processing operations at the point where the
regional development district abuts a residential zone or use. Any
odor will be deemed "objectionable" when either:125
[i] The Zoning Enforcement Officer determines, following personal
observation, that the odor is objectionable, taking into account its
nature, concentration, location and duration; or
[ii] The Department of Environmental Protection Air Compliance
Unit determines such according to guidelines and standards
provided by the General Statutes of Connecticut.
[f] Glare and heat. The processing use shall be conducted so that direct
or indirect illumination from a source of light in the process shall not
cause illumination in excess of 0.50 footcandle at the point where
the regional development district abuts a residential zone or use.
Any form of heat shall not be perceptible outside of the lot where it
originates.126
(3) There shall be no outside storage of materials.
(4) The location of the portion of the building devoted to the processing use shall be
set back 180 feet from the perimeter of the RDD zone where it abuts a residential
zone or use.
D. Development standards. Any plan submitted for approval of a development in the
regional development district shall be consistent with the following standards for the
use of land; type, bulk design and locations of buildings; and the density or intensity
of land uses:
(1) Minimum lot area shall be eight acres.
125. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
126. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 213-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-36
1:641
(2) There shall be a minimum building setback of 60 feet for all yards. For the front yard and
all yards abutting residential uses or residential zones, a sixty-foot setback area shall be
landscaped so as to provide adequate visual buffering. Such landscaping shall be along
the perimeter of a regional development. Where a regional development abuts Route I-91
or I-691, the building setback shall be 25 feet from the highway property line and no
visual buffering shall be required unless storage or loading areas face either highway.
Screening of loading and storage areas shall consist of coniferous plantings, which shall
be installed at the edges of such loading and storage areas. The remainder of the sixtyfoot
setback shall be attractively landscaped with shrubs, shade trees and grass.
(3) No parking shall be permitted in any sixty-foot setback area in a front yard or any
other yard which abuts a residential use or residential zone. Only access drives, natural
features, landscaping, directional and identification signs and utilities shall be permitted
within the sixty-foot setback area. In no instance shall parking be permitted within 15
feet of a line.
(4) Total lot coverage for principal and accessory buildings and paved areas shall not exceed
50%.
(5) All buildings on an individual lot shall be integrated in terms of architecture, color,
texture and scale.
(6) Maximum height of buildings.
(a) Maximum height of buildings, except coliseums, shall be three stories, not to exceed
40 feet, except that antennas, elevator stacks and other similar structures may be
erected to a reasonable and necessary height but not greater than 10 feet above any
roofline. All roof-mounted structures shall be integrated into the architectural design
of the building(s) so as to be concealed and inconspicuous.
(b) Coliseums may be constructed to a height not to exceed 120 feet, including roofmounted
structures. For each foot in height that a coliseum exceed 50 feet, an
additional 2 1/2 feet shall be added to the sixty-foot setback requirement.
(7) Structures may be further restricted by the Planning Commission to provide for public
safety and adequate light and air and to maintain the neighborhood character and shall
be designed and located to be consistent with the reasonable enjoyment of neighboring
property and the efficiency of public services as more specifically set forth herein.
(8) All regional developments shall be adequately served by all necessary utilities, including
water, sanitary facilities and storm drainage.
(9) All regional developments shall have a minimum of 200 feet of frontage on a City street.
(10) Outdoor lighting shall be directed or shielded so that the light source is not readily
visible and no glare and direct light is cast on adjacent properties. Indirect light falling
on adjacent property shall be of low intensity. No luminaries shall be higher than 20 feet
above ground level.
(11) Wherever practicable, the regional development shall be planned to accommodate
existing natural features, including topography.
(12) Off-street parking facilities shall be laid out in conformance to the requirements of
§ 213-55E(1), (2), (3) and (4).
(13) All utilities, including electricity and telephone, in both public streets and under private
property, shall be underground.
(14) The development shall be initiated (building permit secured) within 12 months of the
approval date. Upon the applicant's showing of good cause, the Planning Commission
may grant one extension to initiate development. Said extension of time shall not exceed
12 months.
(a) The total development shall be completed in accordance with the following schedule:
§ 213-36 MERIDEN CODE § 213-36
1:642
Number of Acres Number of Years
8 to 24 4
24 to 64 6
64 and over 10
(b) The above shall be the maximum period of time for completion of a regional development
site plan from the initiation of development.
(c) If construction is begun and is not completed in accordance with the above schedule, further development requires another application per the regulations then in effect.
(d) The developer shall furnish such performance bond or bonds that may be determined
by the Planning Commission to assure performance in the construction of public and other facilities in accordance with the approved plan and to protect interest in the event of abandonment of said plan.
(15) Signs.
(a) Only one freestanding sign, pertaining to the principal use of a regional
development, for the purpose of identifying the development, may be erected. sign shall not exceed 40 square feet in area nor eight feet in height. Such sign be placed within the property boundaries of the regional development. Such may be illuminated but may not be animated, flashing or rotating. A sign which illuminated shall be shielded so that no glare may be visible from the street.
(b) Only one wall sign pertaining to each accessory business use within a regional
development, for the purpose of identifying the name of each business, may erected on any lot in the regional development district. Such signs are subject respects to the requirements of building signs contained in § 213-56 of this chapter,
as well as the requirements of the preceding subsection of this chapter.
(c) Directional signs may be maintained on any lot, provided that no such sign shall larger than four square feet in area nor exceed a height of four feet.
(d) On a site which abuts Route I-91 or I-691, one additional sign may be permitted,
subject to the approval of the Planning Commission. Such additional sign may either wall or freestanding, but not a roof sign, and shall not exceed 40 square E. Standards for review.
(1) For any development within a regional development district a site plan must
be reviewed and a certificate of approval must be issued by the Planning
Commission in accordance with the requirements and procedures of Article XI,
§ 213-72, of this chapter prior to the issuance of a building permit.
(2) In order to aid the Planning Commission's review of a regional development
proposal, the Commission shall require that the developer submit for review
the following information and studies in addition to information required for a
certificate of approval application (§ 213-72J):
(a) A traffic study which identifies the probable impacts of a proposed
development on the road network in the surrounding area and the measures
necessary to mitigate the negative traffic impacts, if any.
(b) An economic feasibility report which provides sufficient evidence that the
developer has the financial means and experience necessary to successfully
carry out the project and identifies the fiscal impact of the project on the City.
(c) The site plan shall include all buildings, utilities, grading and structures, both
for principal and accessory uses.
§ 213-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-36
1:643
(d) An environmental impact report. Such report shall generally include the
following items as appropriate for a particular site:
[1] An inventory of existing environmental conditions at the project site and
the surrounding area, which shall describe air quality, water quality,
water supply, soils, topography, vegetation, wildlife, archaeology, geology
and land use.
[2] A listing of all licenses, permits or other approvals required by law other
than those to be obtained from the Planning Commission and the status
of each.
[3] An assessment of the probable impact of the project upon all topics
described in Subsection E(2)(d)[1] above.
[4] A listing of adverse environmental impacts which cannot be avoided and
steps to be taken to minimize adverse environmental impacts during
construction and operation, both at the project site and in the
surrounding area.
(e) A written statement must be provided by the applicant addressing the
following:
[1] The reasons the particular proposal is consistent with the statement of
objectives.
[2] A detailed description of all uses and how each accessory use relates
to the primary use. This statement shall include area calculations,
employment projections, time of operation, storage and equipment area
and special needs.
(f) In the case of plans that call for development over a period of years, a
schedule showing the time within which the phase will be completed.
(g) The applicant shall file all required documents, and submit a filing fee as
indicated in the Land Use Fee Schedule. [Amended 12-1-2008]
(h) Within 65 days of the meeting at which the application for site plan approval
is presented, the Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing, and public
notice shall be published at least twice at intervals of not less than two days,
the first notice being not less than 10 days nor more than 15 days before
such hearing. The Planning Commission shall reject or issue the certificate of
approval within 65 days of the closing of the public hearing. Failure of action
within this time frame shall be deemed approval by the Commission.
F. Off-site improvements.
(1) Approval prerequisites. Prior to the receiving of a building permit for any
regional development proposal, the developer shall pay his pro rata share of the
cost of providing any reasonable and necessary street improvements and water,
sewerage and drainage facilities, and easements therefor located outside the
property limits of the development. All payments shall be in the manner provided
herein, it being the intent of this section that the developer bear that portion
of the cost which is related to improvements required for the development and/
or improvements that benefit the development, as determined by the Planning
Commission.
(2) Determination of nature of improvement.
(a) Consistent with the provisions of this section, the City Council, with the
assistance of the Planning Commission and appropriate City departments,
shall, prior to the imposition of any conditions on an applicant for a
development, determine whether the off-site improvement is to be
§ 213-36 MERIDEN CODE § 213-36
1:644
constructed by the City as a general improvement or whether such
improvement is to be constructed by the developer in accordance with
Subsection F(1) above.
(b) Once the foregoing determination has been made, the Planning Commission
shall estimate, with the aid of the City Engineer and such other persons
having pertinent information or expertise:
[1] The cost of the improvement; and
[2] The portion of the total cost of the improvement that is attributable to the
development under the provisions of Subsection F(1).
(c) If the improvement is to be constructed by the applicant, a bond or cash
deposit in an amount equal to the estimated cost of the improvement may be
required as a condition of approval.
(d) In the event that the developer shall not be required to install off-site
improvements by virtue of the provisions of this section, then he shall pay to
the City his share of the finally determined cost of the off-site improvement.
All moneys received by the City in accordance with the provisions of this
section shall be deposited in an interest-bearing account, and such funds
shall be used only for the improvements for which they are deposited or
improvements serving the same purpose. If the improvements are not
initiated for a period of 15 years from the date of payment, or other mutually
agreeable period of time, all deposited funds shall be returned to the
developer, together with accumulated interest.
G. Precedence over inconsistent provisions of the Zoning Ordinance. Section 213-36
shall supersede all sections of this chapter of the City of Meriden where they may
conflict.
§ 213-37. Active adult cluster developments (AACD). [Amended
9-6-2005]
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to encourage developments that provide
alternative housing choices for people of 55 years or older. The active adult cluster
development is a method of development which permits variation in lot sizes for
detached single-family dwellings in R-R, S-R and R-1 Zones without an increase in the
density except to the limited extent provided herein with regard to historic structure.
Furthermore, development shall consider the protection of surrounding properties and
shall provide for open space and preservation of natural and historic features to provide
for a shorter network of streets and utilities and more efficient use of infrastructure, i.e.,
streets and utilities.
B. Planning Commission authority. The Planning Commission is hereby designated as the
agency to administer and enforce this section.
C. Statement of objectives.
(1) Active adult cluster development may receive favorable consideration where the
following conditions are present and the following objectives are achieved:
(a) There is no adverse impact on adjacent properties;
(b) There is sufficient capacity in sanitary sewer water supply or other utility
systems over the life of the development;
(c) Passive and active recreation facilities and other amenities are provided by the
developer;
(d) Creative design and careful land planning are accomplished;
(e) Appropriate screening and landscaping is provided;
§ 213-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-37
1:645
(f) Water resources and natural and historical features are protected and enhanced;
(g) Soil erosion and sedimentation that occurs as a result of development are
minimized during construction and completely stabilized upon completion of
development; and
(h) Other necessary facilities are provided for the convenience and welfare of the
residents.
(2) If any of the conditions noted in Subsection C(1) are not present when a developer
submits an application for approval, the Planning Commission may decide not to
give further consideration to the application unless the developer presents adequate
evidence of his ability and willingness to correct any condition not meeting these
objectives or of the official action of the municipal or state agency which will satisfy
the condition within a time period acceptable to the Planning Commission.
(3) This statement of objectives shall not be subject to variance or exception by any City
agency.
(4) Homeowners'/unit owners' association.
(a) Prior to the sale of any dwelling units, a homeowners' association or, where
ownership of the active adult cluster development is to be in the form of a
condominium or other common-interest community, the unit owners' association
shall be established (collectively, the "association"). Membership in such
association shall be mandatory for all owners of dwelling units in the active adult
cluster development.
(b) The association shall be responsible for management, operation and
maintenance of all common open space, recreational, cultural and other
common areas that are not dedicated to public use or separately owned by
owners of dwelling units.
(c) A declaration shall be recorded in the Meriden land records to implement
the occupancy restrictions required herein. Such declaration shall specifically
provide that the City of Meriden shall be entitled to exercise all enforcement
rights that are provided to the association with respect to occupancy
restrictions. Such enforcement rights are in addition to any and all rights of
the City of Meriden to enforce the conditions of the approval of the planned
active adult cluster development. Such provisions of the declaration relating
to occupancy restrictions and enforcement by the City of Meriden may not be
modified or terminated without the approval of the Planning Commission.
(d) The declaration and association bylaws shall be approved by the Planning
Commission prior to recording of same in the City of Meriden land records.
D. Applicability of active adult cluster development. The provisions of this section shall
apply only to a tract of land of seven or more acres, which tract is under single
ownership and zoned for R-R, S-R or R-1.
E. Permitted uses. Uses permitted in an active adult cluster development may include and
shall be limited to:
(1) Single-family detached dwelling units with a maximum of three bedrooms or, in the
alternative, two bedrooms plus one utility (guest, study, etc.) room.
(2) Accessory uses such as parking lots, garages, recreational and cultural, to the extent
they are designed and intended to serve the permitted occupants of the active
adult cluster development and are consistent with and appropriate to the needs and
interest of those occupants.
F. Standards and criteria for active adult cluster development.
(1) A plan must be consistent with:
§ 213-37 MERIDEN CODE § 213-37
1:646
(a) The purpose of active adult cluster development;
(b) The statement of objectives for active adult cluster development;
(c) The general standards established in this chapter; and
(d) The specific rules and regulations for active adult cluster developments adopted to time and placed on public record by the Planning Commission.
(2) Occupancy restrictions. Occupancy within active adult cluster development shall as follows.
(a) Each of the occupied dwelling units shall be occupied only by:
[1] A person who is 55 years of age or older (an "age-qualified person");
[2] A spouse, companion or relative of a age-qualified person residing in the with the age-qualified person;
[3] The spouse, relative or companion of a deceased age-qualified person who resided in the dwelling unit or who has entered into a long-term care facility, that if any surviving spouse, relative or companion of a deceased age-qualified shall remarry or cohabit then the occupancy requirements of Subsection F(or [2] above must be met; or
[4] A personal care attendant who is in service to a permitted occupant to attend occupant's medical and/or health needs, provided that: the personal care attendant years of age or older, registered with the Director of Planning's office, and any form of rent; the occupant in question has a note from his/her doctor the condition of the occupant is such that a personal care attendant is warranted; occupant in need of a personal care attendant is not in occupancy of the dwelling a period in excess of one month, unless extended by the Commission, the personal attendant shall not live in the dwelling unit; and provided further that, in least 90% of the dwelling units shall be occupied by at least one age-qualified (b) No unit may be occupied by a resident who is younger than 18 years of age.
(c) No unit may be occupied by more than three residents.
(d) An owner of a dwelling unit may rent or lease his dwelling unit for a term(s) than one year, provided that each occupant complies with the occupancy restrictions section.
(e) Purchase or acquisition of a dwelling unit for investment purposes, that is by who does not intend to occupy the dwelling unit as his residence, or by a trust or where the owner(s) or beneficiary(ies) thereof do not occupy the dwelling unit their residence, shall be prohibited, except for ownership (either directly or indirectly) particular unit by an individual who is a family member of an occupant of the who meets the occupancy requirements of this section.
(f) Each year in the month of September, the association established pursuant to C(4) shall deliver to the Commission and the Zoning Enforcement Officer a written certifying, based on reasonable inquiry and documentation obtained from the units, compliance with the foregoing occupancy restrictions and expressly number of units in which at least one occupant is 55 years of age or older.
(3) A plan shall be consistent with the following general standards for use of land, the use design and location of buildings, the density or intensity of uses, common open facilities and development by geographic division of the area:
(a) The plan may provide for single-family detached structures whether in individual condominium, cooperative, municipal or other type of ownership.
(b) The total ground area occupied by buildings, structures and paved area (drives, not exceed 20% of the total ground area of the active adult cluster development.
§ 213-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-37
1:647
(c) Height of particular buildings shall not exceed 30 feet. Structures may be further the Planning Commission to provide for public safety, adequate light and air the neighborhood character. Structures shall be designed and located to be consistent reasonable enjoyment of neighboring property and the efficiency of public services.
(d) Architectural style of the buildings shall be consistent with the best practices of profession and shall not conflict with development of any area designated by Commission as a historical area or amenity. Adequate provisions shall be made acoustical privacy of individual dwelling units. Insulation within buildings, walks, landscaping shall be utilized to the greatest extent for the protection and aesthetic property and the privacy of occupants. Interior floor plans shall be consistent with to active adults and shall include a minimum of one bedroom on the first floor. Units a quality amount of overall living space reflecting the standards of the underlying zoning (e) The maximum number of lots/units to be permitted within an active adult cluster determined by reducing the total acreage by 8 1/2% for street right-of-way; also, a further of land area of slopes exceeding 25%; land area designated "inland wetland and and land within the one-hundred-year floodplain, at the time of application. The (development area) is then divided by the minimum per-dwelling-unit area requirement underlying zoning district as stated in the Schedule of Lot and Bulk Requirements [Amended 8-3-2009]
(f) Lot size.
[1] The minimum lot size and width and yard requirements are to be as follows:
Yards
(feet)
Zone
Minimum Lot
Size
(square feet)
Minimum Width
(feet) Front Side R-R 30,000 150 30 25 S-R 11,250 90 25 15 R-1 10,000 70 25 7 [2] Rear lots shall be permitted per the requirement that each rear lot be a minimum the above minimum lot area requirement, excluding the area of the accessway. lots shall be a minimum of 20 feet wide, with a minimum of 12 feet of driveway. shall provide access for one lot only, and the maximum number of adjoining accessways yards for a rear lot must be a minimum of 40 feet from the rear lot line of the road. [Amended 8-3-2009]
(g) If the active adult cluster development is not to have separate lots, then the distance dwelling units shall be a minimum of 25 feet, and all structures shall be set back a feet from all streets (interior and exterior). The Planning Commission may require from streets if sidewalks are required. A building unit envelope of at least 50 feet by provided in districts with an underlying RR Zoning District. [Amended 8-3-2009]
(h) All structures shall be located a minimum of 50 feet from the perimeter property active adult cluster development.
(i) Cul-de-sac streets shall not serve more than 16 residential structures.
(j) There shall be a minimum of two off-street parking spaces for each dwelling, one of within an attached garage.
§ 213-37 MERIDEN CODE § 213-37
1:648
(k) Each dwelling shall not front on more than one interior street except at street (l) Open space.
[1] The land area not allocated to building lots, buildings and/or streets shall may include certain covered open areas in community facilities, such as patios, trails, plazas or covered recreation areas. This space shall be devoted to environmental amenity for the enjoyment of all residents of the development. Commission may require a permanent conservation easement over that space that is to remain in a native state except for amenities such as walking open space shall be of the same character of land to be developed and capitalize on the natural beauty and amenities of the site and landscaped shrubs. [Amended 8-3-2009]
[2] Provisions shall be made for maintenance of open space after completion either by agreement with the City of Meriden to accept dedication as a to the general public or by other methods such as a homeowners' association. maintenance shall be described in detail and approved by the City Planning final approval of the development. Documentation, including deed covenants association organization, shall be presented to the City Planning Commission and approval.
(m) Recreation facilities. Each adult active cluster development must consider the recreation needs of future residents. Each development with more than 15 clubhouse for residents.
(n) Streets. All interior streets within the development are to be private streets responsibility of the development. All streets are to be built to subdivision design that interior collector streets shall have a minimum pavement width of 28 feet street minimum pavement width of 24 feet. Also, the Planning Commission bituminous curbs in lieu of concrete curbs.
(o) The plan shall contain such proposed covenants, easements and other provisions location and density of residential units, nonresidential uses and public facilities the welfare of the adult active cluster development and are consistent with the neighborhood and the entire City. Said covenants, easements and other provisions enforced, removed or released only with the written approval of the Planning Commission.
(p) The Planning Commission may approve divisible geographic sections of the developed as an adult active cluster development and shall, in each case, specify within which development of each section must be commenced and may permit, deviations from the number of dwelling units per acre established for the entire development, provided such deviation shall be adjusted for in other sections of that the number of dwelling units per acre authorized for the entire adult active is not affected. The Planning Commission may also establish completion dates based on data and a projected schedule of completion provided by the developer.
(q) The development shall be initiated within 12 months of approval. The development from the commencement date for each section thereof may be modified time by the Planning Commission upon the showing of good cause by the owner, case shall each extension of time exceed 12 months.
[1] The total development shall be completed in accordance with the following 127. Editor's Note: The schedule is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 213-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-37
1:649
Number of Acres Number of Years
10 to 200 10
201 and over 15
[2] The above shall be the maximum period of time for completion of an development.
[3] The developer shall furnish such performance bond or bonds that may be Planning Commission to be reasonably required to assure performance in construction utilities, streets and other public facilities in accordance with the approved plan public interest in the event of abandonment of said plan before completion of the The estimated costs of measures required to control soil erosion and sedimentation, in the approved plan, may be covered in a performance bond or other assurance Commission in accordance with the provisions specified above.
(r) Parking areas shall be so designed and landscaped as to provide for minimal adverse livability of the adult active cluster development. Parking spaces shall be in accordance required number of spaces for similar uses as noted in § 213-55 of this chapter. At least space per unit shall be located in an attached garage.
(s) Utilities shall be designed so that, in all cases in an adult active cluster development, installation of utilities, including electricity and telephone, in both public streets and property, is accomplished.
(t) The pedestrian circulation system and its related walkways shall be so designed wherever possible, for separation between pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
(u) A plan for soil erosion and sediment control shall be designed in accordance with Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control (2002), as amended. Soil erosion control plans shall result in a development that minimizes erosion and sedimentation construction; is stabilized and protected from erosion when completed; and does not erosion and sedimentation. The appropriate method from of the Connecticut Guidelines Erosion and Sediment Control (2002), as amended, shall be used in determining peak volumes of runoff unless an alternative method is approved by the Commission.
(4) To encourage development that supports preservation of residences and other structures significant historic, architectural or cultural value or interest (a "historic building"), Commission, in its discretion, may permit, as part of an active adult cluster development, increase of up to one additional unit per development acre [Subsection (F(3)(e) above] than the number of dwelling units that might otherwise be allowed in the proposed active cluster development but, in no case, more than four additional dwelling units, provided following criteria are satisfied:
(a) The Commission determines that any increase in density under this subsection adequately supported by adjacent streets, utilities and other infrastructure;
(b) The Commission determines, based upon appropriate evidence provided by the applicant,
that the historic building has significant historic, architectural or cultural value or that justifies being supported and encouraged as provided in this section. In its deliberation
of the significance and historic value of the structures, the Commission may request input of Meriden or other government historical societies or bodies, as well as recognized
private historic organizations;
(c) The proposed use of the historic building (whether a continuation of an existing an adaptive reuse) will not be inconsistent with the character of the historic building inconsistent with the preservation, with any necessary restoration, of the exterior historic building and its architectural features;
§ 213-37 MERIDEN CODE § 213-37
1:650
(d) Any proposed restoration of deteriorated architectural features shall match texture and other visual qualities of the rest of the historic building and documented duplications of such features as opposed to conjectural designs;
(e) The proposed development will recognize and respect the siting of the historic building lot, including, but not limited to, existing view corridors to the historic building streets and, where relevant and appropriate, its relationship to the neighborhood;
(f) The architectural design of new construction shall be compatible with the architectural exhibited by the historic building; and
(g) The Commission may condition its approval of a development that is approved to this subsection on appropriate covenants being recorded against the property compliance with undertakings proposed by the applicant to satisfy the above requirements.
G. Application for approval of adult active cluster development.
(1) The application for approval shall be executed by or on behalf of the owner and
filed in duplicate with the Planning Commission. A filing fee in accordance with
the City of Meriden Fee Schedule shall be submitted to the Planning Commission.
Said filing fee shall be in addition to the cost of any public hearing and advertising
and publication and for study/studies by a consultant(s) hired by the Planning
Commission.
(2) The application for approval shall include such items as the Planning Commission
by its regulations shall specify in order to disclose:
(a) The location and size of the area involved and the nature of the owner's interest
in the land proposed to be developed.
(b) The location, function, ownership and manner of maintenance of common open
space and recreation facilities.
(c) The density, approximate height, ground area covered by buildings, general
location and basic design and type of buildings and other structures and
numbers of dwelling units and distribution of bedrooms.
(d) The proposals for the disposition of sanitary waste and stormwater.
(e) The proposals for supplying the development with fresh water.
(f) The substance of covenants, grants of easements or other restrictions to be
imposed upon the use of the land, buildings and structures, including proposed
easements for utilities.
(g) The provisions for parking of vehicles and the location and width of proposed
streets and public ways and the relationship of proposed streets and other public
facilities to similar public facilities in proximity to the proposed adult active
cluster development. Traffic study regarding generation and effect, capacity and
alignment of existing street system.
(h) In the case of plans which call for development over a period of years, a schedule
showing the time within which applications for final approval of all parts of the
adult active cluster development are intended to be filed.
(i) The proposals for soil erosion and sediment control and stormwater facilities,
including but not limited to: the existing and proposed topography; soil types;
wetlands; watercourses and water bodies; areas of clearing; the location of
and design details for all proposed erosion and sediment control measures and
stormwater management facilities; the sequence of grading and construction
activities; installation of erosion and sediment control measures, and final
stabilization of the site. The plans shall conform to § 213-57 of this chapter.
(3) Said application shall also be accompanied by a written statement by the owner
setting forth the reasons why, in his/her opinion, the adult active cluster
§ 213-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-37
1:651
development would be in the public interest and would be consistent with the
standards and criteria of this chapter and with the regulations published by the
Planning Commission.
(4) Informal consultations between the owner and the Planning Department prior to
the filing of an application for tentative approval are to be encouraged; provided,
however, that no statement or representation by a member of the Department shall
be binding upon the Planning Commission.
H. Public hearing. Within 65 days after filing of an application for approval of an adult
active cluster development, the Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing and
public notice shall be published at least twice at intervals of not less than two days, the
first notice being not less than 10 days nor more than 15 days and the last notice being
not less than two days before such hearing. All maps, reports and other documents
required to be submitted with the application shall be on file in the office of the
City Planning Commission and open to public inspection at least 10 days prior to the
scheduled hearing date.
I. Action of Planning Commission after hearing.
(1) Prior to acting on the application, the Planning Commission shall solicit advice and
comment from the City Engineer, Board of Education, Fire and Police Departments,
and any other public agency which has programs or activities which might be
affected by the development of an adult active cluster development.
(2) The Planning Commission shall, within 65 days following the conclusion of the public
hearing, either:
(a) Grant approval of the plan as submitted.
(b) Grant approval subject to specified conditions not included in the plan as
submitted.
(c) Deny approval of the plan, stating in writing its reasons for said disapproval.
(3) Failure of the Planning Commission to act within said period shall be deemed to be
a grant of approval of the plan as submitted.
J. Status of plan after final approval.
(1) A certified copy of the approved final plan shall be filed in the land records and the
office of the City Clerk.
(2) Upon the filing and recording of the approved final plan, the zoning and regulations
otherwise applicable to the land included in such plan shall cease to apply thereto.
(3) If the owner fails to commence construction of the adult active cluster development
within one year after notification of final approval by the Planning Commission, said
approval shall be null and void and no further development shall take place on the
property, except as otherwise authorized in this chapter.
K. Precedence over inconsistent provisions of the Zoning Ordinance. Section 213-37 shall
supersede all sections of this chapter of the City of Meriden where they may conflict.
L. Definitions. For the purposes of this section of the chapter, the following words shall
have the indicated meaning:
ACTIVE RECREATION FACILITIES — A common area designated on the final plan
including indoor facilities, such as a pool, gym, track, exercise room, etc., large enough
to accommodate 1/2 of all residents of the development and outdoor places and
equipment for energetic leisure-time activities, such as fields, courses or courts for
games involving cardiovascular exercise, and competition involving persons of all ages,
such as softball, golf, tennis, swimming, ski trails, including cross-country, appropriate
to the needs of the community, but not including basic yards, pavement or areas that are
often unusable, such as floodplains.
§ 213-37 MERIDEN CODE § 213-37
1:652
COMMON OPEN SPACE — A parcel or parcels of land, or an area of water, or combination of land and water within the site designated for an adult active cluster
development and designed and intended for the use and enjoyment of residents of
the adult active cluster development. Said open space shall not include areas devoted
to residential or commercial buildings and structures or parking areas. Such open
space shall be for the exclusive use for recreation or leisure activities, with appropriate
complementary structures and improvements.
INTERIOR STREETS — Streets within the boundaries of the adult active cluster
development.
OWNER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of all the land proposed to be
included in the adult active cluster development and the holder of an option or contract
to purchase or other person having an enforceable interest in such land shall be deemed
to be the owner.
PASSIVE RECREATION FACILITIES — A common area designated on the final plan,
including indoor and outdoor areas and equipment for less energetic leisure-time
activities such as trails for walking and nature observation, remote fishing areas, picnic
areas, clubhouse rooms for social recreation such as table games and special health
facilities such as saunas or hot tubs, but not including basic yards and sidewalks.
STATEMENT OF OBJECTIVES — A written statement of the goals of the City of Meriden
with respect to land use for residential purposes, density, direction of growth, location
and function of streets and other public facilities, common open space for recreation,
and other factors which the Planning Commission may find relevant in determining
whether an adult active cluster development shall be permitted.
M. Effect on previously approved planned residential cluster developments (PRCD).128
[Added 7-2-2007]
(1) All lots and single-family detached dwelling units which have been permitted
pursuant to a previously approved and filed planned residential cluster
development, and for which the owner has commenced construction of the planned
residential cluster development within one year after notification of final approval by
the Planning Commission, shall be and remain valid building lots or approved units
irrespective of the other provisions, conditions and terms set forth in this § 213-37.
All conditions which were specified by the Planning Commission in its approval of
the PRCD shall remain in effect.
(2) Any modifications, i.e., boundary changes to lots created by such previously
approved and filed planned residential cluster development shall be treated, in the
same manner as a resubdivision, as defined in § 8-26 of the Connecticut General
Statutes. The number of approved lots and density and bulk requirements shall
remain as were approved for the PRCD.
§ 213-38. Planned elderly housing community (PEHC). [Added
7-5-1988]
A. Purpose. The purpose of this district is to permit the creation of
developments for the elderly that provide for a continuum of care,
including detached and attached residential units, with convalescent
128. Editor's Note: Regulations in this section pertaining to planned residential cluster
developments (PRCD) were replaced by those for active adult cluster developments
9-6-2005 by Meriden City Council acting in its capacity as zoning authority.
§ 213-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-38
1:653
homes, as defined in this chapter, on a single site in which the users are
integrated to provide a comfortable, safe and attractive environment for
elderly living and care.
B. Authority and permitted uses. The Planning Commission is hereby
designated as the agency to administer and enforce this section and
shall make such written regulations regarding procedure and form of
application as it may determine. A planned elderly housing community
may be permitted on any parcel of land in the City improved with a rest
home with nursing supervision (intermediate care facility) or chronic
and convalescent nursing home (skilled nursing facility), as licensed by
the State of Connecticut, at the time of the adoption of this chapter
and otherwise meeting the standards and criteria of this section and on
parcels not so improved in R-2, R-3, R-4, C-1 and C-2 Zones.
(1) Uses permitted in a planned elderly housing community may include
and shall be limited to:
(a) Independent housing units detached, semidetached or attached
units, or any combination thereof.
(b) Convalescent home, as defined in this chapter, provided that any
planned elderly housing community shall have at least a rest
home with nursing supervision (intermediate care facility) or
chronic and convalescent nursing home (skilled nursing facility)
in order to qualify for approval under this section. At least 50%
of the beds in the planned elderly housing community licensed
by the State of Connecticut shall be in the rest home with
nursing supervision (intermediate care facility) or chronic and
convalescent home (skilled nursing facility) category.
(c) Accessory uses: day-care centers for the elderly which may be
located in a separate building or in a convalescent home, as
defined in this chapter.
(d) Community building for the use of residents of the planned
elderly housing community and recreation facilities oriented to
use by elderly persons.
(e) Residential rooms for the elderly licensed by the Housing
Division of the City of Meriden, provided that no more than 25%
of the total beds in the planned elderly housing community shall
be in this category. [Added 10-2-1989]
(2) A planned elderly housing community shall include a combination
of housing units and at least a rest home with nursing supervision
(intermediate care facility) or chronic and convalescent nursing
home (skilled nursing facility) licensed by the State of Connecticut.
This section shall not be applicable to convalescent home separate
from independent housing nor to independent housing separate
from convalescent home.
C. Development standards. Any plan submitted for approval of a
development in a planned elderly housing community shall be consistent
with the following standards for the use of land; type, bulk, design and
locations of buildings; and the density or intensity of land uses.
(1) Density.
(a) Dwelling units: four units per acre.
§ 213-38 MERIDEN CODE § 213-38
1:654
(b) Convalescent home: one acre for each thirty-bed unit; each
shall be exclusive, i.e., land area may not be counted for
dwelling units and a convalescent home.
(c) Residential rooms for the elderly: one acre for each thirty-bed
unit or part thereof. Each use shall be exclusive with respect
to density, i.e., land area may not be counted both for dwelling
units and/or convalescent home and/or residential rooms for
the elderly. [Added 10-2-1989]
(2) Building height: maximum of 35 feet.
(3) A building to be used for housing units shall not exceed 3,000
square feet nor contain more than four units.
(4) Setback and yard requirements. Setback and yard requirements for
housing units shall be identical to those required for the zone in
which the planned elderly housing community is proposed to be
located and for a convalescent home shall be a minimum of 50 feet
in any residential zone.
(5) Access. A planned elderly housing community shall be located only
on collector or major streets.
(6) Site area: minimum site of five acres. The total ground floor area of
all buildings shall not exceed 25% of the site area.
(7) Off-street parking. Off-street parking shall be provided at the ratio
of 1.5 spaces for every dwelling unit plus one space for every
three beds in a convalescent facility, one space for every three
employees, and one space for every five persons enrolled in the
day-care facility.
(8) Utilities. Utilities in a planned elderly housing community shall be
underground wherever practical.
(9) Pedestrian walks. A pedestrian circulation system shall be so
designed so as to provide wherever possible for separation between
pedestrian and vehicular traffic. All such walks shall be designed
and built to provide for wheelchair access. All existing walks shall
be upgraded to accommodate wheelchairs.
(10) Water and sewer. A planned elderly housing community shall be
located only in areas which shall have access to public water supply
and public sanitary sewer service.
(11) Total lot coverage for principal and accessory buildings and paved
areas shall not exceed 50%.
(12) All buildings on an individual lot shall be integrated in terms of
architecture, color, texture and scale.
(13) Wherever practicable, the planned elderly housing community shall
be planned to accommodate existing natural features, including
topography.
(14) Off-street parking facilities shall be laid out in conformance to the
requirements of § 213-55E.
(15) Structures may be further restricted by the Planning Commission
to provide for public safety, adequate light and air, and to maintain
the neighborhood character, and shall be designed and located
to be consistent with the reasonable enjoyment of neighboring
§ 213-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-38
1:655
property and the efficiency of public services as more specifically
set forth herein.
(16) The development shall be initiated (building permit secured) within
12 months of the approval date. Upon the applicant's showing of
good cause, the Planning Commission may grant two extensions to
initiate development. Said extensions of time shall not exceed 12
months each. Building permits for housing units may be restricted
by the Planning Commission until such time as the applicant has
received all regulatory approvals required for the construction of
a convalescent facility and until such time as construction on such
facility has actually commenced.
(17) The Planning Commission shall require that 12 1/2% of the
independent housing units be constructed as handicapped units in
conformity with state and federal requirements for handicapped
housing units including handicapped kitchens. All of the units shall
be equipped with residential sprinkler systems, handicapped
bathrooms and/or intercom systems connecting to the rest home
with nursing supervision (intermediate care facility) or chronic
and convalescent nursing home (skilled nursing facility) in the
complex with the establishment of a response program for handling
emergencies. All units shall be totally accessible to wheelchairs.
The Planning Commission may reduce the number of handicapped
units required by amendment to the site plan approval after the
units have been built but only upon the showing by the developer
that substantial marketing efforts have been pursued for the
handicapped units and that such units have not been sold or rented.
(18) The developer shall furnish such performance bond or bonds as
may be determined by the Planning Commission to assure
performance in the construction of public utilities and other
facilities in accordance with the approved plan and to protect the
public interest in event of abandonment of said plan.
(19) The Planning Commission may require a part of the independent
housing units to have garages and/or carports.
D. Standards for review.
(1) For any development of a planned elderly housing community, a site
plan must be reviewed and a certificate of approval must be issued
by the Planning Commission in accordance with the requirements
and procedures of Article XI, § 213-72, of this chapter prior to the
issuance of a building permit.
(2) In order to aid the Planning Commission's review of a planned
elderly housing community proposal, the Commission shall require
that the developer submit for review the following information and
studies in addition to information required for a certificate of
approval application (§ 213-72J).
(a) A traffic study which identifies the probable impacts of a
proposed development on the road network in the surrounding
area and the measures necessary to mitigate the negative traffic
impacts, if any.
§ 213-38 MERIDEN CODE § 213-38
1:656
(b) The site plan which shall include all buildings, utilities, grading
and structures, both for principal and accessory uses.
(c) An environmental impact report. Such report shall generally
include the following items as appropriate for a particular site:
[1] An inventory of existing environmental conditions at the
project site and the surrounding area which shall describe
air quality, water quality, water supply, soils, topography,
vegetation, wildlife, archeology, geology, and land use.
[2] A listing of all licenses, permits or other approvals required
by law, other than those to be obtained from the Planning
Commission, and the status of each.
[3] An assessment of the probable impact of the project upon all
topics described in Subsection D(2)(c)[1] above.
[4] A listing of adverse environmental impacts which cannot
be avoided and steps to be taken to minimize adverse
environmental impacts during construction and operation,
both at the project site and in the surrounding area.
(d) In the case of plans that call for development over a period of
years, a schedule showing the time within which each phase will
be completed.
(e) The applicant shall file all required documents and a filing fee as
established by the Commission 15 days prior to regular Planning
Commission meetings.
(f) Within 65 days of the meeting at which the application for site
plan approval is presented, the Planning Commission shall hold a
public hearing and public notice shall be published at least twice
at intervals of not less than two days, the first notice being not
less than 10 days nor more than 15 days before such hearing. A
copy of the application shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk
at least 10 days prior to the scheduled hearing date. All maps,
reports and other documents required to be submitted with the
application shall be on file in the office of the City Planning
Commission and open to public inspection at least 10 days prior
to the scheduled hearing date. A transcript of the hearing shall
be made by the Planning Commission, copies of which shall be
made available at cost to any party to the proceedings, and
all exhibits accepted in evidence shall be identified and duly
preserved. The original transcript shall be paid for by the
applicant.
E. Action of Planning Commission after hearing.
(1) Prior to acting on the application, the Planning Commission shall
solicit advice and comment from the City Engineer, Board of
Education, Fire and Police Departments, and any other public
agency which has programs or activities which might be affected by
the development of a planned elderly housing community.
(2) The Planning Commission shall, by resolution, within 65 days
following the conclusion of the public hearing, either:
(a) Grant approval of the plan as submitted;
§ 213-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-38
1:657
(b) Grant approval subject to specified conditions not included in the
plan as submitted; or
(c) Deny the approval of the plan, stating in writing its reasons for
said disapproval.
(3) Failure of the Planning Commission to act within said period shall be
deemed to be a grant of approval of the plan submitted.
(4) The resolution granting or denying approval shall include
conclusions and finding of fact on the following:
(a) In what respect(s) the plan is or is not consistent with the
purposes of this section.
(b) In what respect(s) the plan is or is not in the public interest.
(c) The adequacy of plans for public services, control over vehicular
traffic and furthering the amenities of light and air, recreation,
and visual enjoyment.
(d) The impact of the proposed development upon the neighborhood
in which it is proposed to be established.
(e) The sufficiency of terms and conditions proposed to protect the
interests of the public.
(f) The adequacy of plans for protecting natural resources.
(g) The adequacy of plans for flood control or stormwater retention
and storage.
(h) The compatibility of the proposed land uses with existing or
proposed land uses on adjacent properties.
(i) The consistency of the plan with the Planning Commission's
adopted Comprehensive Plan of Development in effect at the
time of application for approval.
F. Covenants and restrictions. An appropriate declaration of covenants and
restrictions running with the land in favor of the City of Meriden shall be
submitted as part of an application for site plan approval for a planned
elderly housing community. Said declaration shall restrict the design,
use and occupancy of the buildings and land for "elderly person," as
defined in § 213-38G, in accordance with the plans approved by the
Planning Commission. Said declaration shall be recorded in the land
records of the City of Meriden.
G. Special definitions.
ELDERLY PERSON — An elderly person, for the purpose of this section,
shall be defined as any person 62 years of age or over or a person
who has been certified by the Social Security Board as being totally
disabled under the Federal Social Security Act. At the time of admission
to housing in a planned elderly housing community, at least one person
per unit must meet the foregoing definition.
H. Precedence over inconsistent provisions of the zoning ordinance.
Section 213-38 shall supersede all sections of this chapter of the City of
Meriden where they may conflict.
§ 213-38.1. Assisted and Independent Living Facilities Overlay
District (ASSIST). [Added 9-19-2016]
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide a mechanism for the
approval in the M-1, C-1, C-2, R-2 and R-4 Zoning Districts of:
§ 213-38 MERIDEN CODE § 213-38.1
1:658
(1) Assisted living facilities (ALF), with or without memory care units,
within a residential environment that offer supportive services to
individuals who are unable to live independently in the community
by offering supervision and/or assistance with basic activities of
daily life, such as, but not limited to, dressing, bathing, and
nutrition;
(2) Independent living facilities (ILF) that offer congregate living
arrangements with supportive services to persons over the age of
55;
(3) The development of ALF and ILF in a manner that conserves
environmental features, woodlands, wet areas, open space, areas
of scenic beauty, views and vistas as well as encouraging the
renovation and rehabilitation of older, existing buildings;
(4) The development of ALF and ILF in a manner harmonious with the
surrounding land uses while protecting natural resources and open
space.
B. Permitted uses.
(1) Permitted uses shall be assisted living facilities and/or independent
living facilities with supportive services, as well as accessory uses
that are intended and designed as supportive services for the
maintenance and/or operation of the assisted living facility or
independent living facility and/or the use of its residents.
(2) Accessory and incidental retail use, including, but not limited to, the
following: beauty and barber salons; recreational, physical fitness
and therapy services; food services; library; bank automated teller
machine; management offices; adult day care or adult day health
facility within the facility is allowed, provided the retail uses are
primarily to serve the needs of the residents of the facility, as
determined and approved by the Commission. There shall be no
external advertising or signs related to any internal retail use, unless
approved by the Commission.
(3) When the assisted living facility is located in a nonresidential zone,
medical services and adult day care services located within the
facility and each occupying no more than 10% of the building area
may also be offered to the general public, provided that these
services are an important part of the assisted living community and
serve the residents thereof.
C. Definitions. Within this section, the following terms shall have the
following meanings:
APPLICANT — The person or persons, including a corporation or other
legal entity, who applies for issuance of a special permit hereunder. The
applicant shall own, or be the beneficial owner of, all the land included
in the proposed site, or have authority from the owner(s) to act for him/
her/it/them or hold an option or contract duly executed by the owner(s)
and the applicant giving the latter the right to acquire the land to be
included in the site; the owner (or owner's representative) of such land
must also sign the application.
§ 213-38.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-38.1
1:659
ASSISTED LIVING FACILITY (ALF) — Assisted living residence or
residence means any development, conducted for profit, which is
licensed by the State of Connecticut as an ALF and meets all of the
following criteria:
BEDROOM — A separate room or distinct sleeping area intended for, or
which customarily could be used for, sleeping.
COMMISSION — The Meriden Planning Commission.
DWELLING UNIT — A residence, including studio units. Each residence
shall contain a living area, bathroom and, except in studio units, one or
more bedrooms, and may contain a kitchen area or combination kitchen/
living area.
INDEPENDENT LIVING FACILITY (ILF) — A facility reserved for
occupancy by persons age 55 who are able to care for themselves,
but with some common facilities incorporating supportive services as
described herein.
D. Special permit. The development of an ALF and/or an ILF may be
permitted upon the issuance of a special permit by the Planning
Commission and upon site plan approval pursuant to § 213-72.
E. Statement of objectives. An ASSIST District shall be designated to meet
the following objectives:
(1) Application of creative design technique to foster attractive,
functionally efficient and well-planned new developments, which will
be aesthetically integrated with adjacent areas.
(2) Sufficient capacity in sanitary sewer, water supply and other utility
systems will be available over the life of the development.
(3) Appropriate landscaping and buffering is provided.
(4) The independent living facility with supportive services and/or the
assisted living facility proposal will help meet senior housing needs
of Meriden.
(5) The independent living facility with supportive services and/or the
assisted living facility have been designated to meet the needs of
handicapped residents or visitors.
F. Standards for ASSIST District, special permit.
(1) Requirements for lot and bulk design criteria applicable to such
facilities:
(1) Provides room and board; and
Provides, directly by employees of the entity or through
arrangements with another organization which the entity may or
may not control or own, personal care services for three or more
adults who are not related by consanguinity or affinity to their care
provider; and
(2)
Collects payments or third-party reimbursements from or on behalf
of residents to pay for the provision of assistance with the activities
of daily living or arranges for the same.
(3)
§ 213-38.1 MERIDEN CODE § 213-38.1
1:660
(a) Minimum lot area shall be determined by reducing the lot
area for slopes exceeding 25%; land area designated "inland
wetland and watercourses" and land within the one-hundredyear
floodplain, at the time of application.
[1] Facility containing 101 to 150 units: seven acres.
[2] Facility containing up to 100 units: five acres.
(b) Maximum density dwelling units per acre: 20.
(c) Minimum lot width: 150 feet.
(d) Minimum front and rear yards: 40 feet.
(e) Minimum side yards: 20 feet.
(f) Maximum lot coverage for all building and paved areas: 50%.
(g) Maximum height: underlying zone.
(h) Minimum floor area per ILF unit, square feet: 400 (studios)*;
600 (one or two bedrooms).
(i) Minimum floor area per ALF unit, square feet: 250 (studios)**;
450 (one or two bedrooms).
*Studios shall be limited to a maximum of 20% of total number
of units in a development.
**Studios shall be limited to a maximum of 50% of total number
of units in a development. [Amended 11-7-2016]
(2) Buffer. A buffer area of 50 feet shall be provided at the perimeter
of the property on all sides except street frontage, except for
driveways necessary for access and egress to and from the site.
No vegetation in this buffer area will be disturbed, destroyed or
removed, except for normal maintenance. The Planning
Commission may waive the buffer requirement:
(a) Where the land abutting the site is the subject of a permanent
restriction for conservation or recreation so long as a buffer is
established of at least 20 feet in depth which may include such
restricted land area within such buffer area calculation; or
(b) Where the land abutting the site is held by the Town for
conservation or recreation purposes; or
(c) The Planning Commission determines that a smaller buffer will
suffice to accomplish the objectives set forth herein.
(3) Removal and replacement of vegetation. With the site, no clear
cutting shall be permitted, except incidental to construction of
buildings, roads, trails and parking areas. No site work shall be
permitted prior to the granting of the special permit and written
authorization from the Planning and Development Department.
(4) Roadways. The principal roadway(s) and private way(s) serving the
site shall be designed to conform to the rules and regulations of the
Planning Commission, and acceptable to the Department of Public
Works, as required.
(5) Parking. The applicant shall provide adequate parking to serve all
anticipated uses on the property, with information detailing the
method of computation of parking spaces. The minimum number
of parking spaces provided on the site shall be 0.3 parking space
§ 213-38.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-38.1
1:661
per dwelling unit in an ALF and one parking space per dwelling
unit in an ILF. For both ALFs and ILFs, one parking space shall be
provided for every employee during the largest shift. The Planning
Commission may increase or decrease the required parking by
up to 10% to serve the needs of employees, visitors and service
vehicles. All parking areas shall be screened from view from
adjacent residentially zoned or occupied premises located outside
the site, including public ways, by a landscaped border at least 10
feet in width. Parking lots in front setbacks in residential zones, and
in buffer areas in all zones, with the exception of necessary access
driveways, are prohibited. Parking areas in residential districts
shall be located to the side or rear of all buildings where practical.
Parking lot layout shall be planned to permit landscaping,
buffering, or screening to prevent direct views of parked vehicles
from adjacent streets. The use of traditional picket fencing, hedges,
walls, or landscape berms to define parking areas is encouraged.
In parking areas of 20 or more parking stalls, at least one tree of
three-inch or greater caliper shall be planted for every 10 parking
places. Adequate tree wells and irrigation shall be provided for
all parking lot landscaping. Pedestrian access is to be taken into
consideration in parking lot design. The use of separate walkways
is encouraged.
(6) Utilities. All electric, gas, telephone, and water distribution lines
shall be placed underground, except upon a demonstration of
exceptional circumstances.
(7) Paths. Paths for the use of residents shall be attractively designed
with proper regard for convenience, separation of vehicular and
pedestrian traffic, adequate connectivity, completeness of access to
the various amenities and facilities on the site and to pathways on
adjacent sites.
(8) Design and architectural character (for new construction).
(a) Massing and style. Building massing and style shall be
distinctively residential in character and compatible with
surrounding. Historical and traditional design elements are
encouraged. Where an ALF has an accompanying ILF a mix of
building styles, including smaller, lower buildings with separate
entrances, should be incorporated.
(b) Roofs. New England traditional or vernacular styles are
preferred but not mandated. Material shall be consistent with
the architecture of the building. Composition shingle material
is acceptable, providing that it is of high quality and provides
architectural definition to the tab shingle to emulate traditional
wood shingle styles. Tile, slate, or metal roofing is permitted,
provided it is consistent with the architectural style of the
building. Gutters and downspouts are encouraged to provide
drainage away from foundations, but shall be consistent with
the other architectural elements of the building.
(c) Facade element. Design of any newly developed facade shall
be highly detailed and articulated to be compatible with the
§ 213-38.1 MERIDEN CODE § 213-38.1
1:662
scale and sensitivity to the residential uses of the project.
Facades should have a well-defined foundation, a modulated
wall element, and pitched roof or articulated cornice that
defines the character of the building, and provides relation to
the human scale of typical family residences.
(d) Entrances. Building entrances shall comply with all current
accessibility regulations, however, the use of ramps and lifts
is discouraged. Buildings should be designed with entrances
that are barrier free for the intended residential or commercial
uses. The use of sloping entry walks, covered entryways,
porticos, arcades, and covered porches is encouraged. Where
grade separation of an entrance is required because of site
topography, accommodation should be provided in the
architectural detail of the entry to allow barrier-free use by
building residents and visitors.
(e) Materials and design elements. Material chosen for exterior
elements should be consistent with the intent and use of
materials traditionally found in residential design in New
England. Siding materials such as clapboard and shingle are
preferred, and the use of new materials, which reduce
maintenance, but emulate the look and feel of traditional
materials, is encouraged. The use of a variety of trim material
to provide detail at the eaves, corners, gables, pediments,
lintels, sills, quoins, and balustrades is encouraged. The use
of bays, towers, cupolas, cross gables, and dormers to provide
unique character to a building and provide articulation of the
facade is encouraged.
(9) The ALF or ILF shall have an integrated emergency call, telephone
and other communications system to provide monitoring for its
residents. There shall be sufficient site access for public safety
vehicles.
(10) An ALF or an ILF may consist of a single building or multiple
buildings.
(11) Structures and uses accessory to the ALF or ILF may also be
provided within the same building, including, but not limited to, the
following: beauty and barber salons; recreational, physical fitness
and therapy services; library; bank automated teller machine;
management offices; adult day care or adult day health facility;
certain medical facilities; hospice residence; food service; laundry
and covered parking areas; provided, however, that such accessory
uses and structures shall be designed for the primary, but not
exclusive, use of the residents and staff of the ALF or ILF. Such
accessory uses shall have no exterior advertising display.
(12) The facility shall be served by the municipal water and sewer
system.
G. Conversion of existing structures. Notwithstanding the standards set
forth in Subsection F(8)(a) through (e) hereinbefore, applicants may
apply for an overlay designation to convert land and buildings that
are no longer needed or suitable for their original use, and to permit
§ 213-38.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-38.1
1:663
reuses which are compatible with the character of the neighborhood
and which take into consideration the interests of abutters, neighbors
and the public, especially where the site abuts a residential area or the
building(s) merit preservation.
H. Outdoor recreation. Each assisted living facility must provide at least
one acre total of outdoor recreation area(s), creatively designed to
provide stimulation (i.e., landscaping, walkways, site lighting, bird
feeders, benches, and gardens) and shielded from heavy traffic. No less
than 25% of the total area of such space shall be contiguous.
I. Zoning Map designation of overlay district area: creation of district.
Within any zoning district M-1, C-1, C-2, R-2 and R-4, the City Council
may create an Assisted and Independent Living Facilities Overlay
District (ASSIST) in accordance with the standards, criteria and
procedures contained in this chapter.
J. Application. An application for a special permit, in accordance with
the process and procedure as stated in § 213-27R(2) through (8) and
listed below, for a site entirely within the ASSIST overlay district shall
be submitted to the Planning Commission on forms furnished by the
Commission. Each such application shall be accompanied, if applicable,
by a definitive plan of land pursuant to the regulations of the
Commission. In addition, the applicants shall submit:
(1) The following plans:
(a) A site plan pursuant to § 213-72;
(b) A plan at a scale of one inch equals 40 feet showing the
topography of the site at a minimum of two-foot intervals, as well
as vegetation and special features, including wetlands, perennial
streams and ponds, trees of more than eight-inch caliper, rock
outcroppings, slopes in excess of 15%, slopes in excess of 25%
for the purposes of calculated lot area, existing and proposed
trails and paths, open vistas, structures of historical importance
and biological or wildlife habitats, and proposed conservation
and recreation easement areas; and
(c) A plan illustrating preliminary landscaping and architectural
design, showing types, location and layout of buildings, and
typical elevations, as well as the general height, bulk and
appearance of structures. The Commission may subsequently
require perspective drawings.
(2) The following narrative reports or data:
(a) A proposed development schedule showing the beginning of
construction, the rate of construction and development,
including stages, if applicable, and the estimated date of
completion;
(b) A development impact statement determining the impact of the
development on the City's capacity to furnish services, including,
but not limited to, roads, police, fire, emergency services and
water.
(c) The applicant shall provide a market analysis indicating the need
for the facility and describing how the project will benefit the
City of Meriden and its residents.
§ 213-38.1 MERIDEN CODE § 213-38.1
1:664
(d) Any and all other information that the Commission may
reasonably require in a form acceptable to it to assist in
determining whether the applicant's proposed development plan
meets the objectives of this section.
K. Action of Planning Commission.
(1) For any development in an ASSIST District a site plan must be
reviewed and a certificate of approval must be issued by the
Planning Commission in accordance with the requirements and
procedures of Article XI, § 213-72 of the zoning regulations prior to
issuance of a building permit.
(2) Within 65 days of the meeting at which the application for special
permit approval is presented, the Planning Commission shall hold a
public hearing, and public notice shall be published at least twice
at intervals of not less than two days, the first notice being not less
than 10 days nor more than 15 days before such hearing. A copy of
the application shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk at least 10
days prior to the scheduled hearing date. All maps, reports and other
documents required to be submitted with the application shall be on
file in the office of the City Planning Commission and open to public
inspection at least 10 days prior to the scheduled hearing date.
(3) Prior to acting on the application, the Planning Commission shall
solicit advice and comment from the Department of Public Works,
Fire and Police Departments, and any other public agency which has
programs or activities which might be affected by the development
proposed.
(4) The Planning Commission shall, by resolution, within 65 days
following the conclusion of the public hearing, either:
(a) Grant approval of the plan as submitted;
(b) Grant approval subject to specified conditions not included in the
plan as submitted;
(c) Deny the approval of the plan, stating in writing its reasons for
said disapproval.
(5) Failure of the Planning Commission to act within said period shall be
deemed to be a grant of approval of the plan submitted.
(6) The resolution granting or denying approval shall include
conclusions and finding of fact on the following:
(a) In what respect(s) the plan is or is not consistent with the
purposes of this article.
(b) In what respect(s) the plan is or is not in the public interest.
(c) The adequacy of plans for public services, control over vehicular
traffic and furthering the amenities of light and air, recreation,
and visual enjoyment.
(d) The impact of the proposed development upon the neighborhood
in which it is proposed to be established.
(e) The sufficiency of terms and conditions proposed to protect the
interests of the public.
(f) The compatibility of the proposed land uses with existing or
proposed land uses on adjacent properties.
§ 213-38.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-38.1
1:665
(g) The consistency of the plan with the Planning Commission's
adopted Plan of Conservation and Development in effect at the
time of application for approval.
(7) The Commission shall consider in each case whether the proposed
use will:
(a) Be in accordance with the Plan of Conservation and
Development.
(b) Not prevent or inhibit unreasonably the orderly growth of the
retail business development of the area.
(c) Not adversely affect storm drainage, sewerage disposal or other
municipal facilities.
(d) Not materially adversely affect adjacent areas located within the
closest proximity to the use.
(e) Preserve or enhance important open space and other features of
the natural environment and protect against deterioration of the
quality of the environment, as related to the public health, safety
and welfare.
(f) Not interfere unreasonably with pedestrian circulation, most
particularly as related to retail shopping patterns.
(g) Not adversely affect safety in the streets nor increase traffic
congestion in the area so as to be inconsistent with an
acceptable level of service nor interfere with the pattern of
highway circulation.
(h) Be in scale with and compatible with surrounding uses,
buildings, streets and open spaces.
(i) Preserve land, structures or features having special historical,
cultural, or architectural merit.
§ 213-39. Planned development district (PDD). [Added 9-5-1989;
amended 7-28-1998]
A. Purpose. The stated purpose of such a district is to allow for diverse but
integrated uses (including, but not limited to, open space, recreation, industrial,
education, retail-commercial, and housing) in a large area consistent with the
objectives set forth in the Land Use Plan of the City of Meriden (adopted August
14, 1985). All of the land in such district may be considered as a single unit of
development for the purpose of site planning and utilities so that the integrated
nature of the development will be encouraged and maintained, even though
individual lots created after the adoption of this district may be separately
owned.
B. Statement of objectives. All development in the planned development district
shall be designed to meet the following:
(1) Provision of adequate facilities for sanitary sewerage, water supply,
stormwater drainage and other utilities for the life of each development;
(2) Application of creative design techniques to foster attractive, functionally
efficient, and well-planned developments which will be aesthetically
integrated with adjacent areas;
(3) Provision of appropriate landscaping, screening and buffers;
(4) Provision of all appropriate off-site roadway and utility improvements
necessitated by each phase of the development; and
§ 213-38.1 MERIDEN CODE § 213-39
1:666
(5) An integration of the different uses considering inherent differences of
needs and protections.
C. Uses.
(1) Permitted uses by right:
(a) Single-family dwellings.
(b) Two-family and/or multifamily structures.
(c) Manufacturing, production, fabrication and warehouse.
(d) Research and development facilities.
(e) Offices, banks, institutional, public and municipal buildings, schools,
including facilities to house data processing equipment, recreational
(including equestrian center for general public) and/or health club.
(f) Retail-commercial uses are permitted and shall be designed and
intended for the use of the residents of the planned development
district, and the burden shall be on the owner to show that such
areas will primarily serve persons residing in the planned development
district. The total space allocated to retail-commercial establishments
shall not exceed 10% of total residential building floor area, and the
total area of retail-commercial establishments and their required
parking areas shall not collectively occupy more than 10% of the total
ground area of the planned development district. No building designed
or intended to be used in part or in whole for retail commercial
purposes shall be constructed prior to the completion of not less than
30% of the dwelling units in the plan; however, the Planning
Commission, at its discretion, upon the completion of 200 dwelling
units, may permit retail-commercial development. Retail-commercial
uses may be permitted within the development but shall be limited
to the following types of shops and stores: bakery, barber, beauty,
drug, food, gift, ice cream or sandwich shop, launderette, laundry or
dry cleaning (pickup only), restaurant with liquor license, liquor store
or gas sales with service center and limited repair (no auto body or
general repair). No shop or store shall contain more than 2,000 square
feet of sales area, except a food store, which shall contain not more
than 5,000 square feet of sales area.
(g) Congregate living center to be defined as a convalescent home, as
defined in this chapter, combined with elderly housing to provide a
comfortable environment for elderly living and care. Each convalescent
house shall be located on one acre of land for each thirty-bed unit. The
density of the elderly residential segment shall be per § 213-39D(2).
(h) Hotel.
(i) Riding academies and stables for rental to general public, subject to
provisions of § 213-16B(2)(c).
(j) Public and private utility substations.
(k) Places of worship and public assembly.
(l) Home occupations, as per § 213-18B(2)(e).
(m) Commercial clubs.
(n) Child-care provider — Class II.
(o) Electric-generation facilities.
[1] Electric-generation facilities are defined as follows: Any bulkelectric-
generating unit and its ancillary buildings and structures.
§ 213-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-39
1:667
Such ancillary buildings and structures shall be defined to include,
but not be limited to, cooling towers, water and fuel storage
facilities, stacks and gas and electric transmission lines and towers,
provided that such electric-generation facilities shall meet the
following conditions:
[a] Such facilities shall be located on a lot having a minimum area
of 20 acres.
[b] No building shall be in excess of 120 feet in height. This height
limitation and any limits specified in § 213-49A shall not apply
to ancillary buildings and structures which may be up to 200
feet in height, provided that the plan for such ancillary
buildings and structures shall be submitted to the Planning
Commission prior to installation. Upon its review of such plan,
the Planning Commission may recommend reasonable
conditions to minimize any adverse impacts.
[c] Such facilities shall meet all regulations of the Department of
Environmental Protection for such facilities.
[d] Such facilities shall comply with the performance standards set
forth in § 213-54 for the industrial districts.
[e] Such facilities shall comply with the width, coverage and
minimum yard requirements set forth in § 213-39D(2)(b) for
nonresidential uses.
[f] Such facilities shall comply with the off-street parking
requirements specified in § 213-55, except that the minimum
parking spaces required for such facilities shall be one parking
space for each three total employees or 500 square feet of gross
building area, whichever is less.
[2] The following provisions shall apply to electric-generation facilities
in the PDD and supersede all sections of this chapter of the City of
Meriden where they may conflict:
[a] More than one main principal building shall be permitted on
one lot.
[b] Outdoor storage or parking of construction trailers shall be
permitted.
[c] The supplementary lot, yard, height and building regulations
specified in § 213-48 shall not apply.
(p) Child-care provider — Class III, subject to the requirements of
§ 213-19B(2)(j). [Added 2-3-1992]
(2) Accessory uses:
(a) Regarding residential permitted uses, same accessory uses are allowed
per accessory uses in the R-1 Zone (§ 213-18C).
(b) Regarding nonresidential permitted uses, same accessory uses are
allowed per accessory uses in the M-4 Zone (§ 213-32C).
(c) Earth and rock excavation and removal and/or rock crushing for the
preparation of land for permitted uses, accessways and utilities.
D. Development standards.
(1) Overall planned development district.
(a) The planned development district zoning designation shall be only applied
to a parcel or group of contiguous parcels totalling a minimum of 200 acres.
§ 213-39 MERIDEN CODE § 213-39
1:668
At the time of application for such zoning designation, the entire area must
be in single ownership.
(b) A fifty-foot-wide nonencroachment strip shall be provided around the entire
perimeter of the planned development district. Only access drives,
landscaping and utilities shall be permitted within this nonencroachment
strip.
(c) At least 50% of the land area within the planned development district shall
be used for open space, recreation, education or housing. All nonresidential
buildings shall be a minimum of 50 feet from any residential property line.
Like uses shall be clustered together and appropriately separated through
landscaping and other buffer methods from other uses (i.e., residential vs
industrial areas).
(d) The initial application for development or subdivision within the planned
development district shall be accompanied by an A-2 survey of the entire
district and a conceptual plan highlighting major land features,
environmentally sensitive areas, potential land use areas, access points
and conceptual estimate of overall population density. All subsequent
applications shall be accompanied with an updated conceptual plan and
updated land use calculations of lot coverage, area devoted to different
uses, open space and road pattern.
(2) Lot and bulk requirements within the planned development district. For any
development within the planned development district, a site plan must be
reviewed and a certificate of approval must be issued by the Planning
Commission in accordance with the requirements and procedures of Article
XI, § 213-72, of this chapter prior to the issuance of a building permit. Any
plan (site plan or subdivision) submitted for approval of a development in
the planned development district, except plans for electric-generation facilities
which only must comply with the width, coverage and minimum yard
requirements for nonresidential uses, shall be consistent with the following lot
and bulk requirements:
Lot
Minimum Yard
Requirements1
(feet)
Area
Area per
Dwelling
Unit
(square
feet)
Width
(feet)
Coverage
(%) Front Side Rear
Maximum
Height
(feet)
Single-family2 Same as R-1 Zone requirements
Two-family
/multifamily3
Same as R-2 Zone requirements, except density for high-rise
residential shall be 1,500 square feet per unit. No more than 40%
of the acreage devoted to residential use in the planned
development parcel shall be developed for high-rise building.
754
Nonresidential3 1 acre — 100 40% 25 20 20 40
§ 213-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-39
1:669
NOTES:
1 When lot lines are coterminous with the perimeter boundary of the planned development
district, the minimum yard requirements are in addition to the required nonencroachment
strip, § 213-39D(1)(b).
2 Rear lots per § 213-48B are allowed for single-family lots only.
3 More than one principal building is allowed in these areas.
4 The Planning Commission may authorize a high-rise residential structure up to 125 feet,
provided that:
a. Adequate fire protection and water pressure is to be provided to serve each building;
b. An additional setback of one foot for each five additional feet of building height is
provided;
c. Sufficient developed recreation space is provided on the site; and
d. The site is deemed appropriate for a building in excess of 75 feet.
(3) General development standards.
(a) All buildings and signs shall be integrated and compatible in terms of
architecture, color, texture and scale.
(b) Structures may be further restricted by the Planning Commission to provide
for public safety, adequate light and air, and to maintain the character of
the entire district, and shall be designed and located to be consistent with
reasonable enjoyment of neighboring property and the efficiency of public
service, as more specifically set forth herein.
(c) All uses shall be adequately served by all necessary utilities including water,
sanitary sewer facilities and storm drains.
(d) All structures and roads shall be planned to accommodate existing natural
features, including topography and inland wetlands and watercourses.
(e) Off-street parking facilities shall be laid out in conformance to the
requirements of § 213-55.
(f) All utilities required by § 213-39D(3)(c) above shall be underground.
(g) All streets shall be built to City standards unless waived by the Planning
Commission upon consultation with the City Engineer. Any street for which
the City standards relating to the construction integrity (i.e., subgrade,
base, binder, finished surface, etc.) have been waived shall not be
considered for acceptance by the City.
(h) The performance standards in § 213-54 are applicable to all nonresidential
uses within the planned development district.
E. Off-site improvements.
(1) Approval prerequisites. Prior to the receiving of a certificate of occupancy
for any planned development proposal, the developer shall pay his pro
rata share of the cost of providing any reasonable and necessary street
improvements and water, sewage and drainage facilities directly related to
or required by the proposed development and easements therefor located
outside the property limits of the development. All payments shall be in
the manner provided herein, it being the intent of this section that the
developer bear that portion of the cost which is related to improvements
that benefit the development, as determined by the Planning Commission.
§ 213-39 MERIDEN CODE § 213-39
1:670
The Planning Commission shall consider the portion of the developer's land
which will be benefited by improvements as compared to developed and
other undeveloped land which may be further benefited by the proposed
improvements.
(2) Determination of nature of improvement.
(a) Consistent with the provisions of this section, the City Council, with
the assistance of the Planning Commission and appropriate City
departments, shall, prior to the imposition of any conditions on an
applicant for a development, determine whether the off-site
improvement is to be constructed by the City as a general improvement
or whether such improvement is to be constructed by the developer in
accordance with Subsection D above.
(b) Once the foregoing determination has been made, the Planning
Commission shall estimate, with the aid of the City Engineer and such
other persons having pertinent information or expertise, including the
developer and its consultants, the cost of the improvement and the
portion of the total cost of the improvement that is attributable to the
development under provisions of Subsection E(1).
(c) If the improvement is to be constructed by the applicant, a bond or cash
deposit in an amount equal to the estimated cost of the improvement
may be required as condition of approval.
F. Precedence over inconsistent provisions of the Zoning Ordinance. Section
213-39 shall supersede all sections of this chapter of the City of Meriden where
they may conflict.
§ 213-40. Ridgeline protection zone.
A. Statutory authorization. This chapter is adopted pursuant to § 8-2 of the
Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
B. Purpose. To restrict development in the ridgeline setback area, as defined
herein.
C. Definitions. In this section, words and phrases defined below shall have the
meanings indicated:
BASALT (TRAPROCK) RIDGELINE — The line on a traprock ridge created by all
points at the top of a fifty-percent slope (two horizontal for each vertical unit
of distance) along Beseck Mountain, Lamentation, Cathole, South Mountains,
East/West Peaks, (not Chauncey Peak), which is maintained for a distance of 50
horizontal feet perpendicular to the slope and which consists of surficial basalt
geology.
DEVELOPMENT — Defined as found in C.G.S. § 8-2.
NONCONFORMING USE — A use, whether of a building, structure or lot, or
combination thereof, that legally exists before the effective date of this chapter,
yet currently fails to conform to this chapter as a result of the adoption of this
chapter.
PASSIVE RECREATION — Nonmotorized recreation, such as hiking, bicycling,
picnicking and birdwatching.
RIDGELINE SETBACK AREA — The area bounded by: .
§ 213-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-40
1:671
SELECTIVE TIMBERING — The harvesting of no trees greater than six inches
in diameter at breast height (dbh).
D. Applicability.
(1) All development proposals within the ridgeline setback area, as defined in
Subsection C, whether public or private, shall comply with the requirements
and purposes of this chapter.
(2) For the purposes of this chapter, development proposals include proposals
which require any of the following: certificate of approval, special
exceptions, variance, building permit, PRD, PRCD, grading, filling or
excavation permits.
E. General requirements.
(1) Map. The City shall cause to be drafted and obtain within three months after
the enactment of this chapter a map or series of maps which generally delineate
the ridgeline setback area as defined in Subsection C. This map shall not be the
definitive source for these areas but will serve to alert the public and municipal
officials of the potential presence of a ridgeline setback area. The City may
subsequently amend this map as newly acquired information concerning the
presence of additional ridgeline setback areas is presented to it. Information
provided by the map shall be used for general informational and illustrative
purposes only. The actual presence and location of ridgeline setback areas, as
determined by qualified technical professionals, shall govern the review of a
submitted development proposal.129
(2) Permitted operations and uses. The following operations and uses shall be
permitted in ridgeline setback areas, as of right, as set forth in C.G.S. § 8-2(c).
(a) Emergency work necessary to protect life or property.
(b) Approved development proposals which were applied for prior to the
effective date of this chapter.
(c) Any nonconforming use of the land lawfully existing at the effective date of
this chapter.
(d) Selective timbering, grazing of domesticated animals, passive recreation.
(3) Prohibited operations and uses. Prohibited operations and uses in the ridgeline
setback areas are building construction, road construction, utility construction,
quarrying, clear-cutting of vegetation and cutting of timber within 50 feet of the
ridgeline, as defined in Subsection C.
A line that parallels and is placed a horizontal distance of 150 feet off
the more wooded, lesser-sloped side of all basalt (traprock) ridgelines, as
defined in this subsection; and
(1)
That contour line located below the basalt (traprock) ridgeline on the rocky,
more steeply sloped side of a basalt (traprock) ridgeline, where a fiftypercent
slope (two horizontal for each vertical unit of distance) has been
maintained for a distance of 50 horizontal feet
(2)
129. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 213-40 MERIDEN CODE § 213-40
1:672
Ridgeline Protection Zone
§ 213-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-40
1:673

ARTICLE VIII
Supplementary Regulations
§ 213-41. Applicability.
This article includes provisions that are applicable to all or substantial
portions of the City.
§ 213-42. Parking of commercial vehicles.
A. Commercial vehicles in excess of three-fourths-ton capacity, excluding
station wagons, compact-type bus vehicles and pickup trucks used for
private transportation, shall not be parked or stored in any residential
district.
B. Overnight parking of any commercial vehicle, as defined above, on any
public street of the City of Meriden is prohibited.
§ 213-43. Storage of recreation vehicles, trailers and boats.
The outdoor storage or parking and use of a trailer or recreation vehicle by
any person or persons is hereby prohibited in all districts, except that:
A. Not more than one camping trailer or recreation vehicle per dwelling
unit may be stored, but not used for any purpose, on a lot in any
residence district, provided that such lot is occupied by a dwelling, and
provided further that such trailer or recreation vehicle is not stored in
the front yard. If stored in a side or rear yard, said trailer or recreation
vehicle shall be screened from adjoining properties by a fence or
landscape screen of at least six feet in height.
B. Not more than one boat per dwelling unit may be stored on a lot in any
residence district, provided that such lot is occupied by a dwelling, and
provided further that such boat is not stored in the front yard. If stored in
a rear or side yard, said boat shall be screened from view from adjoining
properties by a fence or landscape screen of at least six feet in height.
C. Where a building permit has been issued for the construction or
alteration of a building, the Building Official may issue a temporary
permit for one or more trailers, for a period not to exceed one year, to be
used as a site office or sales office. The number of trailers shall be limited
to that which the Building Official shall deem to be necessary in each
case. Said temporary permit may be extended for additional successive
periods of six months each if the Building Official finds that construction
has been diligently pursued and that justifiable circumstances require
such an extension.
D. During the period immediately following an emergency or disaster, the
Building Official may issue a temporary permit for one or more trailers
for a period not to exceed one year. The number of such trailers shall
be limited to one per affected household or business, unless additional
temporary trailers are authorized by the Planning Commission as a
special permit. Said temporary permit may be extended for additional
successive periods of six months each if the Building Official finds that
construction has been diligently pursued and that justifiable
circumstances require such an extension.
§ 213-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-43.1
1:675
§ 213-43.1. Interstate Development District. [Added 6-21-2010]
A. Purpose. The stated purpose of this section is to encourage the growth
and diversity of the City's economic base in an efficient, planned,
environmentally and aesthetically sensitive manner along the I-691 and
I-91 corridor. Further, this section is meant to allow the City to compete
in the region's growth and take advantage of the City's central location
and the site's locale on the interstate highway system. This section of
the Meriden Zoning Regulations is prescribed by the City's 2009 Plan of
Conservation and Development.
B. Statement of objectives.
(1) Development within the IDD may receive favorable consideration
where the following conditions are present and the following
objectives are achieved:
(a) To accommodate future growth which will enhance the tax base
through the optimum use of appropriate parcels for economic
development purposes;
(b) To encourage maximization of building coverage by
discouraging excess parking spaces and providing common
parking areas;
(c) To provide for the appropriate use of undeveloped land;
(d) To maintain proper mixture of uses to insure overall
sustainability;
(e) To protect the existing adjoining residentially zoned
neighborhoods by appropriate buffers and by additional
landscaping along the perimeter of the zone;
(f) To control strip development and "big box" development through
design controls and restrictive regulations so as to insure a
positive image and to prevent blighting influence; and to
encourage application of creative design techniques to foster
attractive, well planned developments which will be
aesthetically integrated with adjacent areas;
(g) To provide appropriate landscaping for green areas and
development schemes and enhance natural settings;
(h) To protect the integrity of environmentally sensitive areas;
(i) To facilitate traffic and pedestrian circulation and safety by
providing the necessary roadway infrastructure;
(j) To provide for the development of a capital plan for general
improvements which insure that the private sector will
participate in the financing improvements, thereby relieving the
public burden;
(k) To provide adequate facilities for sanitary sewerage, water
supply, stormwater drainage and other utilities for the life of the
development.
(2) If any of the conditions noted above are not present when a
developer submits an application for development within the IDD,
the Planning Commission may decide not to give further
consideration to the application unless the developer presents
adequate evidence of his ability and willingness to correct any
condition not meeting these objectives or the official action of the
§ 213-43.1 MERIDEN CODE § 213-43.1
1:676
municipal or state agency which will satisfy the condition within a
time period acceptable to the Planning Commission.
(3) This statement of objectives shall not be subject to variation or
exception by any City agency.
C. Planning Commission authority. The Planning Commission is hereby
designated as the agency to administer and enforce this section.
D. Applicability. The Interstate District shall apply only to a tract of
property of 55 acres or more contiguous to I-691 and/or I-91, which tract
is under single ownership and shall remain under single ownership. This
district is intended to encourage smaller sites to combine with other
sites to provide larger-scale developments; therefore, special provisions
are included to allow consolidation of smaller contiguous lots.
Contiguous lots, zoned differently than IDD, will continue to be
conforming until included in the IDD overall development plan and
zoned IDD.
E. Permitted uses.
(1) Primarily, a commercial district which will allow a fully integrated
mixed-use land use pattern of commercial, residential, institutional,
and cultural uses to further the purpose of this regulation. These
uses are to be developed in a compatible and attractive manner
per standards set forward in this regulation and best practices of
urban design principles. Further, the initial structures within the
IDD must be commercial (retail and office), of a minimum size of
50,000 square feet. A certificate of occupancy must be issued for
these initial commercial buildings prior to the issuance of a building
permit for any other use. Permitted uses include:
(a) Permitted uses by right:
[1] Retail.
[2] Office/corporate high tech.
[3] Financial institutions, including drive-through.
[4] Restaurant (not fast food).
[5] Conference center hotel.
[6] College/university.
[7] Health and wellness center.
[8] Attached residential (maximum of 50% of total developed
floor area per density requirement); detached single-family
structures are prohibited.
(b) Uses permitted subject to issuance of a special exception permit
by the Zoning Board of Appeals in accordance with the
requirements of § 213-73. Fast-food restaurants, without drivethroughs,
coliseums, arenas, or stadiums shall be permitted only
where there is direct access to I-691 or I-91.
(c) Accessory uses. Accessory uses need to be reviewed and
approved by the Planning Commission.
[1] Uses customarily accessory to permitted uses if constructed
concurrently with or subsequent to the main building.
[2] Signs, as regulated in § 213-56.
[3] Heliport, subject to conditions of § 213-23B(2)(m).
[4] Off-street parking in accordance with § 213-55.
§ 213-43.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-43.1
1:677
(2) Understanding that site appearance and performance determine
the appropriateness of a use, and that there will be appropriate
uses that have not yet been developed, future permitted, special
exception or accessory uses will be those that are able to meet all
the standards of these regulations.
F. Lot and bulk requirements.
(1) Minimum lot area: 55 acres.
(2) Minimum lot frontage on City street: 1,000 feet.
(3) Minimum lot width on I-691 and/or I-91: 1,000 feet.
(4) Setback requirements:
(a) Perimeter buffer: A forty-foot landscaped buffer is required
around the entire perimeter of the Interstate Mixed-Use
Development district. Said buffer is not required for such
portions of the perimeter along I-691 and/or I-91. Only crossing
access drives, landscaping and utilities shall be permitted in this
buffer area. The Commission may grant a waiver to allow for art/
sculpture or other decorative items within the buffer.
(b) Building setback line: The building setbacks of 25 feet front and
10 feet side and rear shall begin at the edge of the interior fortyfoot
buffer line or that portion which abuts I-691 and/or I-91
and shall apply to all buildings within the interior. No parking or
structures shall be allowed within the building setback.
(5) Lot coverage: Maximum impervious coverage is 60%.
(6) Building height:
(a) Maximum building height of buildings shall be four stories, not
to exceed 45 feet, except that antennas, elevator stacks and
other similar uses may be erected to a reasonable and necessary
height but not greater than 10 feet above the roofline.
(b) The Commission, upon the applicant's request, may grant a
height waiver to increase the building height to 75 feet (seven
stories) for a nonresidential building or portion thereof located
at least 500 feet from any City streets and from any residential
zone boundary, if the Commission determines that the site is
suitable for a taller building and that the Interstate Mixed-Use
District is enhanced rather than diminished by a taller building.
To qualify for a height waiver, the applicant must demonstrate
that the taller building conforms with the following criteria:
[1] Site location and topography are such that the taller
building blends in with its surroundings rather than
standing out. This criteria will generally be met when the
site elevation is substantially lower than the adjacent public
street(s).
[2] The taller building does not unduly disrupt the character of
a residentially zoned neighborhood.
(7) Residential density:
(a) One unit per 8,700 square feet of lot area (five units per acre).
See "Residential Design Standards" for details. Sequence
requirement:
§ 213-43.1 MERIDEN CODE § 213-43.1
1:678
[1] The floor area of the aggregate of all residential units in the
development shall be limited to a maximum ratio of 1:1 to
the nonresidential floor area in the development.
[2] Construction of residential units must be preceded by
construction of nonresidential space at a ratio of 3:1
nonresidential to residential floor area. Therefore, for every
square foot of residential floor area constructed, there must
exist three square feet of nonresidential floor area. This
required sequence ceases upon the construction of fiftypercent
nonresidential floor area per the adopted Overall
Development Plan.
G. Design and appearance standards.
(1) General concepts:
(a) The development shall be human scale, pedestrian friendly and
oriented. It is the expressed intention not to resemble a typical
strip commercial center.
(b) These standards require a basic level of architectural variety
and compatible scale. The standards are intended to be a useful
tool for design professionals engaged in site- specific designs.
(c) Applicants should avoid stereotypical franchise-type buildings
unless the building demonstrates architectural and
compatibility excellence.
(d) Street trees/landscaping shall be incorporated into landscaping
plans. All buildings elevations that are visible from a public
street must be designed with windows and/or other
architectural elements and features such that no visible
elevation looks like the back of a building.
(e) Historic structures shall be preserved and incorporated into
site design to the maximum extent possible.
(f) Existing healthy trees of six-inch caliper and greater (to be
survey-located either singly or as groups) shall be incorporated
into the site plan to the maximum extent possible. Similarly,
significant stands (10 or more trees) of related species, or
consistent scrub-shrub groupings occurring in front, side or
rear yards, shall be preserved whenever feasible. Welling or
mounding are recommended techniques when grade changes
are required.
(g) Driveway lighting shall incorporate standard fixtures and poles
in order to obtain a uniform lighting appearance.
(h) All business, servicing, or processing shall be conducted within
completely enclosed buildings, with the following exceptions:
[1] Off-street parking/loading;
[2] Seasonal outdoor dining;
[3] Outdoor amenities normally conducted as accessory uses to
a hotel, such as a swimming pool and patio;
[4] Outside display of merchandise for sale on the interior part
of a pedestrian environment such as in a village-style
shopping center, or a courtyard area with kiosks or market
carts, where outside merchandise display is an integral part
§ 213-43.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-43.1
1:679
of the theme and thus enhances the appearance of the
site. This section is not intended to allow outside display
of merchandise typically sold inside retail stores in
conventional shopping areas; rather, it is intended to
encourage true pedestrian-oriented areas in a village
atmosphere.
(i) Outside dining and display areas shall not occupy sidewalks
intended for pedestrian passage and access. Outside dining and
display areas must be shown on the site plan and approved by
the Commission.
(j) For the purpose of this section, garden shops that are contained
within walls shall be permitted even though the enclosure does
not have a partial or complete roof. The applicant may propose,
and the Commission may accept, a ventilated wall similar in
appearance to the rest of the building.
(k) Areas reserved for open space and set aside to meet impervious
coverage requirements shall be distributed throughout the site
in such a manner that the land is visible (from public streets)
and/or useable (e.g., for pedestrian circulation, outdoor
entertainment and cultural events, band shell, or arts/crafts
shows).
(l) Outdoor storage is prohibited.
(m) Loading docks/receiving areas shall not be visible from public
streets or from residential zones. All loading docks shall be
designed as an integral part of the building, shall be suitably
screened, and shall not detract from the appearance of the
building and site.
(n) Satellite dishes shall be screened so they are not visible from
public streets.
(o) Detention basins should work with natural water flow systems
and when not working with the flow should be an enclosed
system or located to the rear and visually obstructed from the
street. Agreements for maintenance of detention basins must be
filed on the land records.
(p) Rear road connection between properties is encouraged.
(q) Dedication of land along the street may be required for future
roads.
(r) Sharing of driveways to eliminate excessive curb cuts is
encouraged.
(s) Lampposts, trees, retaining walls and other streetscape
features should be compatible with each other and the
environment.
(t) Additional parking spaces over the required number of parking
spaces should be paved where possible with geopavers or
similar permeable material and not asphalt.
(u) Shared parking to reduce the area of land used for parking is
encouraged. A pedestrian circulation system must be designed
to provide a separation between vehicular and pedestrian
traffic.
§ 213-43.1 MERIDEN CODE § 213-43.1
1:680
(v) All utilities, including electricity and telephone, on site shall be
underground.
(w) All outdoor lighting should be appropriately shielded from and
should not cast glare on adjoining properties and City rights-ofway.
Outdoor lighting should not exceed a height of 20 feet.
(x) Accommodate existing natural features, including topography,
where possible.
(y) If included in the Meriden Transit route, a bus shelter must be
provided after the initial building is occupied. An agreement
for maintenance of the bus shelter must be filed in the land
records.
(2) Nonresidential site standards. The following additional objectives
and standards apply to all nonresidential establishments. Items
designated as "objectives" are not mandatory, but are stated in order
to provide insight regarding the design objectives. Items designated
as "standards" are mandatory. All design details are subject to
Commission approval.
(a) Facades and exterior walls.
[1] Objective: Facades should be articulated to reduce the
massive scale and the uniform, impersonal appearances of
nonresidential buildings and provide visual interest. The
intent is to encourage a more human scale.
[2] Standards:
[a] Facades greater than 100 feet in length, measured
horizontally, shall incorporate wall plan projections or
recesses having a depth of at least 3% of the length of
the facade and extending at least 20% of the length of
the facade. No uninterrupted length of any facade shall
exceed 100 horizontal feet.
[b] Ground-floor facades that face public streets shall have
arcades, display windows, entry areas, awnings, or other
architectural features along no less than 60% of their
horizontal length. Alternatively, other pedestrianattractive
features such as benches, niches, plantings,
and pavers may be used to create pedestrian interest,
subject to Commission approval.
(b) Detail features.
[1] Objective: Buildings should have architectural features and
patterns that provide visual interest at the scale of the
pedestrian and reduce massiveness effects. The elements
in the following standard should be integral parts of the
building fabric and not superficially applied trim or
graphics, or paint.
[2] Standards: Building facades must include a repeating
pattern of at least two of the elements listed below or of
other architectural features. At least one of the elements
shall repeat horizontally. All elements shall repeat at
intervals of no more than 30 feet.
[a] Color change;
§ 213-43.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-43.1
1:681
[b] Texture change;
[c] Material module change; or
[d] Expression of architectural or structural bay through a
change in plan no less than 12 inches in width, such as
an offset or reveal.
(c) Roofs.
[1] Objective: Variations in rooflines should be used to add
interest to and reduce the massive scale of large buildings.
[2] Standards:
[a] Roofs shall have no less than two of the following
features:
[i] Overhanging eaves, extending no less than three
feet past the supporting walls;
[ii] Three or more roof slope planes; or
[iii] Other roof features.
[b] In addition, rooftop mechanical equipment must be set
back from building edges, appropriately screened and/or
located so equipment is not visible from public streets.
Also, such equipment shall be integrated into the
architecture design of the building so as to be
inconspicuous.
(d) Back and side facades.
[1] Objective: All facades of a building should contribute to
the pleasing scale features of the building and encourage
community integration by featuring characteristics similar
to the front facade.
(3) Residential site standards. The site shall be designed to integrate
the multifamily residential use with other approved nonresidential
uses (including, but not limited to, retail, office, and recreation uses)
to achieve a village-style mixed-use environment with the residential
use fully integrated into the site in residential buildings and in
buildings that also contain nonresidential uses. Such integration
shall also include shared roadways/parking, utilities, appropriate
open space area, landscaping/buffers, strong pedestrian
interconnections within the commercial/residential development
and to other adjacent nonresidential uses, and related
improvements.
(a) Residential uses shall be permitted in separate residential
buildings and/or in buildings which include nonresidential uses.
(b) Residential units shall be either studio/efficiency units, onebedroom
units, or two-bedroom units. Not more than 50% of the
total number of residential units within the first phase of the
development shall be two-bedroom units.
(c) The floor area of the aggregate of all residential units in the
proposed development shall be limited to a maximum ratio of 1:1
to the nonresidential floor area within the entire development.
Facilities for the sole purpose of support of a residential use,
such as club houses, meeting rooms, shall not be counted as
either residential or nonresidential floor area in determining
§ 213-43.1 MERIDEN CODE § 213-43.1
1:682
compliance with the ratio. Offices and garages within residential
buildings shall be counted as residential floor area.
(d) The construction of a development plan may be approved by the
Commission to be done in phases, but construction of residential
units must be preceded by construction of nonresidential floor
area at a ratio of 3:1 nonresidential to residential floor area.
Therefore, for every square foot of residential floor area
constructed, there must exist three square feet of nonresidential
floor area. This required sequence ceases upon the construction
of 50% nonresidential floor area per the adopted overall
development plan.
(e) Each residential unit shall require a minimum of 725 square
feet of open space within the site. Such open space may be for
recreation purposes (active or passive) or for preservation of
natural features (wetlands, wooded areas, open lawns, etc.), or
both.
(f) Parking shall be provided at a minimum of 1.75 spaces per
residential unit and may be designated in open lot parking,
carports, or garages. Parking spaces shall be a minimum of nine
feet wide by 18 feet deep. Parking spaces in multistory parking
garages may be smaller subject to approval by the Planning
Commission.
(g) Infrastructure improvements as utilities, roadways, and related
improvements shall conform to City design standards. Twentyfour-
foot pavement width for driveways is acceptable. Standards
may be reduced or waived as deemed appropriate and approved
by the Planning Commission. All utilities shall be underground.
Concrete sidewalks shall be required to appropriately
interconnect the proposed development with other uses on the
site or adjacent sites and also wherever deemed necessary by
the Commission.
(h) Roadways and utilities: Unless specifically noted by the
applicant at the time of site plan application and specifically
approved by the Commission, all roads and utilities within the
site shall be owned and maintained by the owner of the site,
an association or other entity formed to carry out maintenance,
and/or the utility company.
(i) Residential building design requirements.
[1] Objective: Buildings shall have architectural features and
patterns that provide visual interest, are at human scale,
reduce building massing to residential scale. The elements
in the following standards shall be integral parts of the
building design.
[2] Standards:
[a] Roofs: Roofs shall be identifiable with roof patterns
normally seen in residential structures in the local and
New England area and considered to be part of an
architectural period design.
§ 213-43.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-43.1
1:683
[b] Rooftop-mounted and at-grade installed mechanical
equipment must be installed, screened, and/or located
so the equipment is not visible from streets as defined in
these regulations.
[c] Housing unit types: The site shall include buildings
which contain a mixture of housing unit types. Housing
types may include units that allow the occupant to also
conduct a small business within the unit (live/work for
professional and home occupation).
[d] Exterior building materials and colors are a significant
part of the visual impact of a building. They must be
aesthetically pleasing, use materials normally found in
residential construction in the local area and New
England, and, where appropriate, be compatible with
other residential construction in the local area.
[e] Back and side facades of a building shall contribute to
the pleasing scale features of the building and shall be
integrated with the front facade by featuring materials
and characteristics similar to the front facade.
[f] Any portion of a building fronting on a City street must
have the appearance of the front of building as not to
"turn its back to the street."
H. Landscaping. A detailed landscaping plan shall be required as part of
the final certificate approval application. The landscaping plan shall
include a detailed planting layout, planting schedule, and shall note the
type and size of all plantings.
(1) General requirements.
(a) Landscaping, trees and plants required by these regulations
shall be planted in a growing condition according to accepted
horticultural practices, and they shall be maintained in a healthy
growing condition. Any landscaping, trees, and plants which are
in a condition that does not fulfill the intent of these regulations
shall be replaced by the property owner during the next planting
season for the particular plant material.
(b) To the extent possible, existing trees, vegetation, and unique
site features shall be retained and protected. Existing healthy,
mature trees, if properly located, shall be fully credited against
the requirements of these regulations.
(2) Standards. The following minimum landscaping standards shall be
met:
(a) Perimeter buffer.
[1] There shall be a landscaped strip equal to at least 30% of the
required perimeter buffer along the property. The required
landscaped area shall be covered with grass or other ground
cover and shall include appropriate trees and shrubs.
[2] One shade tree having a caliper of not less than two inches
(12 feet) shall be planted within the front landscaped area
for each 20 feet or fraction thereof of lot frontage.
(b) Side and rear yards.
§ 213-43.1 MERIDEN CODE § 213-43.1
1:684
[1] All unpaved areas not utilized for parking and storage shall
be landscaped utilizing lawn ground cover and/or shrub and
tree material.
[2] Undeveloped areas proposed for future expansion shall be
maintained in a weed-free condition but need not be
landscaped.
[3] Areas used for parking shall be screened from view or have
the view interrupted by landscaping and/or fencing from
access streets, highways and adjacent properties. Plant
materials used for screening purposes shall consist of lineal
or grouped masses of shrubs and/or trees of a sufficient size
and height to meet this requirement when initially installed.
(c) Sloped banks. All sloped banks greater than five to one and
adjacent to public rights-of-way shall be stabilized, planted and
irrigated with full coverage in accordance with plans submitted
to and approved by the Planning Commission.
(d) Pedestrian access. The site plan shall detail consideration for
pedestrian access to the subject property and to adjacent
properties. The plan shall show all interior walkways and all
walkways in the public right-of-way if such walkways are
proposed or necessary.
(e) Loading docks, truck parking, utility meters, HVAC equipment,
trash collection, trash compaction and other service functions
shall be incorporated into the overall design of the building
and the landscaping so that the visual and acoustic impacts of
these functions are fully contained and out of view from adjacent
properties, public streets, pedestrian ways and public sidewalks,
and no attention is attracted to the functions by the use of
screening materials that are different from or inferior to the
principal materials of the building landscape.
I. Signs. The following signs are allowed in the Interstate Development
District. The following signs may be illuminated indirectly and are
allowed by the Planning Commission, except if otherwise noted:
(1) Freestanding signs.
(a) One freestanding sign at the primary entrance to the site from
the major local street, which may be a business identification,
area identification, directory sign or a combination, not
exceeding the following dimensions: 100 square feet in area per
side, up to 25 feet in height, and set back 10 feet from the street
line.
(b) One freestanding sign along the frontage of I-691/I-91 which
may be a business identification, area identification directory
sign or a combination, not exceeding the following dimensions:
300 square feet in area per side, up to 35 feet in height, and set
back 10 feet from the property line.
(2) Wall signs.
(a) One wall sign per building occupant, which may be either a
business, area identification or directory sign. Total wall signs
shall not exceed 5% of the wall to which it is attached.
§ 213-43.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-43.1
1:685
[1] For those lots bordering I-691 or I-91, one additional wall
sign is allowed for walls facing the highway. Such signs shall
not exceed 5% of the building wall to which it is attached.
[2] For multitenanted buildings, a sixteen-square-foot directory
sign may be affixed to the entrance wall of buildings with a
common entry.
(b) One sign per building occupant which may be either a business,
area identification or directory sign, not exceeding six square
feet in area per face.
(c) One door identity/logo per occupant entrance to be affixed at
height of pull hardware, not to exceed 12 inches in height.
(d) One window decal per glass panel, to be affixed to the inside
face of a tenant's storefront glass, not to exceed four inches in
height.
(e) Mailing address: occupant address number discretely affixed to
storefront.
(f) Site banners: up to two banners per light pole, not to exceed 16
square feet per face.
(g) Awnings. Signage integral to storefront awnings shall be
permitted.
(3) Multiple freestanding directory/directional signs are allowed on
properties with businesses located in two or more buildings. Such
signs shall be located in areas designed to facilitate proper vehicular
and/or pedestrian circulation. The sign shall contain only the names
of occupants and an indication of where they are located. The sign
area shall not exceed 60 square feet per face.
(4) One freestanding temporary identification sign listing the name of
future tenants, responsible agent or realtor and the identification
of the complex. The sign may remain until such time as a final
inspection of the building(s) designates said structure(s) fit for
occupancy or the tenant(s) are occupying said building(s),
whichever occurs first. The sign may not exceed a maximum of 40
square feet, and may not be illuminated.
J. Application procedure.
(1) Overall Development Plan: The initial step in the planning and
zoning application/review process is the Planning Commission's
approval, following a public hearing, of an Overall Development
Plan. The Overall Development Plan is a plan of the entire Interstate
Development District showing, in schematic form, the areas of the
proposed development with the following elements:
(a) Proposed use areas, density, acreage and the general floor area
assigned to each.
(b) Proposed vehicular and pedestrian circulation patterns,
prepared by a certified traffic engineer. Said plan shall include
location, size and adequate number of parking stalls, access
management strategies, parking barriers, walk, recreational
and bicycle ways, curb cut and crossing locations on existing
and proposed streets.
§ 213-43.1 MERIDEN CODE § 213-43.1
1:686
(c) Proposed open space areas, such as parks, lawn areas,
recreational and natural spaces.
(d) Proposed general landscaping, including modifications to
present treed, sloped, and watercourse areas, areas of formal
plantings, and related treatment of open space, present
screening and proposed topography.
(e) Schematic layouts of utility systems, including water, sewerage,
and drainage, including capacity and additional flow into
watercourses and ponds and the location of connections of the
proposed utility system to present utilities.
(f) Proposed location and height of buildings and other structures,
indicating feasibility in relation to the above elements.
(g) Proposed architectural and design features.
(h) Proposed boundaries for stages of development within the
district, if applicable.
(2) Certificate of approval.
(a) For any development within an Interstate Development District,
a site plan must be reviewed and a certificate of approval must
be issued by the Planning Commission in accordance with the
requirements and procedures of Article XI, § 213-72, of the
Zoning Regulations prior to the issuance of a building permit.
(b) In order to aid the Planning Commission's review of an
Interstate Development District proposal, the Commission shall
require that the developer submit for review the following
information and studies in addition to the information required
for a certificate of approval application:
[1] A traffic study, prepared by a certified traffic engineer,
which identifies the probable impacts of a proposed
development on the road network in the surrounding area
and the measures necessary to mitigate the negative traffic
impacts, if any;
[2] Parking, traffic and pedestrian circulation plan;
[3] Architectural elevations and renderings of buildings and
structures;
[4] Landscaping plan;
[5] Lighting plan;
[6] Soil erosion control plan;
[7] An economic feasibility report which provides sufficient
evidence that the developer has the financial means and
experience necessary to successfully carry out the project
and identifies the fiscal impact of the project on the City.
Fiscal impact should include but not be limited to: the
anticipated change in Grand List, the effect on City services
to be provided and associated cost. The Commission may
require the applicant to pay for an independent consultant
used by the City to advise the Commission regarding the
economic feasibility report;
[8] The site plan shall include all buildings, utilities, grading
and structures, both for principal and accessory uses;
§ 213-43.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-43.1
1:687
[9] An environmental impact report;
[10] Inland wetlands plan;
[11] A written statement must be provided by the applicant
addressing the following:
[a] The reasons the particular proposal is consistent with
the statement of objectives;
[b] A detailed description of all uses and how each use is
related to the primary use. This statement shall include
area calculations, employment projections, time of
operation, storage and equipment area and special
needs.
[12] In the case of plans that call for development over a period
of years, a schedule showing the time within which the
phase will be completed;
[13] Plans for each development shall be accompanied by an
updated Overall Development Plan showing all existing
developments and the proposed development at a scale of
one inch equals 200 feet;
[14] Proposed and approved certificate of approval and Overall
Development Plans shall be provided in PDF form. Three
hard copies of all plans must be submitted to the Planning
office.
K. Consolidated properties.
(1) Purpose. In the interest of promoting development continuity, the
consolidation of contiguous parcels to the Interstate Development
District is encouraged. "Consolidation" is defined here as the
integration of two or more individually owned parcels into a single
consolidated parcel for the purposes of creating a shared-use
arrangement of selected site components, e.g., common points of
access/egress, drive passage, parking, loading/unloading, and
yards. Said consolidated parcel then is added to the overall
Interstate Development District parcel and could be used in all
aspects to enhance the zone once it is shown on the Overall
Development Plan and approved as a formal zone change.
(2) Procedure.
(a) A consolidated parcel shall be developed with an amendment to
the Overall Development Plan of buildings, parking, loading and
unloading, and open space.
(b) A zone change to IDD must be approved by the Commission and
City Council for each consolidated parcel.
(c) The consolidated parcel must be legally combined with the
initial IDD zoned parcel.
(d) Certificate of approval is required prior to the development of
any consolidated parcel of access/egress. Such restriction would
be in accordance with current access management policies and
plans.
L. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
§ 213-43.1 MERIDEN CODE § 213-43.1
1:688
FLOOR AREA — Does not include stand-alone parking structures or
parking lots.
HUMAN SCALED — Site and building design elements that are
dimensionally related to pedestrians, such as: small building spaces
with individual entrances (e.g., as is typical of downtowns and main
street developments); larger buildings which have articulation and
detailing to break up large masses; narrower streets with tree canopies;
smaller parking areas or parking areas broken up into small components
with landscaping; and pedestrian amenities, such as sidewalks, plazas,
outdoor seating, shorter light poles (usually 10 feet to 14 feet), weather
protection (e.g., awnings or canopies), and similar features. These
features are all generally smaller in scale than those which are primarily
intended to accommodate automobile traffic.
PEDESTRIAN AMENITIES — Pedestrian amenities serve as informal
gathering places for socializing, resting, and enjoyment of a particular
area and contribute to a walkable center. Typical amenities include
extra wide sidewalks, street trees, sitting spaces, weather protection
(awnings or canopies), pedestrian-scale lighting, bus stop seating,
sidewalk dining, etc.
PEDESTRIAN-FRIENDLY/PEDESTRIAN-ORIENTED — Development
which is designed with an emphasis primarily on the sidewalk and
pedestrian access to and within the site and building, rather than on
auto access and parking areas. The building is generally placed close
to the street and the main entrance is oriented to the street sidewalk.
There are generally windows or display cases along building facades
which face the street.
STRIP COMMERCIAL CENTER — Strip commercial centers are
typically developed, owned and maintained as a unit and have large
parking lots in front, with many/most of the stores arranged in a straight
row and an automobile-centric design. Proliferation results in a pattern
of development wherein commercial development is strung along an
arterial thoroughfare.
M. Off-site improvements.
(1) Approval prerequisites. Prior to the receiving of a building permit
for any Interstate Development District, the developer and City shall
agree on the developer's share of specific improvements related to
the project to be maintained by the City within the City right-of-way
or easement. The developer shall pay a pro rata share of the cost
of providing any reasonable and necessary street improvements and
water, sewerage and drainage facilities, and easements therefor,
located outside the property limits of the development. All payments
shall be in the manner provided herein, it being the intent of this
section that the developer bear that portion of the cost which is
related to improvements.
(2) Mitigation fee. A mitigation fee will be charged to all new
development, including expansions of current uses. The mitigation
fee will be primarily for applicable off-site traffic improvements
§ 213-43.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-43.1
1:689
required in the study area that are not part of site plan approval.
The mitigation fee will be proportionate to the development's impact
on the area. This amount will be determined by the Commission. The
mitigation fees will be based on the parking spaces provided. The
fee structure will be determined by the Commission.
N. Precedence over inconsistent provisions of Zoning Ordinance. This
section shall supersede all sections of the Zoning Ordinance of the City
of Meriden where they may conflict.
O. Modification — special permit. The Planning Commission by special
permit is authorized to allow a limited modification in excess of the
Interstate Development District standards as herewith provided. The
limited modification could allow an applicant to modify the certain
standards (setbacks, coverage, building height, landscaping
requirements, parking and signs) not to exceed 5% of the required
standard. Density, use ratios (commercial to residential), permitted
uses, facade and wall standards cannot be modified by either the
Planning Commission or Zoning Board of Appeals.
§ 213-44. Swimming pools.130
Except as provided hereinafter, no swimming pool shall be located,
constructed or maintained on any lot except in conformity with the following
requirements:
A. Said pool may be installed or maintained in any residential district or in
any nonresidential district where specifically permitted.
B. Said pool shall be used as an accessory use to a dwelling or group of
dwellings or as part of the recreational facilities of a camp, club or
similar use.
C. When accessory to a single-family residence, such pool may be located
in a side or rear yard.
D. The portion of the premises upon which such pool is located shall be
entirely enclosed with a good quality security fence, which, any other
provision of this chapter notwithstanding, shall have a height of not
less than four feet. All gates or doors opening through the fence shall
be equipped with self-closing and self-latching devices designed and
capable of keeping such gates or doors securely closed at all times when
not in actual use. Said fence shall be of a type approved by the Building
Official.
E. Every gate or other opening in the fence enclosing such pool shall be
kept securely locked at all times when said pool is not in use.
F. Such pool shall be located not less than five feet from any lot lines and
not less than 10 feet from the main building.
G. Such a pool shall be chemically treated in a manner sufficient to
maintain the bacterial standards established by the provisions of the
Connecticut State Sanitary Code relating to public swimming pools.
H. Where the proposed pool is so located or is of such height or design that
protective fencing is not required or impractical, the Building Official
130. Editor's Note: See Diagram 8, Location of Swimming Pool or Tennis Court or Accessory
Use, at the end of this chapter.
§ 213-43.1 MERIDEN CODE § 213-44
1:690
may, at his discretion, issue a permit for the erection of said pool without
such fencing. The Building Official shall, however, first make a finding
to the effect that, in his opinion, the said pool has protection from entry
equivalent to that afforded by the erection of a fence as provided for in
Subsection D above.
I. Such pool shall be equipped with an integral filtration system and filter
pumps or other mechanical devices, which shall be so located and
constructed as not to interfere with the peace, comfort and repose of the
occupants of any adjoining property.
§ 213-45. Tennis courts and similar accessory recreation
facilities.131
A. When accessory to a single-family residence, any tennis court, paddle
tennis court or similar accessory recreation facility may be located in a
rear yard or side yard, but not within the required minimum yard. No
such facility may be located closer to the property lines than is permitted
for accessory structures in the district in which the property is located.
B. A fence or suitable planting strip shall be provided to screen the
recreation use from view from adjacent properties.
§ 213-46. Landscaping requirements.
A. Required landscaping.
(1) All portions of improved multifamily and nonresidential properties
which are not used for buildings, structures, off-street parking and
loading, permitted outdoor storage, driveways, walkways or similar
purposes shall be appropriately landscaped with grass, shrubs, trees
and other ground cover in such manner as to minimize erosion and
stormwater runoff and to maintain or improve the aesthetics of such
development.
(2) Landscape strips at least three feet wide shall be provided along
all property lines of multifamily developments in any zone and
nonresidential uses within residential zones. Such landscape strips
shall comply with the following minimum standards as well as all
applicable requirements set forth elsewhere in this chapter:
(a) Said landscape strips shall include evergreen planting and other
landscaping of such type, height, spacing and arrangement as, in
the judgment of the Planning Commission, will effectively screen
the activity on the lot from neighboring uses. New trees shall
have a caliper of not less than three inches, three feet from the
base, and shall be at least six feet high when planted.
(b) Unless specifically required elsewhere in this chapter, an opaque
wall or fence of location, height, design and materials approved
by the Planning Commission may be substituted for part or all of
the required landscape strips.
(c) Where the existing topography and/or existing landscaping
provides adequate screening, the Planning Commission may
131. Editor's Note: See Diagram 8, Location of Swimming Pool or Tennis Court or Accessory
Use, at the end of this chapter.
§ 213-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-46
1:691
waive or modify the planting and/or landscape requirements of
this chapter.
(3) A landscaped area of at least 25 feet shall be provided between any
residential district and a C-1, C-2, C-3, M-1, M-2, M-3 or M-4 District
for purposes of visual and noise buffering.
B. Maintenance. All fences, trees, plantings, shrubbery or other screening
required by direction of the City Council, the Zoning Board of Appeals,
the Planning Commission or by this chapter shall be maintained at all
times at least to the same quality required of said items at the time they
were initially installed.
§ 213-47. Outdoor storage.
A. Junkyards, building material yards and industrial and commercial
equipment storage as a principal use.
(1) The storage of scrap, salvage, vehicle parts, lumber, fuel, equipment
and similar operations shall be conducted within a building or within
a solid board or masonry fence at least eight feet in height.
(2) The required fencing shall not be allowed to deteriorate, and the
required setbacks shall be maintained and kept free of rubbish,
scrap, weeds and other unsightly materials.
(3) No storage of scrap, wrecked vehicles or equipment shall be allowed
to extend above the required fencing.
B. Outdoor storage of vehicles, materials and equipment, as an accessory
use in any nonresidential district, shall be subject to the following
conditions:
(1) The outdoor storage of vehicles, materials and equipment shall be
located on the same premises as the principal use or building.
(2) All outdoor storage areas shall be located in the side or rear yards
but not within the required yard, except as provided herein.
(3) All outdoor storage areas shall be screened from view by suitable
landscaping and/or an eight-foot fence, except as provided herein.
(4) The outdoor display of motor vehicles, when accessory to a permitted
use or any use allowed as a special exception in the C-2, C-3, M-2 or
M-3 District, shall be exempt from the provisions of Subsection B(2)
or (3) above. Outdoor display of motor vehicles for indoor automotive
sales shall be limited to same-day staging of test drive vehicles.
[Amended 3-5-1990; 7-16-2018]
(5) In no case shall stored materials exceed the height of the screening
or fencing.
(6) No outdoor storage area shall be located within 10 feet of any lot
line.
(7) All equipment and vehicles in a storage area shall be in operable
condition.
(8) No tractor-trailer or truck loaded with merchandise shall be parked
or stored on a lot for a period exceeding seven consecutive days in
one calendar month.
(9) All areas utilized for the outdoor storage or display of motor vehicles
shall be paved with a dust-free all-weather surface. [Added
3-5-1990]
§ 213-46 MERIDEN CODE § 213-48
1:692
§ 213-48. Supplementary lot, yard, height and building regulations.
The following general regulations relating to lots, yards, visibility at
intersections, height limits and dwellings are applicable to all zoning
districts, unless otherwise specified, and are to be applied in addition to the
specific requirements of the applicable zoning district.
A. Building on unaccepted streets.
(1) No building permit shall be issued and no building shall be erected on any
lot within the City unless the street giving access to the lot upon which said
building is proposed to be placed shall have been accepted by the City or
unless such street corresponds in its location and lines with a street shown
on a subdivision plan approved by the Planning Commission.
(2) This requirement shall not prevent issuance of a building permit for the
construction of farm or accessory buildings which are not in violation of any
lawful zoning or building regulations.
B. Rear lots. [Amended 4-3-2006]
(1) Rear lots shall be permitted only in R-R, S-R and R-1 Districts.
(2) Access to rear lot shall be provided by an accessway, as defined in § 213-7 of
this chapter. Said accessway shall be in the same ownership as the rear lot
and be owned in fee simple. The area of such accessway shall not be included
in the minimum required lot area as set forth in Subsection B(3) hereof. Each
accessway shall provide access to a City-accepted street for one lot only, and the
maximum number of adjoining accessways should be two.
(3) Any rear lot shall meet the zoning requirements of the district within which it is
located, excluding the area of the accessway, except that the lot area, minimum
width and front and side yard setbacks shall be:
Zone
Minimum Lot
Size
(square feet)
Minimum
Width
(feet)
Front Yard
Setback
(feet)
Side Yard
Setback
(feet)
R-R 80,000 250 60 40
S-R 45,000 175 40 25
R-1 34,000 125 40 20
(4) Accessways to rear lots shall be a minimum of 25 feet wide, with a minimum
twelve-foot-wide paved driveway. Said driveway shall be a maximum of 425
feet in length and have less than a twelve-percent grade. Two rear lots with
contiguous accessways may share one driveway. Contiguous driveways must
be separated by a landscaped strip at least five feet in width. [Amended
12-21-2009]
(5) Identification sign. Each driveway shall be identified by a sign indicating the
street number of the house which the driveway serves and shall be of sufficient
size to meet the house numbering requirements of the Fire Department. Such
signs shall be visible to emergency personnel at all times.
(6) Consideration shall be given to buffering the rear lot from adjacent properties.
Every effort must be made to retain existing natural buffers in setback areas.
C. Through lots. On a through lot, front yards are required on all streets in
accordance with the applicable district.
§ 213-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-48
1:693
D. Yards.
(1) All yards shall be suitably landscaped and shall not be used for any building or
structure. [Amended 12-21-2009]
(a) Suitably landscaped residential yards shall include a large front, rear or side
yard area of lawn. [Amended 1-3-2012]
[1] No single-family residential lot shall be created without an approved
(suitable) landscape plan showing grading and ground-cover for which
development will need to conform with. Said large lawn area should
be at least equivalent to the size of the single-family home structure's
footprint, generally rectangular, with the smallest dimension at least
25 feet in length. Said large lawn area shall be generally level (not
exceeding 10% grade in any direction). Said large lawn area may
include garden or mulch, or host an uncovered patio or pool as allowed
under regulation.
[2] No building permit for a new or expanded-footprint residence shall be
granted on any single-family lot of nonconforming size or lot with area
and/or density variance without an approved (suitable) landscape plan.
For lots created prior to approval of this section, and not modified
thereafter, the Planning Department may approve two smaller lawn
areas, greater in overall size than the home footprint, to meet the intent
of the large yard requirement. Other lawn areas may be approved for
single-family lots in multiple-family districts.
(b) (Reserved)
(c) Any land shown to include yards with wetland/watercourse or steep slope
soils (greater than 15%) in the Plan of Conservation and Development's
Map of Environmentally Sensitive Soils must have a detailed development,
landscape, drainage and slope maintenance plan approved by the City
Planner and the City Engineer or their agents. Said plan must show
substantial areas for building devoid of easements or other nonbuildable
areas (wetland/watercourse areas, very steep slopes, etc.) that could
prevent building. Said plan must also show areas for suitable yards;
otherwise maps to be filed with the City Clerk creating new yards shall be
marked "Not Approved as a Building Lot."
(d) Approval of a detailed development, landscaping, drainage and slope
maintenance plan showing viable use and improvements of all residential
lots, yards and the ROW as necessary shall be required for permitting and
development, and all improvements shall be completed and stabilized prior
to occupancy.
(2) Front yards. Each lot shall be required to have a minimum front yard as
specified in the applicable district. The required front yard on any major or
collector street shall be measured from the center line of the street as follows:
District
Major Street
(feet)
Collector Street
(feet)
R-R 80 70
S-R 65 55
R-1 65 55
§ 213-48 MERIDEN CODE § 213-48
1:694
District
Major Street
(feet)
Collector Street
(feet)
R-2 65 55
R-3 65 55
R-4 75 65
C-1 40 30
C-2 55 45
C-3 55 45
C-4 (As specified for the adjacent R District)
M-1 80 70
M-2 65 55
M-3 65 55
M-4 90 80
(3) Where four or more lots in a block have been improved with buildings, the
minimum required front yard for main buildings shall be the average of the front
yards of the improved lots if less than the front yard requirements herein, but in
no case less than 15 feet. Further, no residential garage shall be closer than 20
feet from the street line. [Amended 1-3-2012]
(4) Projection into yard. Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the projection of not
more than four feet into a required yard of pilasters, belt courses, columns,
sills, cornices, open uncovered porches or similar architectural features. Fire
towers and stairwells may project not more than six feet into any required yard.
However, in no case may such feature project closer than four feet to an interior
lot line.
(5) The minimum front yard requirement for cul-de-sac turnaround areas shall be
35 feet from the property line. [Amended 12-21-2009]
E. Lots with private utility systems. Any lot in any district which has a private
water and sewer disposal system shall contain a minimum of 40,000 square feet
and have a minimum lot frontage of 100 feet.
F. Visibility.132
(1) No structure, wall, fence, shrubbery or trees shall be erected, maintained
or planted on any lot which unreasonably or dangerously obstructs or
interferes with the visibility of drivers of vehicles on a curve or at any street
intersection. The minimum vision clearance shall require a clear space
between the elevations of 2 1/2 feet and seven feet above the street grade
(top of curb) within 25 feet of the intersecting street lines bordering corner
lots.
(2) No fence, hedge, screen or planting shall exceed four feet in height within
any front yard.
G. Accessory buildings.
132. Editor's Note: See Diagram 7, Visibility at Street Intersections, included as an attachment
to this chapter.
§ 213-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-48
1:695
(1) Detached accessory buildings in R-R, S-R, R-1, R-2, R-3 and R-4 Districts,
not more than 15 feet in height and not used for human habitation nor for
the housing of animals or fowl, may be located in the rear yard not less than
five feet from any property lot line. Any accessory building located in a side
yard must be set back a minimum of 20 feet, except that, in an R-4 District,
it must be set back 10 feet.
(2) Accessory buildings in C-1, C-2, C-3 and C-4 Districts, not more than 15 feet
in height, may be located not closer than 15 feet to a side or rear property
line. Accessory buildings in an M-1 District, not more than 35 feet high,
may be located not closer than 25 feet to a side or rear lot line. Accessory
buildings in M-2 and M-3 Districts, up to 35 feet high, may be located not
closer than 20 feet to a side or rear lot line.
(3) In case any accessory building is attached to and made structurally a part
of the main building, it shall comply in all respects with the requirements of
this chapter applicable to the main building. A garage attached to the main
building, having its entrance from a side street or cul-de-sac turnaround,
shall be located at least 25 feet from the property line.
§ 213-49. Exceptions and modifications.
A. Height limits.
(1) Spires, chimneys, elevator housings, machinery, towers, radio and
television towers, penthouses, scenery lofts, cupolas, water tanks
and similar architectural structures may be built and used to a
height of not more than 15 feet above the height limit established
for the district in which the structure is located, provided that no
such architectural structure in excess of the allowable height shall
be used for sleeping or eating quarters or for any commercial
advertising.
(2) Public utilities, gas and electric transmission lines and towers and
poles adjacent thereto may be allowed in all districts to greater
heights than established for the district in which the structures
are located without the securing of a special exception therefor,
provided that all routes of transmission lines shall be submitted to
the Planning Commission prior to installation of such routes.
(3) On sixty-foot or wider lots in the S-R, R-1 and R-2 Zones, the
maximum height of buildings within the height restricted band shall
be 30 feet. [Added 1-3-2012]
(4) On lots narrower than 60 feet in the S-R, R-1, R-2 Zones, the
maximum height of buildings shall be two stories (not to exceed 30
feet). [Added 1-3-2012]
B. Lots in industrial zones. In any industrial zone, the rear or side yard
adjacent to a railroad siding may be eliminated, provided that the three
other required yards are maintained.
§ 213-50. Extraction and excavation regulation.
A. General provisions. [Amended 2-3-1986; 12-21-1998]
(1) Extraction and excavation of earth, sand, gravel, clay, stone or other
material shall be allowed in all zones as surplus material resulting
from a bona fide construction, landscape or agricultural operation
§ 213-48 MERIDEN CODE § 213-50
1:696
being executed on the premises for which a building permit, site plan
or subdivision approval has been granted, and provided that no more
material is removed from the site than that material necessary to
develop the site in a manner that reasonably maintains the current
topography of the property. Any damage to the landscape must be
repaired.
(2) Excavation and extraction of more than 100 cubic yards shall be
permitted only in all commercial and industrial zoning districts by
the Planning Commission after a public hearing, provided that, in
its judgement, such operation will not impair the water supply, flood
protection or natural condition of any public park or wildlife
reservation, and subject to the following conditions:
(a) The applicant shall submit a plan showing existing grades in
the area from which material is to be removed, together with
finished grades at the conclusion of the operation.
(b) The plan shall provide for proper drainage of the area of the
operation during and after completion, and no bank shall exceed
a slope considered excessive for the material encountered.
(c) No removal shall take place within 30 feet of a property line,
except that, where grade from the property line rises towards
the lot where removal is to take place, material lying above the
grade at the property line may be removed.
(d) The applicant shall submit a soil erosion and sedimentation
control plan where the disturbed area is cumulatively more
than 1/2 acre in conformance with § 213-57 of this chapter. The
plan shall contain provisions to adequately control accelerated
erosion and sedimentation and reduce the danger from
stormwater runoff. Plans for soil erosion and sediment control
shall be developed using the principles as outlined in Chapters
3 and 4 of the Connecticut Guidelines for Erosion and Sediment
Control (1985), as amended. The plan shall result in an
operation that minimizes erosion and sedimentation during
construction, is stabilized and protected from erosion when
complete and does not cause off-site erosion and/or
sedimentation.
(e) Before a permit is granted by the Planning Commission under
this section, the applicant shall post a bond with the Planning
Commission in an amount approved by the Commission as
sufficient to guarantee conformity with the provisions of the
permit issued hereunder, including an amount sufficient to cover
the cost of fill, if necessary, under the provisions of § 213-50C.
(f) The earth excavation permit shall be valid for two years. After
the expiration of this period, the applicant shall be required
to reapply to the Planning Commission for a new permit. The
Commission may, in its sole discretion, grant a new permit upon
evaluation of the operation.
(g) Proposed routes of truck traffic shall be indicated as a part of
the application. Use of streets in residential districts shall be
discouraged.
§ 213-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-50
1:697
(h) A phasing plan shall be submitted with the application.
(i) Landscaping and reclamation plan. An inventory of all existing
trees over twelve-inch caliper and other significant flora and
fauna shall be submitted. Removal of trees over twelve-inch
caliper shall be discouraged. The removal of all other significant
flora as identified by the inventory shall be discouraged. A
landscaping/reclamation plan, including work schedule for
completion, shall be prepared by a design professional or firm
experienced in reclamation of property, which shall show the
type, location and extent of all proposed vegetation to be
retained or restored to the land, preferably in accordance with
site-specific application of the United States Soil Conservation
Service Guidelines.
(j) Ground cover. At the conclusion of the operation or of any
substantial portion thereof, the whole area where removal takes
place shall be covered with not less than four inches of topsoil
and seeded with a suitable cover crop, except where ledge rock
is exposed.
(k) Location of buildings, roads, septic tanks and wells within 500
feet of the affected area should be shown on the site plans.
(l) A hydrogeologist's report, including test boring to ascertain
water table, effect on water table, effect on wells in the
neighborhood, effect on watercourses, wetlands, etc., shall be
provided and proved to be not detrimental.
(m) Information on soil type and depth, rock ledge, certified by a soil
scientist, shall be provided with the application.
(n) An estimate of the number of cubic yards to be filled, excavated,
graded or removed and an estimate of the time necessary to
complete the operation.
(o) An estimate of the number, types and hours of operation of
trucks and other machinery to be used on site and the locations
and types of any buildings, including temporary buildings, to be
erected.
(p) Details of blasting and storing of explosives.
(q) The application shall include a street cleaning schedule and dust
control measures. Streets shall be cleaned on a daily basis at a
minimum and more often if required by staff.
(r) Site plan shall comply with objectives and requirements of site
plan approval as set forth in § 213-72.
(s) All restoration should conform to § 213-50B.
(t) As an additional condition of approval, the Commission may
require the applicant to submit periodic reports of progress
including contours and cross sections, prepared and certified
by a licensed engineer or a land surveyor. If at any time the
Commission finds that the excavation, extraction, regrading,
removal or filling is not being conducted in accordance with the
plans as approved, the Commission may order the applicant to
cease operation and may revoke the permit.
§ 213-50 MERIDEN CODE § 213-50
1:698
(3) Topsoil removal shall be permitted in residential zones, with the
following conditions:
(a) Approval from Planning Commission after a public hearing.
(b) Six inches of topsoil should be maintained undisturbed on the
site and certified by a soil scientist.
(c) Subject to conditions set forth in § 213-50A(2) of this chapter.
B. Fill. Where the area to be filled or disturbed is cumulatively more than
1/2 acre, the applicant shall submit a soil erosion and sediment control
plan in conformance with § 213-57 of this chapter. The plan shall contain
provisions to adequately control accelerated erosion and sedimentation
and to reduce the danger from stormwater runoff. Plans for soil erosion
and sediment control shall be developed using the principles as outlined
in Chapters 3 and 4 of the Connecticut Guidelines for Soil Erosion
and Sediment Control (1985), as amended. The plans shall result in an
operation that minimizes erosion and sedimentation during construction,
is stabilized and protected from erosion when complete, and does not
cause off-site erosion and/or sedimentation. Where fill is required to
carry out an approved plan for site development, including approved
drainage plans, or to restore an area excavated in accordance with
§ 213-50A herein, the following shall apply: [Amended 2-3-1986]
(1) Slopes created by fill shall not be steeper than one foot of vertical
rise in two feet horizontal distance for a maximum rise of 10 feet
unless stabilized by a retaining wall or cribbing, except where
approved by the City Engineer. For greater vertical rise, for certain
soils more prone to erosion, and where maintainable lawns are
intended, the slope should be reduced and/or terraced. Any retaining
wall over 36 inches in height, or any wall supporting a surcharge,
is considered a structure and is not allowed within 10 feet of any
property line unless shown on a plan approved by the Planning
Commission. Generally, such walls should be utilized in connection
with steep slope cuts, not fills. [Amended 12-21-2009]
(2) Adequate provisions shall be made to prevent surface water from
damaging the sloping surfaces of fills.
(3) Fills shall not endanger adjoining property.
(4) All fills shall be compacted to provide stability of material and to
prevent undesirable settlement. The fill shall be spread in a series
of layers, each not exceeding 12 inches in thickness, and shall be
compacted after each layer is spread. The City Engineer may require
tests or other information if, in his opinion, the conditions or
materials are such that additional information is necessary.
(5) Fills shall not encroach on natural watercourses, constructed
channels or floodplain areas.
(6) Fills placed adjacent to natural watercourses, constructed channels
or floodplains shall have suitable protection against erosion during
periods of flooding.
(7) Grading shall not be done in such a way as to divert water onto the
property of another landowner without the express consent of the
Planning Commission.
§ 213-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-50
1:699
(8) During fill and grading operations, necessary measures for dust
control shall be exercised.
C. In the event that a building operation is arrested prior to completion
and the building permit therefor is allowed to lapse, within six months
after the date of expiration of such permit the premises shall be cleared
of all rubbish or other unsightly accumulations, and topsoil shall be
replaced over all areas from which such soil may have been removed.
Any excavation for a basement or foundation with a depth greater than
three feet below grade shall be either filled or surrounded by a
substantial fence adequate to deny children access to the area and shall
be adequately maintained by the holder of the permit. If such action is
not taken within said six months, the bond or other surety filed as part
of the approved plan shall be utilized by the City for such purpose.
D. Standards for fill materials. Fill materials consisting of organic materials
or nonsoil materials, such as tree stumps, sawdust, wood chips and bark,
bricks, asphalt, concrete, metal, wallboard, etc., even with a soil mixture,
shall not be used. The in-place fill shall not contain more than 25%
by volume of cobbles (six-inch diameter) and boulders (larger than 12
inches in diameter). The in-place fill should not have more than 27% by
weight of clay-size (0.002 mm and smaller) particles. The fill should be
essentially homogeneous. If bedding planes and other discontinuities are
present, detailed analysis is necessary. [Added 8-2-1988]
§ 213-51. Sale of alcoholic liquor. [Amended 11-19-1984; 3-2-1987;
11-21-1994; 6-7-2004; 5-21-2012; 3-13-2014; 3-4-2019]
A. The sale of alcoholic liquor at retail under any valid class of permit, as
defined in § 30-15, as amended, of the Connecticut General Statutes,
issued by the Liquor Control Commission of the State of Connecticut
for consumption either on the premises or off the premises, shall be
permitted only in the following districts, as established by § 213-8 of this
chapter:
(1) C-1 Central Commercial District.
(2) C-2 General Commercial District.
(3) C-3 Highway Commercial District.
(4) C-4 Convenience or Neighborhood Commercial District
(5) R-4 Multiple-Family/Professional Office District.
(6) M-1 Research, Development and Manufacturing District, under a
hotel or restaurant permit issued by the Liquor Control
Commission of the State of Connecticut.
(7) M-4 Planned Industrial District.
(8) NCDD Neighborhood Commercial Design District.
(9) RDD Regional Development District.
(10) TOD-HC TOD Historic Commercial.
(11) TOD-P TOD Park.
(12) TOD-H TOD Hanover (on primary and secondary streets).
(13) TOD-C TOD Civic (on primary and secondary streets).
(14) TOD-G TOD Gateway (on primary and secondary streets).
B. No building or premises shall be used for the sale of alcoholic liquor
at retail for consumption off the premises under any class of permit,
§ 213-50 MERIDEN CODE § 213-51
1:700
as defined in § 30-15, as amended, of the Connecticut General Statutes,
which may be issued by the Liquor Control Commission of the State
of Connecticut, if the main front entrance to the permit premises shall
be located within a 1,500-foot radius, measured in a straight line, from
the main front entrance of any other permit premises used for the sale
of alcoholic liquor at retail for consumption off the premises under
any class of permit issued by the Liquor Control Commission of the
State of Connecticut. The above distance requirement is not applicable
to any building or premises located in a shopping center development
(§ 213-7B) of at least 50,000 square feet of gross floor area located on a
lot of a minimum area of four acres.
C. No building or premises shall be used for the sale of alcoholic liquor
at retail for consumption on the premises under any class of permit,
as defined in § 30-15, as amended, of the Connecticut General Statues,
which may be issued by the Liquor Control Commission of the State
of Connecticut, if the main front entrance to the permit premises shall
be located within a 1,500-foot radius, measured in a straight line, from
the main front entrance of any other permit premises used for the
sale of alcoholic liquor at retail for consumption on the premises under
any class of permit issued by the Liquor Control Commission of the
State of Connecticut. The above distance requirement is not applicable
to any building or premises located in a shopping center development
(§ 213-7B) of at least 50,000 square feet of gross floor area located on a
lot of a minimum area of four acres.
D. The distance set forth in Subsection C above will be reduced to zero for
restaurants and hotels.
E. Within the TOD area that liquor is permitted, the distance set forth in
Subsection C above will be reduced to zero for bars or nightclubs that
obtain a special permit from the Planning Commission.
F. Notwithstanding the distance restrictions set forth above in this section,
any permittee using a permit premises for the sale of alcoholic liquor
under any class of permit issued by the Liquor Control Commission of
the State of Connecticut shall be allowed to move such permit premises
within a radius of 750 feet of the old permit premises, provided that
said new location is within a district in which the sale of alcoholic liquor
at retail is permitted under this chapter, and provided, further, that
said removal shall be in accordance with the Liquor Control Act and
the rules and regulations of the Liquor Control Commission and, more
particularly, the need for said removal is a result of hardship or caused
by reason of the commencement of an eviction action against such
permittee from the particular permit premises for which the original
permit was issued. All other provisions of this chapter shall be applicable
except the distance restrictions set forth within this section.
G. The provisions of this section shall not be deemed to be retroactive,
except that any permit premises being used for the sale of alcoholic
liquor under any class of permit issued by the Liquor Control
Commission of the State of Connecticut prior to the effective date of
this chapter, which use is not in conformity with the provisions of this
chapter and which shall be voluntarily discontinued for a period of more
§ 213-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-51
1:701
than 60 days, may not be resumed unless such use shall thereafter
conform to this chapter.
H. The words "alcoholic liquor" are meant to conform to the definition of
"alcoholic liquor" as set forth in the Connecticut State Liquor Control
Act, as set forth in Chapter 545 of the Connecticut General Statutes
(§ 30-1).
I. The distance restrictions contained in this section shall not apply to
the sale of alcoholic liquor at retail under a club permit as defined in
§ 30-15, as amended, of the Connecticut General Statutes, issued by the
Liquor Control Commission of the State of Connecticut for consumption
on the premises, and such clubs may be permitted as a special exception
only in the following districts, as established by § 213-8: 1) C-1 Central
Commercial District; 2) C-2 General Commercial District; 3) C-3
Highway Commercial District; 4) M-4 Planned Industrial District; 5) R-4
Multiple-Family/Professional Office District; and may be permitted by a
special permit from the Planning Commission in the following districts:
TOD Sub-Districts that permit liquor.
§ 213-52. Vending machines.
Vending machines shall not be located in any required front yard or in any
street right-of-way.
§ 213-53. Wind energy conservation systems and solar devices.
A. Wind energy conservation systems, such as windmills, are permitted
accessory uses in any district, subject to site plan approval and the
following conditions:
(1) No windmill or similar structure shall exceed 80 feet in height.
(2) No windmill or similar structure shall be located in any required
yard.
(3) The windmill or similar structure shall be set back from all lot lines
a distance at least equal to the height of the windmill or similar
structure.
B. Solar system.
(1) When screening is required on a roof to enclose mechanical
equipment, said screening may be modified to allow access to solar
heating devices.
(2) Where solar heating devices are placed within a front, side or rear
yard, they shall be exempt from coverage and setback requirements,
provided that they do not occupy more than 10% of the yard area.
(3) In any new construction requiring a building permit and/or site plan,
access to solar devices on adjoining property shall be considered and
maximum effort to retain solar access shall be made.
§ 213-54. Performance standards.
A. Purpose. It is the intent of this section to ensure that research, manufacturing
and related activities in the M-1, M-2, M-3 and M-4 Districts are established and
maintained in a manner not detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare
and in a manner beneficial to the use, enjoyment and value of neighboring
§ 213-51 MERIDEN CODE § 213-54
1:702
properties. The use of performance standards is necessary to measure potential
nuisances and hazards objectively, thereby protecting industries from arbitrary
control and at the same time affording the neighboring properties and the
general public necessary protection against hazards and nuisance.
B. Performance standards. The following conditions are imposed as standards to
be met in order that a manufacturing or related activity be in compliance with
this chapter.
(1) Noise. The sound level (a frequency-weighted sound measure level as measured
with a sound-level meter using the A-weighting network = dBA) of any
operation or activity, other than: a) noise created as a result of or relating to
an emergency, including but not limited to sirens, alarms, etc.; b) construction
or demolition activity during the daytime, as herein defined; c) noise created
by blasting, other than that conducted with construction activity, which shall
be exempt, provided that the blasting is conducted between 8:00 a.m. and
5:00 p.m.; d) noise created by on-site recreational activities sanctioned by the
state or local government, including but not limited to parades, sporting events,
concerts, fireworks, etc.; e) noise generated by maintenance equipment for
landscaping and snow removal, i.e., plows, mowers, etc.; f) farming activity;
g) noise generated by transmission or distribution facilities and substations
of public utilities; and h) noise that is directly caused by flight operations
specifically preempted by the Federal Aviation Administration, shall not exceed
the noise zone standards of the state statutes (C.G.S. § 22a-69), as herewith
stated. Measurements shall be taken at a point that is located about one foot
beyond the boundary of the emitter's property within the receptor's property.
Emitter's Zone Receptor's Zone
Industrial Commercial
Residential/
Day1
Residential/
Night2
M-1, M-2,
M-3 and
M-4
C-1, C-2 C-3 and
C-4
R-R, S-R, R-1, R-2, R-3 and
R-4
Industrial: M-1,
M-2, M-3 and
M-4
70 dBA 66 dBA 61 dBA 51 dBA
NOTES:
1 Day is from 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.; on Sunday, 9:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.
2 Night is from 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.; on Saturday, 10:00 p.m. to 9:00 a.m.
Sunday
(2) Vibration. No vibration shall be transmitted and therefore felt outside the lot
from which it originates.
(3) Air pollution.
(a) Provisions shall be made to control emissions of air pollutants (dust, fumes,
smoke, vapor, gas, odorous substances, etc.) into the outdoor atmosphere.
Such provisions shall be in compliance with the following standards and
all applicable federal (i.e., Clean Air Act), state (i.e., Air Pollution Control,
C.G.S. § 22a-174) and City (Code of the City of Meriden, Chapter 58, Air
Pollution) regulations.
§ 213-54 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-54
1:703
(b) Odor from any use, except agricultural activities conducted in a manner as
to minimize odors and except mobile sources, shall not be discernible to any
objectionable degree at the property line.
(c) An odor will be deemed objectionable when either:
[1] The Zoning Enforcement Officer determines, following personal
observation, that the odor is objectionable, taking into account its
nature, concentration, location and duration; or
[2] The Department of Environmental Protection Air Compliance Unit
determines such according to guidelines and standards provided by the
General Statutes of Connecticut.
(4) Glare and heat. All uses shall be conducted so that direct or indirect
illumination from the source of light shall not cause illumination in excess of
0.5 footcandle in any residential zone. Any form of heat shall not be perceptible
outside the lot where it originates.
(5) Electromagnetic radiation. No use on any lot shall cause interference with
radio and television reception on any other lot, and any use shall conform
to the regulations of the Federal Communications Commission with regard to
electromagnetic radiations and to any other applicable regulation.
(6) Dangerous materials and hazardous wastes.
(a) Materials which are dangerous due to the possibility of explosion, fire,
radioactivity, corrosion, toxicity or contamination must be secured and
maintained in a manner approved by federal, state and City agencies
against such dangers as:
[1] Groundwater contamination via leachate and direct discharge.
[2] Surface water contamination via runoff, overflow or direct discharge.
[3] Air pollution via open burning, evaporation, sublimation and wind
erosion.
[4] Fire and explosion.
[5] Human and wildlife contact.
(b) Any activity, whether the generation, treatment, storage, transportation
of hazardous waste (as defined and controlled by § 3001 of the Federal
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act and amendments or subsequent
federal, state or City regulations), is restricted to approved and confirmed
Environmental Protection Agency and Department of Environmental
Protection registrants and security methods and, prior to commencement,
such activity is to be reported to and must be approved by appropriate City
officials.
(c) Any discharge of wastewater into the waters of Meriden (surface or ground)
or into public disposal system must comply (either by its nature or
pretreatment) with all federal (i.e., National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System), state (i.e., water quality standards and criteria) and
City (i.e., City Code, Chapter 170, Sewers) standards.
(7) Standards. In addition to these standards, all relevant provisions of any other
federal, state and City laws and regulations shall also apply. Where such
standards, controls or regulations are not in agreement, the more restrictive
shall apply.
C. Administration.
(1) The occupant of a parcel within an industrial district will be solely
responsible for the maintenance of the performance standards. Where the
§ 213-54 MERIDEN CODE § 213-54
1:704
occupant requests an analysis or investigation by a competent technical
expert after having been informed of an alleged violation, the officer
charged with enforcement may engage competent technical experts to
study the alleged violation. The report of the officer charged with
enforcement, charging that a violation has occurred, shall have sufficient
ground for invoking the provisions of law to enforce compliance hereunder.
(2) Where technical experts have been engaged at the request of the occupant,
the occupant shall bear the cost of such technical investigation if he is
thereafter found to be in violation of the foregoing standards. Where
technical investigation reveals that no violation has occurred, the cost of the
technical investigation shall be borne by the City.
§ 213-55. Off-street parking.133
Off-street parking for the storage or parking of passenger vehicles shall be
provided pursuant to the provisions of this section; provided, however, that
no provision of this section shall prevent the repairing, reconstruction or
rebuilding, without enlargement, and the continued use of any building or
structure lawfully existing at the effective date of this section.
A. On-street parking for employees of any establishment is prohibited. [Amended
5-1-1989]
B. Landscaping and screening. On any parcel where a certificate of approval or
special exception permit is required and the parking area faces a street or
property line, a planting area of a minimum width of three feet with appropriate
plantings at least three feet high planted three feet on center shall be provided
between the parking area and the street line or property line, except for a
front street line in industrial districts, where the landscaped area shall be 20
feet. The planting plan for this strip, as well as all additional interior linear
and end islands, shall be approved by the Planning Commission. Said plan
shall specify appropriate plantings suitable to the circumstances and shall
make provisions for necessary clear zones beneath the bumper overhang areas.
Where a parking area abuts a residential property, it shall be screened from
view by landscaping or an opaque fence or wall or other means approved by the
Planning Commission. [Amended 2-2-1987; 5-1-1989]
C. Two or more uses on same lot. Except as specified in § 213-55D, where two or
more different uses occur on a single lot, the total amount of parking facilities
to be provided shall be the sum of the requirements, if any, for each individual
use on the lot. [Amended 5-1-1989]
D. Joint use of parking areas. In the case of two or more establishments on the
same lot or on contiguous lots, the Planning Commission may approve the joint
use of parking areas with a total capacity of not less than 60% of the sum of the
spaces required and using the same driveway giving access thereto, provided
that the Commission finds that the proposed capacity will substantially meet
the intent of the requirements by reason of variation in the probable time of
maximum use by patrons or employees among such establishments. Joint use
of parking areas shall be subject to the following requirements: [Amended
5-1-1989]
133. Editor's Note: See Diagram 9, Typical Arrangement for Ninety-Degree Parking, as well as
Diagram 10, Minimum Parking Dimensions, at the end of this chapter.
§ 213-54 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-55
1:705
(1) If a use is enlarged or changed, the Planning Commission shall have the
discretion to require full compliance for each separate use upon finding that
conditions justifying joint use no longer exist.
(2) Such area shall be sufficient to provide the total number of parking and
loading units required collectively of the participating owners.
(3) An agreement for the construction, use and maintenance of such joint
parking and loading area, and the cost thereof, shall be entered into by
all participating owners on a basis deemed equitable by the Planning
Commission, and the continuance of such agreement and such proper
maintenance shall be guaranteed by a covenant filed with the plan filed
for a certificate of approval and attached to the deed of each participating
property, binding each participating owner and his successors in interest
for the life of the joint use of the facility.
(4) Upon finding that the foregoing conditions have been met, and where
the joint parking facility adjoins or straddles a joint lot line, the Planning
Commission may, for the period covered by such agreement and bond,
waive temporarily the requirements applicable to side yards.
E. Layout of off-street parking facilities. [Amended 5-1-1989]
(1) The plans for a new building or enlargement of the floor area in an existing
building or conversion to additional dwelling units shall show specifically the
location and size of the off-street parking facilities required to comply with
any applicable requirements hereof and the means of access to such space
from public streets or highways. Proper channelization of traffic flow shall be
provided in all off-street parking areas. A "parking bay" consists of two parallel
rows of parking spaces separated by an aisle for maneuvering into said spaces.
In all developments any four parking bays shall be separated from any other
bay by means of a curbed, raised and landscaped linear island. The width of a
majority of the linear islands shall be 10 feet, face to face of curbing, with the
remainder being not less than seven feet wide, face to face of curbing. A linear,
landscaped island having parking on only one side shall separate a parking bay
from an adjacent access aisle or interior driveway, which linear island shall be
no less than six feet wide. In addition, every parking bay shall be separated from
any interior driveway by a landscaped end island not less than six feet wide. The
Planning Commission may waive the requirements for such landscaped linear
and end islands in parking garages if the Commission deems that adequate
landscaping around the structure will be aesthetically pleasing. Access for twoway
movement shall have a minimum width of 24 feet. Access for one-way
movement shall have a minimum width of 16 feet. Greater access width may
be required when recommended by the City of Meriden Engineering Division
based upon the proposed use and the width, travel speed, and location of the
road giving access to the site. An entrance or exit to any off-street parking area
shall be located a safe distance (minimum 50 feet) from any street intersection
and shall not exceed a grade of 6% within 25 feet of any street line or 10% at
any other point. All points of ingress or egress shall be appropriately signed
unless such signing is considered unnecessary by the Planning Commission.
Where the topography of a site is such that a potential safety hazard for parked
vehicles exists, the Planning Commission may require barriers or other safety
devices to be incorporated into the design of the parking area. [Amended
2-4-1991]
§ 213-55 MERIDEN CODE § 213-55
1:706
(2) Each required standard space, exclusive of drives and aisles, shall have an
overall length of not less than 19 feet and a width of not less than nine feet
and shall be served by an aisle as designated in the attached parking dimension
schedule. When the standard space is adjacent to and capable of overhanging a
curbed landscaped area or island, which area or island is not less than 10 feet
wide, the length of the space may be reduced to 17 feet six inches by allowing
the landscaped, curbed island to function as a wheel stop. Up to 30% of the
parking spaces in any off-street parking area may be designated for compact
cars with spaces not less than 16 feet long nor less than eight feet wide.
However, no reduction in the overall length of a compact car space shall be
permitted, whether or not such space overhangs a curbed island. In lieu of the
standard and compact spaces and in parking lots of 50 or more spaces, uniform
spaces having a length of not less than 18 feet and a width of not less than eight
feet nine inches may be constructed. In such event, compact spaces and length
reduction for overhang shall not be allowed; provided, however, that, in order
to maintain uniformity of bays and aisles, the Planning Commission may, where
appropriate, allow a reduction in the length and width of spaces which are
opposite and abut handicapped parking spaces. To accommodate the reduced
width of a compact car space and maintain a uniform pattern of landscaped
end islands, the Commission may permit any group of 16 standard spaces to be
replaced by a group of 18 compact spaces. Each required handicapped space
shall have an overall length of 20 feet and a width of not less than 15 feet. All
spaces shall be clearly marked. In commercial and industrial developments, all
curbing must be constructed of portland cement concrete or similar material
(extruded concrete, pre-cast concrete, granite, etc.) except in commercial and
industrial developments with parking lots of 30 spaces or less. Such smaller
developments shall be allowed to use bituminous concrete lip curbing, subject
to the following restrictions:
(a) That all end and separator islands shall be constructed of portland cement
concrete, or similar;
(b) That stalls with lengths of 17 feet six inches, as provided for elsewhere
in the chapter, shall be of portland cement concrete or similar curbs
functioning as wheel stops;
(c) That all radii of 10 feet or less shall be of portland cement concrete or
similar;
(d) That all curbing on City rights-of-way shall be cast-in-place portland cement
concrete; and
(e) That the Planning Commission may, at its discretion, require more stringent
standards based on unique circumstances such as slope, pedestrian and
traffic safety, or aesthetics.
(3) In residential developments, all curbing on radii must be constructed of
portland cement concrete and straight sections may be constructed of
bituminous concrete, except that, wherever curbing is intended to function as a
wheel stop, it shall be constructed of portland cement concrete. Except as may
be otherwise provided, required off-street parking facilities may be enclosed in
a structure or may be located in the open, provided that such required parking
facilities be graded, surface drained and maintained to the extent necessary to
avoid nuisances of dust, erosion or excessive water from across public ways, or
paved with asphalt, oil and chip or other material that is equivalent in durability.
§ 213-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-55
1:707
Upon a determination by the Planning Commission that the required number of
parking spaces would be greatly in excess of the need of a particular use on a
given lot, the said Commission may waive the requirement that all such spaces
be resurfaced to the extent that it may deem the number required to exceed the
actual need. All parking lots must include handicapped parking spaces per the
following ratio:
Total Parking in Lot
Required Number of Accessible
Spaces
Up to 25 1
26 to 50 2
51 to 75 3
76 to 100 4
101 to 150 5
151 to 200 6
201 to 300 7
301 to 400 8
401 to 500 9
501 to 1,000 2% of total, plus 1 for each 100 over
1,000
(4) Off-street parking areas shall be adequately illuminated for convenience and
safety, but no lighting for parking areas shall cause glare on adjoining property.
(5) All parking areas shall be paved with a dust-free all-weather surface.
(6) All off-street parking shall be located at least 15 feet from the street line.
F. Location and ownership of required accessory parking facilities. Required
accessory parking spaces, open or enclosed, shall be provided upon the same
lot as the use to which they are accessory or anywhere within 400 feet walking
distance of such lot. In all cases, such parking spaces shall conform to all
the regulations of the district in which they are located. Such spaces shall
be in the same ownership as the use to which they are accessory or, if in
separate ownership, there shall be a written agreement between the owners
that the spaces shall be available to the use to which they are assigned and
shall be subject to deed restriction, binding the owner and his heirs and
assigns to maintain the required number of spaces available either throughout
the existence of the use to which they are accessory or until such spaces
are provided elsewhere. Required off-street parking facilities which, after
development, are dedicated to and accepted by the City shall be deemed to
continue to serve the uses for which they were originally provided.
G. Connections between abutting parking areas. Where appropriate, the Planning
Commission may require paved connections between abutting parking areas in
different ownerships, so as to facilitate the flow of traffic.
H. Operation and maintenance of off-street parking facilities. Required off-street
parking facilities shall be maintained throughout the life of any use or structure
which the said facilities are designed to serve. Required parking areas
developed for specific structures and uses shall be reserved at all times for the
use of those persons who are employed at or making use of such structures
§ 213-55 MERIDEN CODE § 213-55
1:708
and uses, except when dedicated to and accepted by the City as public parking
areas.
I. Waiver of parking requirements. All or portions of the off-street parking
requirements may be waived by the Planning Commission, provided that:
(1) The proposed use is within 400 feet of a municipally operated off-street
parking facility or privately owned and operated parking area.
(2) The Planning Commission shall, at the time of its granting a certificate
of approval, certify on such plan that the municipally operated off-street
parking facility or, in the case where a nearby private parking area is to
be utilized, the private parking facility has adequate capacity for storage of
passenger vehicles generated by activities proposed to be conducted on the
subject lot in addition to those generated by any other lots already serviced
by such off-street parking facility. In determining the existence of such
adequate capacity, the Planning Commission shall consider the need for
preventing frequent parking on the street by persons visiting or connected
with each use which is proposed to be served by such off-street municipal
or private parking facility.
(3) Where a private parking facility is to be utilized, the applicant shall provide
assurance that such facility will be available for the life of the proposed use.
(4) The proposed site is owned or leased by the City of Meriden, and the use is
for the public purposes of providing park and recreation services. [Added
10-2-1989]
(5) For commercial uses within the CCDD area or commercial uses within 500
feet of the CCDD area, required accessory parking may be waived by the
Planning Commission if uses are within 600 feet of a municipally operated
parking facility. [Added 11-21-1994]
J. Effect of parking requirements on existing uses.
(1) Structures and land use in existence, or for which building permits shall
have been approved as of the effective date of this chapter, shall not be
subject to the requirements for off-street parking spaces set forth in this
chapter, provided that any parking facilities now existing and serving such
structures or uses shall not in the future be reduced, except to the extent
that they exceed such requirements.
(2) In the event that it is proposed to expand any use not now meeting the
parking requirements, the applicant shall be required to provide additional
facilities so that the use, as expanded, shall meet fully all parking
requirements.
K. Minimum parking spaces required. [Amended 6-17-1985; 12-1-1986;
2-4-1991; 11-4-1996]
(1) Parking spaces shall be provided in all zones for each new or expanded use in
accordance with the following schedule: [Amended 4-21-2008]
§ 213-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-55
1:709
Building Type
Minimum
Parking
Spaces
Required For Each
Auditorium, theater,
stadium, convention hall
or similar place of public
gathering
1 4 seats (Note: Bench capacity is
computed at 1 seat for each 20
inches.)
Automotive service
station
1 5,000 square feet of lot area
(minimum 3 spaces required)
Bank 1 300 square feet of gross floor area or
3 per teller window, whichever is
greater
Boardinghouse 3 4 rooms
Bowling alley 3 Lane
Business or trade school,
junior college, college or
university
1 Faculty member, plus 0.75 per
student
Church 1 7 seats (Note: Bench capacity is
computed at 1 seat for each 20
inches.)
Day care 1 For each 6 students plus 1/2 space
for every faculty
Drive-in or fast-food
restaurant
1 75 square feet of gross floor area or
3 seats, whichever is greater
Elementary or middle
school
2 Classroom (in addition to parking
spaces required for auditorium)
Funeral home 1 75 square feet of assembly room
space
Health care services 1 Space per 200 square feet of gross
floor area
Hospital or convalescent
home
1 3 beds, and 1 for each 2 total
employees
Hotel, motel 1 Guest bedroom and 1 for each 3
employees (in addition to required
parking for other uses)
Indoor tennis 3 Court (for racquetball and similar
court games, 1/2 this amount)
Industrial 1 3 total employees or 500 square feet
of gross building area, whichever is
greater
§ 213-55 MERIDEN CODE § 213-55
1:710
Building Type
Minimum
Parking
Spaces
Required For Each
Medical office 1 150 square feet of gross floor area or
4 spaces per doctor, whichever is
greater
Membership club 1 100 square feet of assembly room
space
Multiple-family dwelling 2 Dwelling unit
Multiple-family housing
for elderly
1 3 dwelling units
Multi-theater 1 5 seats
Office; office building 1 300 square feet of gross floor area
Professional office in a
residential dwelling
1 100 square feet of net floor space
used by such office
Public library, gallery or
museum
1 200 square feet of area accessible to
public
Regional shopping mall 5.0 1,000 square feet of gross leasable
area; provided, however, that it may
be decreased to 4.5 if the Planning
Commission finds that items such as
off-site employee parking, public
transportation or car pooling and
provisions for the policing of parking
in unauthorized areas will
adequately prevent traffic
congestion in the parking area.
Research institute or
laboratory
1 2 employees
Restaurant, cocktail
lounge
1 3 seats or 100 square feet of gross
floor area, whichever is greater
Retail store or shop 1 300 square feet of gross floor space
Senior high school 4 Classroom (in addition to parking
spaces required for auditorium)
Service establishment 1 200 square feet of gross floor space
Single-family dwelling 2 dwelling unit
Wholesale, distribution 1 3 employees or 1,000 square feet of
gross floor area, whichever is
greater
(2) Where a use is not mentioned above, or the use is a variation of that mentioned
above, the minimum number of parking spaces required shall be as determined
by the Planning Commission in order to prevent frequent parking on the street.
§ 213-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-55
1:711
Where the Planning Commission determines the number of parking spaces, the
decision of said Commission shall be based upon: a) standards set forth herein
for uses with similar characteristics; and b) previous experience with similar
uses.
(3) Where parking spaces are provided at a boardinghouse; the spaces shall be
standard-sized spaces, as defined in this chapter. Compact spaces shall not be
allowed.
§ 213-56. Signs.134
A. Purpose; protection of physical appearance. The purpose of this section is to promote and
protect the public health, welfare and safety by regulating existing and proposed outdoor
signs of all types.
B. Applicability. The provisions of this section shall govern the construction, alteration, repair
and maintenance of all outdoor sign structures.
C. Standards and guidelines. In implementing this section, the following standards and
guidelines shall be followed:
(1) Signs shall be a subordinate part of the streetscape, rather than the dominant
features, so as to add interest in building facades without overpowering them.
(2) Projecting signs, except as outlined herein, shall be prohibited.
(3) Roof signs above the lowest point of the roofline, with the exception of a mansard roof,
are prohibited.
(4) Standard, approved methods of constant illumination shall be permitted on ground
signs and wall signs; provided, however, that they shall concentrate the illumination
upon the area of the sign so as to prevent direct glare upon the street or adjacent
property.
(5) Flashing and animated signs are prohibited, except for clocks and customary timeand-
temperature devices.
(6) Except for holiday seasons or grand openings (for a period not to exceed 30 days),
as approved by the Building Official (BO), no sign or part thereof shall consist of
pennants, ribbons, streamers, spinners or other similar moving, fluttering or revolving
devices.
(7) A sign shall not be suspended from an awning.
(8) All ground and freestanding signs shall be constructed to withstand wind pressure
applied to the projected exposed area, allowing for wind from any direction of 30
pounds per square foot.
(9) To the extent possible, adjacent signs on the same or adjoining buildings shall be
placed within the same horizontal band.
(10) Adjacent signs shall be of the same height from the ground.
(11) All ground signs shall comply with the building line requirements of the zone in which
located, except as noted in § 213-56I. [Amended 6-2-1986]
(12) All ground signs shall be located within the property line, and the location of
illumination of such shall not block the view of or otherwise interfere with official
traffic signs and signals or of other permitted signs, except as noted in § 213-56I.
[Amended 6-2-1986]
(13) Wall signs shall not cover, wholly or partially, any wall opening, including doors, fire
escapes and windows, nor project beyond the ends of the wall to which they are
134. Editor's Note: See Diagram 11, Signs, at the end of this chapter.
§ 213-55 MERIDEN CODE § 213-56
1:712
attached. All such signs must be safely and adequately attached to such building by means satisfactory to the Building Official.
D. Permits.
(1) Required permit. It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, alter, redesign, relocate,
reconstruct, repair or cause to be erected, altered, redesigned, relocated reconstructed within the corporate limits of the City any sign or signs, except as herein
exempted, without first having obtained and having in force a permit therefor from Building Official.
(2) Maintenance; construction. All signs shall be properly secured, supported and braced,
shall be kept in sound structural condition and shall be well maintained at all times.
(3) Application; fee. Application for a sign permit shall be made on a form provided the Building Official, which application shall include necessary sketches and supporting
information indicating the location of the sign and the size, colors, type of lettering
or other graphic representation and materials to be used, electrical or gas equipment
and details of its attachment and hanging. In addition, such sign application shall accompanied by a fee in accordance with the City of Meriden Fee Schedule135 and written consent of the owner or lessee of the property upon which such sign or signs are to be erected and maintained.
(4) Appeal from permit denial. Any person feeling himself or herself aggrieved by decision of the Building Official may appeal to the Zoning Board of Appeals within days of such denial.
(5) Issuance of sign construction permit. Upon approval of the application by the Building
Official and after any conditions for approval established by the Building Official satisfied, the Building Official shall issue a permit for construction of such sign.
E. Nonaccessory signs and billboards. [Amended 8-20-1984; 7-7-1986; 9-16-2013]
(1) Nonaccessory signs and billboards are prohibited in all residential districts.
(2) Billboards.
(a) Statement of purpose: Billboards are elements of the urban landscape identifying messages and advertising. In order to promote, preserve, enhance and protect welfare of the City, these standards/regulations intend to diminish the distraction visual blight and ensure urban design fundamentals to preserve Meriden's landscape. regulations control billboard location, size, height, spacing, luminance and frequency (b) Definitions:
BILLBOARD — A sign, including any support structures, displaying a message property on which it is located.
CONVENTIONAL BILLBOARD — A billboard displaying a static message or copy mechanically (for example, a tri-vision billboard) or electronically.
DIGITAL BILLBOARD — A billboard utilizing digital message technology capable message or copy electronically, but not displaying any movement, or the appearance movement, or any flashing, scintillating or varying of light intensity during the BILLBOARD OVERLAY DISTRICT — Billboards must be oriented to limited access restricted to the Billboard Overlay District as shown on the City's Zoning Map.
(c) Development standards:
[1] Maximum height: 35 feet.* The vertical distance from the grade of the closest highway to the top of the highest component of the billboard.
135. Editor's Note: Said fee schedule is on file in the Clerk's office.
§ 213-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-56
1:713
*In no case shall the top be higher than 45 feet above grade at the base of the billboard.
[2] Maximum sign area: 672 square feet.
[3] Clearance: nine feet. Billboards shall have a minimum clearance of nine component of the billboard and the land grade.
(d) Location and orientation:
[1] Billboard Overlay District: Conventional and digital billboards are restricted District.
[2] Lot (size, frontage and use): Billboards are considered principal uses and therefore of principal uses per lot, it is the only use allowed on the lot. A building lot for billboard must have the lot area required for the underlying zone and have 75 limited access highway to which the billboard is oriented.
[3] Orientation: All billboards consisting of back-to-back or parallel design shall be apart. All billboards shall be oriented with faces at an angle no greater than limited access highway. All such signs must be oriented to a limited access highway residential zoning district.
(e) Spacing:
[1] Conventional billboards shall be spaced at a horizontal distance of not less conventional or digital billboards on the same side of the limited access highway.
[2] Digital billboards shall be spaced at a horizontal distance of not less than 1,500 billboard on the same side of the limited access highway.
(f) Digital billboards:
[1] Display time: Messages and/or imagery must be displayed in a static manner for [2] Transition time: Transition time from one message or copy to another must special effects and not exceed one second.
[3] Brightness:
[a] No digital billboard may operate at brightness levels of more than 0.3 footcandle following distances from the sign face based on the size of the sign:
Distance
(feet)
100 150 200 [b] The brightness measurement shall be made with the light meter or similar angle to the orientation of the digital billboard.
[4] Malfunction: Digital billboards must be designed and equipped to freeze the sign occurs. Such billboard must also be equipped with a means to immediately malfunction. The billboard owner must immediately turn off the display when ordered (g) Miscellaneous:
[1] Content: Billboards shall not use the word "stop," "danger" or any other word, character in a manner that might be misconstrued to be a public safety warning [2] Landscaping: Every billboard shall be suitably landscaped covering the area between property lines. This landscaped area shall be properly maintained.
[3] Maintenance:
[a] All billboards shall be maintained in good repair and in safe condition. The which the billboard is located shall be directly responsible for keeping such a safe and neat condition.
§ 213-56 MERIDEN CODE § 213-56
1:714
[b] All parts, including the backs, of billboards shall be painted a dark or (h) Process:
[1] All billboards must obtain a certificate of approval (per § 213-72 of the Planning Commission prior to receiving a building permit.
[2] A certificate of approval is also required for a conversion of an existing billboard The converted digital billboard must comply with all standards/requirements (i) Nonconforming:
[1] Billboards lawfully existing at the time of adoption of this chapter which requirements of this chapter may continue to exist but are prohibited from converted to digital billboards, except in compliance with this chapter.
[2] Maintenance and repair, including restoration, improvement, and changing allowed. Following damage or destruction, a nonconforming billboard, if reinstated as allowed under the terms of this chapter, shall be restored to its condition destruction.
[3] A nonconforming billboard which is damaged or destroyed by any cause or cost of restoration exceeds 1/2 of its replacement cost, and for which no building or replacement of the nonconforming billboard is applied for within 180 is damaged or destroyed, shall not be reconstructed except in conformity chapter.
[4] A nonconforming billboard shall be deemed to be abandoned in accordance § 213-56G and may not therefore be used except in conformity with the requirements F. Unsafe and unlawful signs. If the Building Official shall find that any sign regulated herein
is unsafe or insecure or has been erected in violation of the provisions of this section, or she shall give written notice to the permittee thereof. If the permittee fails to move,
alter or repair the sign so as to comply with the standards herein set forth within 14 after such notice, such sign may be removed or altered to comply by the Building Official
or his or her authorized agent at the expense of the permittee or owner of the property
on which it is located. The Building Official shall refuse to issue a permit to any permittee
or owner who refuses to pay costs so assessed. The Building Official, upon direction authorization of the Chief of Police or the Director of Public Works, may cause any which is an immediate peril to persons or property to be removed summarily and without
notice.
G. Abandoned signs. No sign which has been abandoned for a period of six months shall
thereafter be permitted to be used without being processed as a new sign. The term
"abandoned" as used herein shall mean the voluntary discontinuance and maintenance the sign when accompanied by an intent not to reestablish the use of the sign. Any one the following shall constitute prima facie evidence of intent to abandon:
(1) Any positive act indicating such intent.
(2) Failure to take all necessary steps to resume the business for which the sign is used
with reasonable dispatch, including advertising of the business and/or property for or for lease; in the case of billboards, advertising the availability of the billboard lease.
(3) Discontinuance of the business for which the sign is used for nine consecutive months
or for a total of 18 months during any three-year period.
(4) In the case of billboards only, discontinuance of the use for 90 consecutive days or total of six months during any one-year period.
§ 213-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-56
1:715
H. Illuminated signs. A sign illuminated by electricity or equipped in any way with electric
devices or appliances shall conform with respect to wiring and appliances to the regulations
of the National Electrical Code.
I. Ground or freestanding signs.
(1) Only one freestanding sign of any type may be erected on any premises, except that:
(a) Premises which have more than 450 feet of frontage along the public way, other
than an alley, may have not more than one additional detached sign for each
additional 450 feet of frontage.
(b) Premises with frontage along two thoroughfares may have two freestanding signs.
In the event that a second freestanding sign is permitted by the application of
§ 213-56I(2), this section shall not be construed to permit any additional
freestanding signs.
(c) Signs of less than two square feet in effective area which direct on-premises
vehicular or pedestrian movement and bear no other identification or advertising
matter are not subject to the limitations of this section.
(2) Freestanding signs may have a sign area not to exceed an aggregate of 40 square feet.
(3) In a unified shopping center in single ownership or control, a freestanding sign may be
erected and can be no larger than 100 square feet. The smallest dimension of the sign
shall be not less than five feet.
(4) Freestanding signs to be located on poles, kiosks, stanchions or similar supports shall
not be more than the height of the building or not higher than 25 feet.
(5) Freestanding signs shall be kept entirely within the property line of the lot and shall be
screened from the view of adjoining residential zones on the street frontage.
(6) Freestanding detached on-premises signs may be floodlighted, provided that no glare
is perceived in any adjoining property.
(7) Directory signs; professional offices and medical clinics. A freestanding directory sign
to identify the occupants of a medical clinic or professional office building shall be
permitted where such uses are permitted. It may be erected with two poles as long as
all other requirements of this section are satisfied.
(8) The Planning Commission may grant permission for identification/directory signs in
the case of an industrial or office park having an excess of 20 acres and capable of
supporting three principal buildings and three tenants. The following signs may be
installed within the public right-of-way, provided that they are located a minimum of
15 feet from the curbline and do not unreasonably or dangerously obstruct or interfere
with the visibility of drivers of vehicles: [Added 6-2-1986]
(a) Signs for the purpose of identifying the park, located at the park entrance(s) and
not exceeding 40 square feet in area. Signs may display the name of the park, the
name, address and telephone number of the developer and an applicable logo, but
shall contain no other form of advertising.
(b) Signs for the purpose of directing traffic to businesses, streets or other locations
within the park, not exceeding three square feet each or 40 square feet altogether
when attached to a common background.
(c) Said signs shall be the maintenance responsibility of the applicant and can be
removed at any time by the City.
(9) Identification/directory signs for the purpose of directing traffic for lodging and tourist
attractions. These signs may be installed within the public right-of-way, provided that
they are located a minimum of five feet from the curbline and do not unreasonably
or dangerously obstruct or interfere with the visibility of drivers of vehicles: [Added
4-4-1988]
§ 213-56 MERIDEN CODE § 213-56
1:716
(a) Signs for the purpose of identifying these facilities may display just the name logo of the facility and shall contain no other form of advertising.
(b) Such signs shall not exceed three square feet each or 40 square feet altogether
when attached to a common background. Only one freestanding directional sign allowed on a one-thousand-foot stretch of street or ramp. Therefore, the second any sign thereafter must be a combination sign (maximum 40 square feet).
(c) Said signs shall be the maintenance responsibility of the applicant and can removed at any time by the City.
(d) The Planning Commission has complete authority over the architectural features,
color features and height of the sign.
J. Marquee signs. Signs shall not be permitted on any marquee, other than signs built and forming a part of the structure of the marquee. Such signs shall not exceed a height
of three feet, a total area of 21 square feet on any one side of the marquee and shall extend beyond the edge of the marquee. In addition to the foregoing, only that portion the marquee containing such sign shall be illuminated.
K. Wall signs. Wall signs shall be attached to the face of the building in a place parallel such face but shall not extend or project more than 12 inches over the sidewalk, street highway and shall not extend higher than the parapet in the case of a one-story building,
and in the case of other buildings, they shall not extend above the sill of the windows of second story nor extend more than 15 feet above the outside grade.
(1) No wall sign or combination of signs in any single frontage in a commercial district manufacturing district shall exceed an area equal to two times the linear length of structure on such frontage.
(2) Where there are two or more occupants occupying a portion of the first-floor frontage
of a given structure, each such occupant shall be entitled to a sign equivalent in to that portion of the frontage so occupied. Where multiple occupants share a common
sign, the maximum sign area shall be limited as if there was a single occupant.
(3) Where an establishment for which a sign is permitted has a rear entrance on a public
way or frontage on two or more streets, such as a corner, a sign shall be permitted
on each frontage, up to the maximum area permitted for that frontage. (Examples permitted sign size: a store with a twenty-foot frontage will be permitted up to a of 40 square feet in signs. If the structure has 70 feet of frontage and is occupied
by four stores, a total of 140 square feet of sign area would be permitted. Where establishment is in a corner structure, with two twenty-foot frontages, up to 40 square
feet of signage would be permitted on each frontage.) All such signs must be safely adequately attached to such building wall by means satisfactory to the Building Official.
If illuminated at night, all light sources shall be shielded from the view of adjacent and streets in residential zones.
(4) One identification sign at each entrance to the lot, with an area of not more than three
square feet, and internal directional signs, each with an area of not more than square feet, shall also be permitted.
L. Hanging signs. Each commercial or industrial establishment shall be permitted hanging sign, which shall project not more than 60 inches over a public walkway and shall
not exceed 25 square feet in area. The construction and method of securing such signs the structure shall be approved by the Building Official. All such overhanging signs shall approved by the Director of Public Works. The bottom of such sign shall be at least eight
feet above the sidewalk and shall not extend into any area which is designated for service
or emergency vehicle use.
§ 213-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-56
1:717
M. Temporary signs. The erection, installation or maintenance of temporary signs is hereby
prohibited, except as follows:
(1) No permit shall be required for the maintenance of a temporary sign or signs by a
municipal, charitable, political or nonprofit organization for a period not to exceed 30
days.
(2) A temporary sign announcing anticipated occupancy of a site or building shall be
permitted for a period not to exceed six months. Such sign shall not exceed 32 square
feet if it is freestanding and shall not exceed the maximum permitted for a permanent
sign if it is affixed to a building.
(3) Temporary signs announcing special sales or events shall be permitted in commercial
and industrial districts for a period not to exceed 15 days. Any such temporary signs
must conform to the size and location requirements applicable to permanent signs.
N. Exemptions. The provisions and regulations of this section shall not apply to the signs
enumerated in Subsection N(1) through (5); provided, however, that such signs shall be
subject to the requirements on unsafe and unlawful signs and abandoned signs.
(1) Bulletin boards. Bulletin boards or signs not over 16 square feet in area for public,
charitable or religious institutions where the same are located on the premises of said
institutions.
(2) Construction signs. A sign not exceeding 16 square feet in area, denoting the architect,
engineer and contractor, when placed upon public property where work is under
construction.
(3) Directional signs, etc. Directional signs, name or number plates and professional signs,
not more than two square feet in area.
(4) Memorial signs and tablets. Memorial signs or tablets, names of buildings and date of
erection when cut into any masonry surface or when constructed of bronze or similar
material and affixed directly to the front face of the building and parallel to such front
face.
(5) Signs not over four square feet in residential zones, indicating the name of a building
or apartment, a valid nonresidential use or a "for sale" or "for lease" sign.
O. Nonconforming signs.
(1) Signs existing at the time of the enactment of this chapter and not conforming to its
provisions but which were constructed in compliance with previous regulations shall be
regarded as nonconforming signs.
(2) No nonconforming sign shall be altered by increasing its overall dimensions. If
damaged to the extent of 50%, no nonconforming sign shall be reconstructed, provided
that nothing contained herein shall prevent customary maintenance, repainting or
posting of such signs or structures, or copy changes. Any nonconforming sign removed
for any reason may be repaired or replaced within six months of such removal, provided
that such repairs, rebuilding or replacement do not extend nor expand the previously
existing nonconforming use.
§ 213-57. Soil erosion and sediment control. [Added 2-3-1986]
A. Purpose: to minimize soil erosion and sedimentation that occur as a
result of the construction of residential, industrial and commercial
development.
B. Activities requiring a certified sediment and erosion control plan. A
soil erosion and sediment control plan shall be submitted with any
application for development when the disturbed area of such
development is cumulatively more than 1/2 acre. (The Commission or its
§ 213-56 MERIDEN CODE § 213-57
1:718
agent may require temporary and permanent soil erosion and sediment
control measures for development plans disturbing less than 1/2 acre.)
No development, grading of the land or stripping of vegetation shall be
permitted on slopes of 20% or steeper (shown on the Meriden City Slope
Map, prepared August 2009, on file at the Planning office) unless part of
an approved development, excavation or filling plan with an erosion and
sediment control plan, including any land that may be further divided or
density increased. [Amended 12-21-2009]
C. Exemptions.
(1) A single-family dwelling that is not part of a subdivision of land shall
be exempt from this chapter.
(2) Any application for development for which the disturbed area is 1/
2 acre or less may be exempt from this chapter. (The Commission
or its agent may require temporary and permanent soil erosion and
sediment control measures for development plans disturbing less
than 1/2 acre.)
(3) Agricultural uses such as crop and tree farming and greenhouses or
nursery operations.
D. Erosion and sediment control plan.
(1) To be eligible for certification, a soil erosion and sediment control
plan shall contain proper provisions to adequately control
accelerated erosion and sedimentation and to reduce the danger
from stormwater runoff on the proposed site based on the best
available technology. Such principles, methods and practices
necessary for certification are found in the Connecticut Guidelines
for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control (1985), as amended.
Alternative principles, methods and practices may be used with the
prior approval of the Commission.
(2) Said plan shall contain but not be limited to:
(a) A narrative describing the project, the schedule of activities on
the land, the application and installation of control measures,
design criteria, construction details and the maintenance
program for any erosion and sediment control facilities that are
installed.
(b) A site plan at a scale of one inch equals not more than 20 feet or
not less than 50 feet, showing:
[1] The location of the proposed development and adjacent
properties.
[2] The existing and proposed topography, including soil types,
wetlands, watercourses and water bodies.
[3] The existing structures on the project site, if any.
[4] The proposed area alterations, including cleared, excavated,
filled or graded areas and proposed structures, utilities,
roads and existing, new or altered property lines.
[5] The location of and design details for all proposed soil
erosion and sediment control measures and stormwater
management facilities.
[6] The sequence of grading and construction activities.
§ 213-57 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-57
1:719
[7] The sequence for installation and/or application of soil
erosion and sediment control measures.
[8] The sequence for final stabilization of the development site.
(c) Any other information deemed necessary and appropriate by
the applicant or requested by the Commission or its designated
agent.
E. Minimum standards.
(1) Plans for soil erosion and sediment control shall be developed in
accordance with this chapter using the principles as outlined in
Chapters 3 and 4 of the Connecticut Guidelines for Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control (1985), as amended. Soil erosion and sediment
control plans shall result in a development that minimizes erosion
and sedimentation during construction, is stabilized and protected
from erosion when completed, and does not cause off-site erosion
and/or sedimentation.
(2) The minimum standards for individual measures are those in the
Connecticut Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control
(1985), as amended. The Commission (or County Soil and Water
Conservation District) may grant exceptions when requested by the
applicant if technically sound reasons are presented.
(3) The appropriate method from Chapter 9 of the Connecticut
Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control (1985), as
amended, shall be used in determining peak flow rates and volumes
of runoff unless an alternative method is approved by the
Commission.
F. Issuance or denial of certification.
(1) The Meriden Planning Commission or its designated agent shall
either certify that the soil erosion and sediment control plan, as filed,
complies with the requirements and objectives of this chapter or
deny certification when the development proposal does not comply
with this chapter. Approval of overall site development plans for
a certificate of approval, planned residential development, planned
executive office development or earth excavation or filling
operations by the Planning Commission shall constitute certification
of the soil erosion and sediment control plan.
(2) Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as extending the time
limits for the approval of any application under Chapter 124, 124a
or 126 of the Connecticut General Statutes.136
(3) Prior to certification, any plan submitted to the municipality may be
reviewed by the County Soil and Water Conservation District, which
may make recommendations concerning such plan, provided that
such review shall be completed within 30 days of the receipt of such
plan.
G. Conditions relating to soil erosion and sediment control.
(1) The estimated cost of measures required to control soil erosion and
sedimentation, as specified in the approved or certified plan, may be
136. Editor's Note: See §§ 8-1 through 8-13a, 8-13b through 8-13k and 8-18 through 8-30a of
the Connecticut General Statutes, respectively.
§ 213-57 MERIDEN CODE § 213-57
1:720
covered in a performance bond or other assurance acceptable to the
Commission.
(2) Site development shall not begin, nor shall a building permit be
issued, until the soil erosion and sediment control plan is approved,
the control measures and facilities in the plan are bonded, and those
measures scheduled for installation prior to site development are
installed and functional.
(3) Planned soil erosion and sediment control measures and facilities
shall be installed as scheduled according to the approved plan.
All control measures and facilities shall be maintained in effective
condition to ensure compliance with the intent of the approved plan.
H. Inspection.
(1) Inspection shall be made by the Commission or its designated agent
during development to ensure compliance with the approved plan
and that control measures and facilities are properly performed
or installed and maintained. The Commission may require the
permittee to verify through progress reports that soil erosion and
sediment control measures and facilities have been performed or
installed according to the plan and are being operated and
maintained according to the intent of the approved plan. These
reports, when required, shall be submitted on a schedule to be
determined by the Commission.
(2) The Commission or its agent may require more stringent materials
and methods for soil erosion and sediment control than shown on
the approved plan when determined to be necessary. All inspection
reports shall specify actions taken pursuant to this section.
(3) If the Commission or its agent determines that the requirements of
the approved soil erosion and sediment control plan are not being
adhered to, a cease and desist order shall be issued according
to Article X of this chapter or as provided herein. The cease and
desist order shall be transmitted in writing to the owner/applicant
via the responsible agent at the development site. Such cease and
desist order shall describe the violation of the approved plan and
shall become effective immediately. The cease and desist order shall
remain in effect until the violation is corrected. As long as the cease
and desist order remains in effect, no certificate of occupancy shall
be issued.
§ 213-58. Hospital restricted landing area. [Added 2-3-1986]
A hospital restricted landing area, as defined in Chapter 242 of the
Connecticut General Statutes137 may be located on the premises of an
existing licensed general hospital, as defined by the health services,
provided that the restricted landing area is approved by the appropriate
state and federal agencies and by the City Planning Commission. Said
restricted landing area must be located at least 100 feet from any
residential structure plus any other conditions the Planning Commission
137. Editor's Note: See §§ 13b-1 through 13b-57c of the Connecticut General Statutes.
§ 213-57 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-58
1:721
deems appropriate to ensure the health, safety and welfare of neighboring
properties.
§ 213-59. Drive-through facilities. [Amended 6-2-2008]
A. Drive-through facilities require a lot of at least 120 feet in width from
front of property with said width maintained for area of building and
facility; facility, including required stacking lanes, shall be located in the
rear or side yards in reference to the building;
B. The drive-through facility's circulation must connect to the ingress/
egress curb cut(s) of the primary facility, and curb cuts should be
minimized;
C. A minimum of five vehicle-stacking spaces shall be provided on site for
each drive-through station, including the vehicle being serviced. Where
a restaurant order board and service window are proposed, each service
aisle shall provide a minimum of 10 stacking spaces with a minimum of
five stacking spaces before the order board. Each service aisle shall not
have more than two service windows;
D. Stacking lanes shall be separate from internal traffic aisles and
customer parking to allow traffic to circulate through the site without
entering the drive-through facilities or being impeded;
E. Stacking lanes shall be a minimum of 10 feet wide, and each vehicle
stacking space shall be 20 feet in length;
F. Stacking lanes shall be designed to minimize traffic congestion and to
promote pedestrian safety; also, vehicles should be allowed to escape
from the stacking lane;
G. Drive-through facility vehicular lane(s) are to be screened from adjacent
properties/streetscape as much or more as required for parking;
H. Outdoor speakers shall be located a minimum of 100 feet from the
boundary of any residentially zoned property and shall not be audible
from other property;
I. Drive-through facilities should be designed as a compatible architectural
element of the primary building;
J. Certificate of approval (site plan) and special exception permit
applications are to be made concurrently for all bakery/fast-food
restaurants with drive-through, with complete site plan information.
§ 213-58 MERIDEN CODE § 213-59
1:722
ARTICLE IX
Nonconforming Uses, Buildings and Structures
§ 213-60. Existing nonconforming uses, buildings and structures.
A. Continuance. Any nonconforming use of land, buildings or structures
lawfully existing at the effective date of this chapter may be continued,
and any building so existing which was designed, arranged, intended for
or is devoted to a nonconforming use may be structurally altered and
the nonconforming use therein continued, subject to the conditions set
forth below. Similarly, whenever a district shall be changed hereafter, the
provisions of this chapter with regard to any building or uses lawfully
existing at the time of the passage of this chapter shall apply, subject to
the conditions set forth below, to any building or use lawfully existing in
such changed district at the time of the passage of such amendment.
B. Enlargement.
(1) Nonconforming uses. No nonconforming use of land shall be
enlarged, extended or altered and no building or other structure or
part thereof devoted to a nonconforming use, including two-family,
three-family, and multifamily residential uses in districts and lots
that only allow single-family homes, shall be enlarged, extended,
reconstructed or structurally altered, except where the result of
such changes is to reduce or eliminate the nonconformity. No
nonconforming use of a building or other structure shall be extended
to occupy land outside such building or other structure or space in
another building or other structure. The Zoning Board of Appeals
may grant a special exception to allow limited expansion of
nonconforming industrial uses and industrial uses allowed by
variances or special exceptions of up to 25%, if the Zoning Board of
Appeals finds that: [Amended 1-3-2012]
(a) All other requirements (bulk, height, coverage, etc.) of the zone
in which said use is located are met.
(b) Extraordinary measures are taken to screen and further protect
the neighborhood.
(c) The twenty-five-percent expansion is limited to the size of the
structure or the area of the lot devoted to said nonconforming
use. In a commercial zone, forty-percent lot coverage shall be
allowed for nonconforming industrial use(s).
(d) The 25% is based upon the size of the building or amount of land
devoted to the nonconforming use at the time of the adoption of
this chapter.
(2) Nonconforming buildings. No building which does not conform to the
requirements of this regulation regarding building height limit, area
and parking facilities shall be enlarged in excess of a total of 10%
beyond that which exists at the time of the adoption of this chapter,
unless such enlarged portion conforms to the regulations regarding
width of lot, percentage of lot coverage and required yards applying
to the district in which it is located and unless a special exception
permit for said enlargement is approved by the Zoning Board of
Appeals.
§ 213-60 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-60
1:723
C. Movement. No nonconforming use of land shall be moved to another
part of the lot on which it is located, and no nonconforming use of
a building or structure shall be moved to any part of the building or
structure not manifestly arranged and designed for such use at the time
the use became nonconforming. No building or structure containing a
nonconforming use shall be moved, unless the result of any such moving
is to end the nonconforming use.
D. Reconstruction. Nonconforming buildings damaged or partially
destroyed by fire, explosion, windstorm or other acts to an extent of less
than 50% of its reasonable value, as determined by the Building Official,
may be restored and the use thereof may be continued on condition that
said restoration is started within six months and is diligently continued
to completion, provided that such nonconforming buildings or uses shall
not be enlarged.
§ 213-61. Change in use.
A. A nonconforming use may be changed to another nonconforming use,
subject to approval of a special exception permit by the Zoning Board of
Appeals and the following conditions:
(1) The proposed use is similar to the existing use.
(2) The proposed use will have less impact upon the surrounding area
than the existing nonconforming use.
(3) The number of required parking and loading spaces will not
increase.
B. If any building in or on which any nonconforming use is conducted or
maintained is hereafter removed, the subsequent use of the land on
which such building was located and the subsequent location and use of
any building thereon shall be in conformity to the regulations specified
by this chapter for the district in which such land is located.
C. No nonconforming use shall, if once changed into a conforming use, be
changed back again into a nonconforming use.
§ 213-62. Discontinuance.
A. No nonconforming use which has been discontinued for a period of one
year shall be thereafter resumed.
B. Ownership. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to require
discontinuance of a nonconformity because of mere change of title or
possession of property, except as otherwise provided herein.
§ 213-63. Maintenance and repair of nonconforming buildings.
Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent normal maintenance
and repair or structural alteration in nonconforming buildings, provided
that such action does not increase the degree of or create any new
nonconformance with regard to the regulations pertaining to such
buildings. Further, nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent the
carrying out, upon issuance of a building permit, of major structural
alterations or demolition in the interest of public safety.
§ 213-60 MERIDEN CODE § 213-63
1:724
ARTICLE X
Administration and Enforcement
§ 213-64. Enforcement.
This chapter shall be enforced by the Zoning Enforcement Officer (ZEO)
or his/her authorized official. The Zoning Enforcement Officer is authorized
to cause any building, structure, place, premises or use to be inspected or
examined and to order in writing the remedying of any condition found to
exist therein or thereon in violation of any provision of this chapter.
§ 213-64.1. Function of the Design Review Board. [Added
6-17-2013]
Function and composition of the Design Review Board: The Design Review
Board shall serve as an advisory board to the Planning Commission. Said
Board shall approve the alterations to exteriors of structures only. All
recommendations shall be in conformance with the unified design plan. The
Design Review Board shall consist of five members, who shall be appointed
by the City Council with advice from the Planning Commission, to serve for
a term of three years and until their successors are appointed and qualified,
provided that of the five members first appointed, two shall serve for oneyear
terms, two for two-year terms, and one for a three-year term. Three of
the five members shall be a member of any one of the following professions:
architect, landscape architect, engineer, or contractor.
§ 213-65. Zoning permit required.
No building or structure shall be erected, added to or structurally altered,
no use shall be established and no existing building or land, whether vacant
or occupied, shall be converted to a different use until a zoning permit
has been issued by the Zoning Enforcement Officer or other authorized
official. All applications for such permits shall be in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter. Where a certificate of approval or special
exception permit is required, the zoning permit shall be issued
automatically with such approval.
A. Application. Every application for a zoning permit shall be accompanied
by such information and exhibits, i.e., certified plot plan, soils data,
drainage computations, etc., as are required herein or as may be
reasonably required by the Zoning Enforcement Officer in order that the
proposal of the applicant may be adequately interpreted and judged as
to its conformity with the provisions set forth in this chapter.
B. Plot plan. The application shall be accompanied by three copies of a plot
plan based on a survey prepared by a land surveyor and/or engineer
registered in the State of Connecticut, drawn to scale, showing the
actual dimensions of the lot to be built upon, the size of the building
to be erected, the location of the building upon the lot, the dimensions
of all open spaces, the setback lines observed by buildings, the location
of driveways and curb cuts and such other information as may be
necessary. The Zoning Enforcement Officer may waive any of the plot
§ 213-64 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-65
1:725
plan requirements in cases where it is not needed to determine
conformity with this chapter.
§ 213-66. Certificate of compliance required.
A. No land shall be occupied or used, and no building hereafter erected or
altered shall be occupied or used in whole or in part for any purpose,
until a certificate of compliance shall have been issued by the Zoning
Enforcement Officer or other authorized official, stating that the
premises or building complies with all the provisions of this chapter.
Such a certificate is also required for any change, extension or alteration
in a use.
B. Applications for a certificate of compliance shall be accompanied by a
certified plot plan of the lot and buildings involved, showing the exact
placement of the as-built structures on the lot. The as-built plot plan may
be the same document as is submitted for a certificate of occupancy, if all
zoning data (i.e., setbacks, etc.) are included. The Zoning Enforcement
Officer may waive the requirement for a certified plot plan in cases
where it is not needed to determine conformity with this chapter. No
such certificate of compliance shall be issued by the Zoning Enforcement
Officer until all zoning requirements and conditions, including
certificates of approval and/or special exception permits, have been met.
§ 213-67. Fees.
All applications for zoning permits and certificates of compliance shall be
accompanied by a fee, in accordance with the Schedule of Fees of the City
of Meriden,138 to cover the cost of administration. Said fee shall be paid at
the time of filing the application.
§ 213-68. Conditions for approval and issuance of permits.
A. Any maps, plans, documents, statements and stipulations submitted to
and approved by the Planning Commission or the Zoning Board of
Appeals in connection with certificate of approval (site plan), special
exception, variance or other action of said Commission or Board, as
required by this chapter, and any conditions of such approval(s) attached
by said Commission or Board shall be conditions for the approval of
applications for and the issuance of a zoning permit and a certificate
of compliance by the Zoning Enforcement Officer. Prior to issuance
of a zoning permit or a certificate of compliance, the applicant shall
obtain and submit all approvals required by any other municipal, state
or federal department, bureau or agency.
B. No building permit or certificate of occupancy may be issued until all
zoning permits have been secured.
§ 213-69. Certificate of occupancy required.
A. The occupancy and use of a building erected, reconstructed, restored,
altered or moved, or any change in use of an existing building, shall be
138. Editor's Note: Said fee schedule is on file in the Clerk's office.
§ 213-65 MERIDEN CODE § 213-69
1:726
unlawful until a certificate of occupancy shall have been applied for and
issued by the Building Official.
B. A certificate of occupancy is required for and shall be deemed to
authorize both initial occupancy and the continued occupancy and use of
the building or land to which it applies.
C. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any use requiring the
granting of a special exception permit, variance or certificate of approval
unless and until such permit approval has been duly granted and the
Zoning Enforcement Officer and Building Official have inspected the site
to ascertain that all provisions of said approval are complied with.
D. A nonrenewable temporary certificate of occupancy for a part of a
building may be issued by the Zoning Enforcement Officer for a period
of not more than six months.
§ 213-70. Records.
A record of all zoning permits, certificates of compliance and certificates of
occupancy shall be kept in the office of the Zoning Enforcement Officer.
§ 213-71. Penalties for offenses.
Any person or corporation, whether as owner, lessee, architect, contractor
or builder, or the agent or employee of any of them, who violates or is
accessory to the violation of any provision of this chapter or any rule or
regulation made under the authority conferred by this chapter or who shall
erect, construct, alter, enlarge, convert or move any building or structure or
any part thereof without a building permit or in violation of any statement
or plans submitted and approved under the provisions of this chapter or
who shall use any building, structure or land in violation of this chapter or
any rule or regulation made under the authority conferred by this chapter
or in violation of the provisions of any zoning permit, building permit or
certificate of occupancy or without a zoning permit, building permit, change
of use permit or certificate of occupancy where one is required by this
chapter and who fails to abate said violation within 30 days after written
notice has been served upon him, either by mail or personal service, shall
be liable to a penalty in accordance with the statutes of the State of
Connecticut. Each day that a violation remains shall constitute a separate
offense.
§ 213-69 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-71
1:727

ARTICLE XI
Site Plan Approval
§ 213-72. Certificate of approval required; application procedure.
A. Applicability. For all uses of land or buildings in any commercial,
industrial or regional development district, including any change of use,
for all uses in a residential district requiring eight or more off-street
parking spaces and for all expansions of existing uses which add 25%
or more to the floor area, cars generated, parking spaces or occupants
of the site, a certificate of approval by the Planning Commission shall
be required before any building permit may be issued. The Director of
Planning and Planning Commission Chairman shall have the authority
to waive the necessity for Planning Commission approval for changes of
use in existing buildings, subject to confirmation by the Commission at
its next regular meeting. [Amended 3-19-1984; 10-21-1985]
B. Site plan objectives. In reviewing a certificate of approval application,
the Planning Commission shall take into consideration the health, safety
and welfare of the public in general and the immediate neighborhood in
particular and may prescribe reasonable conditions and safeguards to
ensure the accomplishment of the following general objectives:
(1) That the proposed site plan shall be in general conformance with
the intent of the Plan of Development; however, the Plan of
Development shall not take precedence over specific provisions of
the zoning regulations.
(2) That all buildings, structures, uses, equipment or material are
readily accessible for fire and police protection.
(3) That adequate off-street parking and loading spaces are provided to
prevent on-street and off-traffic congestion; that all parking spaces
and maneuvering areas are suitably identified; that entrances and
exits are suitably identified and designed to specific use radii; that
the interior circulation system is adequately designed to provide
safe and convenient access to all structures, uses and/or parking
spaces; that parking areas are provided with suitable bumper
guards, guardrails, islands, crosswalks, speed bumps and similar
safety devices when deemed necessary by the Commission to
adequately protect life and property; and that provision is made for
safe pedestrian movement within and adjacent to the property by
the installation of sidewalks.
(4) That all proposed traffic and pedestrian accessways do not create
traffic hazards and are adequate but not excessive in number;
adequate in width, grade, alignment and visibility; adequate in
distance from street corners, places of public assembly and other
accessways; and adequate in design for other similar safety
considerations.
(5) That the general landscaping of the site complies with the purpose
and intent of this chapter; that existing trees are preserved to the
maximum extent possible; and that parking, storage, refuse and
service areas are suitably screened during all seasons from the
view of adjacent residential areas and public rights-of-way.
§ 213-72 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-72
1:729
(6) That lighting of the site shall be adequate at ground level for the
protection and safety of the public in regard to pedestrian and
vehicular circulation and that glare from the installation of outdoor
lights and illuminated signs is properly shielded from the view of
adjacent property and public rights-of-way.
(7) That all utility systems are suitably located, adequately designed
and properly installed to serve the proposed uses and to protect the
property from adverse air, water or land pollution.
(8) That the development of the site will preserve sensitive
environmental land features, such as steep slopes, wetlands and
large rock outcroppings, and will attempt to preserve public scenic
views or historically significant features.
(9) That soil erosion and sediment controls are designed, installed and
maintained to minimize soil erosion and sedimentation resulting
from development. [Added 2-3-1986]
(10) That the location and size of any proposed use, building or
structure, as well as the nature and intensity of operations involved
or conducted in connection therewith, will be in general harmony
with the character of the surrounding neighborhood and will not be
hazardous or otherwise detrimental to the appropriate and orderly
development or use of any adjacent land, building or structure.
C. Procedure.
(1) Application for a certificate of approval shall be made to the
Planning Commission in writing on a form prescribed by the
Planning Commission 15 days prior to a regular meeting and shall
be accompanied by plans, elevations and any other data necessary to
show the detail of the proposed use of land or buildings, as outlined
in § 213-72J. Each application shall require a fee as indicated in the
Land Use Fee Schedule. [Amended 11-20-1989; 12-1-2008]
(2) Prior to the consideration of a certificate of approval application
by the Planning Commission, notice shall be sent to each abutting
property owner at least 10 days prior to the meeting at which the
application is to be considered; said notice shall describe the nature
of the proposal and the time and place of the meeting and shall
further state that said meeting is a public meeting and not a formal
public hearing and will be conducted accordingly at the discretion
of the Commission Chairman. The applicant shall provide the names
and complete mailing addresses of the most recent abutting
property owners as listed in the current City of Meriden Assessor's
records.
(3) The Planning Commission, at its regular meeting, shall review the
plans and other documents which may be required and shall render
a decision to determine that no adverse traffic condition is being
created and that proper parking facilities are provided for the
proposed use. The Planning Commission shall also consider the
appropriateness of the proposed location of structures, the
installation of sidewalks, curbing, signs, water and sewer lines or
connections, stormwater drainage, the location of light standards
or other methods of illuminating the parking area and building, the
§ 213-72 MERIDEN CODE § 213-72
1:730
location of traffic islands and any planting materials within said
islands, the location, height and type of screening materials which
will be located along the property lines, general landscaping and,
in general, any conditions which might impair the welfare or safety
of the general public using said facilities. The Planning Commission
may require special conditions to assure the safety and welfare of
the community and conformance with the general character of the
neighborhood.
(4) Before a permit is granted by the Planning Commission under this
section, the applicant may be required to post a bond with the
Planning Commission in an amount approved by the Planning
Commission as sufficient to guarantee conformity with the
provisions of the permit issued thereunder. Said bond shall be
submitted at a time to be determined by the Commission. The
estimated cost of measures required to control soil erosion and
sedimentation, as specified in the approved plan, that are a condition
of certification of any modified site plan may be required to be
covered in a performance bond or other assurance acceptable to
the Commission in accordance with this provision. [Amended
2-3-1986]
(5) The applicant shall submit seven copies of the plot plan or
development plan of the project, along with one copy of elevations
or preliminary drawings showing the general type of building to be
constructed, to the Planning Commission for review. The Planning
Commission, upon approval of said development, shall issue a
certificate of approval to the applicant along with one copy of the
approved plot plan. The Planning Commission shall retain two copies
of the approved development plan in its files and shall transmit
one approved copy of the plot plan along with one copy of the
certificate of approval to the Building Department and one copy to
the Engineering Division for their records.
(6) The Planning Commission shall reject or issue the certificate of
approval within 65 days of the meeting at which the application is
presented. Failure of the Planning Commission to act within said
period shall be deemed approval by the Planning Commission of the
proposal as submitted, and the Planning Commission shall issue said
certificate.
D. Soil erosion and sediment control certification. Approval of the plans
by the Planning Commission shall constitute certification that the soil
erosion and sediment control plan, as filed, complies with the
requirements and objectives of this chapter. [Added 2-3-1986]
E. Inspection. Inspection shall be made by the Commission or its
designated agent during development to ensure compliance with the
certified plan and that control measures and facilities are performed or
installed and maintained. The Commission may require the permittee to
verify through progress reports that soil erosion and sediment control
measures have been performed or installed according to the certified
plan and are being operated and maintained. [Amended 2-3-1986]
§ 213-72 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-72
1:731
F. Expiration. Any approved certificate of approval for a site plan for which
a building permit has not been secured within one year from the date
of a certificate of approval shall be considered not valid, unless an
extension of time is applied for by the applicant prior to the actual
expiration date and granted by the Commission.
G. Amendments or modification. Application for amendments to an
approved site plan shall be made in the same manner as the original
application. Minor modification may be approved by the Director of
Planning.
H. Continuance. All conditions and improvements shown on an approved
site plan shall remain with the property as long as the use indicated
on the approved site plan is still in operation. The conditions and
improvements shall continue in force regardless of any change in
ownership of the property.
I. Any person aggrieved by the action of the Planning Commission may
appeal said action within 15 days to the Superior Court of New Haven
District.
J. Application for certificate of approval. For all uses requiring a certificate
of approval, a site plan shall include seven sets of the following
information, maps and plans. All applications shall include an accurate
Class A-2 survey of the property and improvements prepared by a land
surveyor registered in the State of Connecticut. All plans shall be
prepared, signed and sealed by a Connecticut-registered engineer,
architect or landscape architect, whichever is appropriate. All plans
shall be prepared at a scale of one inch equals not more than 20 feet or
not less than 50 feet.
(1) General information.
(a) Name and address of the applicant and owner of record as
listed on the City's tax rolls. If the applicant is not the owner of
record, the latter shall also sign the application.
(b) Date, North arrow and numerical and graphical scale on each
map.
(c) A written description of the proposed use or uses.
(d) A table or chart indicating the proposed number or amount
and types of uses, lot area, lot width, yards, building height,
coverage, floor area, parking spaces, landscaping and open
spaces as they relate to the requirements of this chapter.
(2) Location map. An accurate scale map at a scale of one inch equals
1,000 feet shall be submitted showing the subject property and all
property and streets within 1,000 feet of any part of the subject
property.
(3) Easement(s). Location, width and purpose of all existing and
proposed easements and rights-of-way on the property.
(4) Buildings and uses.
(a) Location, dimensions, area, height and setbacks of all existing
and proposed buildings, signs, fences and walls.
(b) Location of all existing and proposed uses and facilities not
requiring a building, such as swimming pools, tennis courts,
light standards, tanks, transformers and dumpsters.
§ 213-72 MERIDEN CODE § 213-72
1:732
(5) Parking, loading and circulation.
(a) Location, arrangement and dimensions of automobile parking
spaces, aisles, vehicular drives, fire lanes, entrances, exits and
ramps.
(b) Location, arrangement and dimensions of loading and
unloading areas.
(c) Location and dimensions of pedestrian walkways, entrances
and exits.
(6) Signs and lighting.
(a) Location, size, height, orientation and plans of all signs.
(b) Location, size, height, orientation and design of any outdoor
lighting.
(7) Utilities. Location and design of all existing and proposed sanitary
sewer, storm drainage, water supply facilities and refuse collection
areas, as well as other underground and aboveground utilities. All
public utilities shall be placed underground. The Commission may
waive this requirement if engineering data substantiates that such
underground placement of utilities is impractical.
(8) Topographic map. The topographic map shall illustrate the existing
and proposed conditions of the property, including existing and
proposed contours with intervals of five feet, referred to the City
of Meriden datum, and location of all existing wooded areas,
watercourses, wetlands, rock outcrops and other significant
physical features and, where appropriate, the wetlands boundary
and the flood hazard area.
(9) A soil erosion and sediment control map and narrative shall be
submitted for all development activities in which the cumulative
disturbed area will be more than 1/2 acre. The plan shall conform
with § 213-57 of this chapter. [Added 2-3-1986]
(10) Open space and landscaping plan. The open space and landscaping
plan shall illustrate the existing and proposed landscape
development of the property, including location, general layout,
type and size of buffer or landscape areas, plant material, fencing,
screening devices, decorative paving or other materials proposed.
(11) Staging plan map. In cases where the applicant wishes to develop
in stages, an overall site and staging plan indicating ultimate
development for the entire property shall be submitted at the same
scale as the site plan.
(12) Other information. The applicant shall submit any other
information deemed by the Commission to be necessary to
determine conformity with the intent of this chapter.
§ 213-73. Special exceptions.
A. Applicability. In all cases where this chapter requires approval by special exception
permit, no building permit shall be issued by the Building Official except after
public notice and hearing in accordance with the General Statutes of the State of
Connecticut upon the authorization of the Zoning Board of Appeals.
B. Special exception objectives. In evaluating a special exception application, the
Zoning Board of Appeals shall take into consideration the health, safety and welfare
§ 213-72 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-73
1:733
of the public, in general, and the immediate neighborhood, in particular, and may
prescribe reasonable conditions and safeguards to ensure the accomplishment of
the following objectives:
(1) Harmony with development. That the proposed use is of such location, size
and character that, in general, it will be in harmony with the appropriate and
orderly development of the district in which it is proposed to be situated, will
not tend to depreciate the value of property in the neighborhood, and will not
be detrimental to the orderly development of adjacent properties in accordance
with the zoning classification of such properties.
(2) Site plan objectives. That the site plan submitted as part of the special
exception application will accomplish the site plan objectives described in
§ 213-72, particularly in that it will not create traffic or fire hazards and will not
block or hamper the City circulation pattern.
(3) Conformance to requirements. Unless otherwise specified, a special exception
use shall conform to all requirements of the district in which it is located. Where
two or more special exception uses apply to the same premises, the minimum
requirements shall be the minimum requirements for each use as specified in
this chapter or, in cases of two or more special exception uses in the same
building, whichever requirements are more restrictive.
C. Procedure. Application for a special exception shall be made to the Zoning Board
of Appeals in writing at least 15 days prior to a regular meeting and shall be
accompanied by all required items as outlined in § 213-73I. The applicant shall
submit 10 copies of the application to the Zoning Board of Appeals.
(1) Public hearing and notice.
(a) The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hold a public hearing on all applications for special exception and shall publish a notice of said hearing in a newspaper of general
circulation in accordance with § 213-75B.
(b) In addition to published notice, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall give notice of any
such hearing at least 10 days prior to the date of the hearing to the applicant filing application and to the property owners whose property is located within, abutting and
directly across the street from all boundaries of the property which is the subject such hearing.
(c) Further, the petitioner shall erect or cause to have erected a sign on the premises
affected by the proposed special exception at least 10 days prior to the public hearing
on such special exception. Said sign shall be a minimum of four feet by five feet with
black lettering no smaller than three inches by 1/2 inch on a white background. Said
sign shall be weather-resistant, securely fastened or staked, be clearly visible from street closest to the affected property and be maintained as such until the day following
the public hearing. The sign shall contain the following information:
Public Notice
A petition for a special exception has been filed with the Zoning Board of Appeals. public hearing will be held on said petition on (date of hearing) in City Hall.
(2) A report from the Zoning Enforcement Officer attesting to whether the above-described
sign was erected and maintained as required shall be made part of the record at the
public hearing. Failure of a petitioner to comply with this requirement may be grounds
for automatic denial of the proposed special exception with consideration being given to
cases where weather conditions or acts of vandalism have destroyed a properly posted
sign:
§ 213-73 MERIDEN CODE § 213-73
1:734
(3) The Zoning Board of Appeals shall reject or issue a special exception permit within days of the conclusion of the public hearing on the application. Failure of the Zoning
Board of Appeals to act within the time period shall be deemed approval of the proposal
as submitted.
D. Conditions and safeguards. Any condition or safeguards attached to the granting of
a special exception shall remain with the property as long as the special exception
use is still in operation. These conditions and safeguards shall continue in force
regardless of any change in ownership of the property.
E. Revocation. Any authorized special exception shall be subject to revocation by the
Zoning Board of Appeals if any condition or safeguard imposed by the Zoning Board
of Appeals upon buildings, structures, land or uses for said permit is not strictly
adhered to by the applicant, user and/or owner.
F. Amendments or modifications. Applications for special exception amendments
which are necessitated by site conditions or which are deemed to be in the public
interest shall be made in the same manner as the original application, except that
amendments which are found to be of a minor nature or which do not materially
alter the special exception, as determined by the Zoning Board of Appeals, may
be authorized with Zoning Board of Appeals approval only without another public
hearing.
G. Time period and expiration. In approving a special exception, the Zoning Board
of Appeals may set time limits on the permit and/or require periodic renewal of
the permit without a public hearing. In the event that an appeal is taken from the
Zoning Board of Appeals' approval of a special exception, then the time period shall
commence on the date of final disposition of such litigation. An expired special
exception shall be considered not valid.
H. Continuance. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, when an
amendment is adopted to this chapter or boundaries of zoning districts, a special
exception which has been approved according to the regulations in effect at the
time of filing shall not be required to conform to such amendment, provided that:
(1) Construction of any of the proposed improvements, including but not limited
to roads, sewer lines, landscaping, recreational facilities, etc., shall have
commenced within 12 months from the effective date of the special exception
and certificate of approval (site plan) approvals.
(2) Construction of the improvements are diligently pursued and prosecuted to
substantial completion within the original time constraints set forth at the
time of approval or within three years following the effective date of such
amendment in the zoning regulations or boundaries of zoning districts.
(3) If the applicant and/or owner does not adhere to these conditions, the special
exception permit shall be reconsidered by the Zoning Board of Appeals and
declared void. Notification thereof shall be filed with the City Clerk.
I. Applications. Applications for a special exception shall be made in writing in 10
copies to the Zoning Board of Appeals and shall include:
(1) A statement describing the existing and proposed use or uses.
(2) A site plan in accordance with § 213-72, if applicable.
(3) A list of all property owners required to be notified in § 213-79B, together with
addresses.
(4) Such other information as the Zoning Board of Appeals may require to
determine compliance with the intent and purpose of this chapter.
§ 213-73 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-73
1:735
(5) All applications shall be accompanied by a fee, as provided in the Fee Schedule
of the City of Meriden,139 to cover the cost of administration. Said fee shall be
paid at the time of filing the application.
139. Editor's Note: Said fee schedule is on file in the Clerk's office.
§ 213-73 MERIDEN CODE § 213-73
1:736
ARTICLE XII
Zoning Board of Appeals
§ 213-74. Powers.
The Zoning Board of Appeals, hereinafter called the "Board," shall have
the following powers as set forth in Chapter 124, § 8-6, of the Connecticut
General Statutes, as amended:
A. To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged that there is an error
in any order, requirement or decision made by the official charged with
the enforcement of this chapter or any bylaw, ordinance or regulation
adopted under the provisions of this chapter.
B. To hear and decide all matters, including special exceptions, upon which
it is required to pass by the specific terms of this chapter or state statute.
C. To determine and vary the application of the zoning bylaws, ordinances
or regulations in harmony with their general purpose and intent and with
due consideration for conserving the public health, safety, convenience,
welfare and property values solely with respect to a parcel of land where,
owing to conditions especially affecting such parcel but not affecting
generally the district in which it is situated, a literal enforcement of such
bylaws, ordinances or regulations would result in exceptional difficulty
or unusual hardship, so that substantial justice will be done and the
public safety and welfare secured.
§ 213-75. Adoption of rules and procedures; public hearings.
A. The Board shall adopt such rules, regulations and procedures as may be deemed
necessary to carry into effect the provisions of this chapter.
B. Public hearings conducted by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
(1) Notice of public hearings on variances or special exceptions.
(a) The Board shall hold a public hearing on all applications for special exceptions variances. The Board shall conduct the proceedings in conformance with Chapter §§ 8-7 and 8-7a of the Connecticut General Statutes, 1958 revision, as amended. of the time, place and purpose of such hearings shall be published in a newspaper
having substantial circulation within the City at least twice at intervals of not than two days, the first not more than 15 days nor less than 10 days and the less than two days before the hearing, and notice shall be mailed to each abutting
property owner at least 10 days prior to the hearing by the Zoning Board of Appeals'
administration office. The applicant shall provide the names and complete addresses of the most recent abutting property owners as listed on the current Meriden Assessor's records within 15 days prior to the hearing to the Zoning Board Appeals' administration office. Abutting property owners shall include owners directly across the street line as well as contiguous property owners.
(b) Where an applicant's property is within 500 feet of a municipal boundary, the Clerk said adjoining municipality shall be notified of the hearing in writing at least prior to the hearing.
(c) The petitioner shall erect or cause to have erected a sign on the premises affected
by the proposed variance or special exception at least 10 days prior to the hearing on such variance or special exception. Said sign shall be a minimum feet by five feet with black lettering no smaller than three inches by 1/2 inch white background. Said sign shall be weather-resistant, securely fastened or § 213-74 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-75
1:737
be clearly visible from the street closest to the affected property and be maintained
as such until the day following the public hearing. The sign shall contain the following
information:
Public Notice
A petition for a variance (or special exception) has been filed with the Zoning Board Appeals. A public hearing will be held on said petition on (date of hearing) in City Hall.
(2) A report from the Zoning Enforcement Officer attesting to whether the above-described
sign was erected and maintained as required shall be made part of the record at the
public hearing. Failure of a petitioner to comply with this requirement may be grounds
for automatic denial of the variance or special exception, with consideration being
given to cases where weather conditions or acts of vandalism have destroyed a properly
posted sign.
§ 213-76. Rendering of decisions.
A. In granting any variance or special exception, the Board may prescribe
any conditions applying thereto that it may deem necessary or desirable.
B. Decisions of the Board shall be made in accordance with the purpose and
spirit of this chapter. In addition to this general rule, no special exception
will be granted unless the following requirements are satisfied:
(1) The new use will not create a traffic or fire hazard.
(2) The new use will not block or hamper the town pattern of highway
circulation.
(3) The new use will not tend to depreciate the value of property in
the neighborhood or be otherwise detrimental or aggravating to the
neighborhood or its residents or alter the neighborhood's essential
characteristics.
C. No variance shall be granted on any allegation of hardship resulting
from an act of the applicant subsequent to the adoption of this chapter,
whether in violation of the provisions hereof or not. Before granting a
variance on the basis of unusual difficulty or unreasonable hardship,
there must be a finding by the Board of Appeals that all of the following
conditions exist:
(1) That if the owner complied with the provisions of this chapter, he
would not be able to make any reasonable use of his property.
(2) That the difficulties or hardship are peculiar to the property in
question, in contrast with those of other properties in the same
district.
(3) That the hardship was not the result of the applicant's own action.
(4) That the hardship is not merely financial or pecuniary.
D. Time of decision. The Board of Appeals shall render its decision on such
an appeal within 65 days after the hearing.
E. Any special exception for which a building permit has not been secured
within one year from the date of approval of the special exception shall
be null and void.
§ 213-75 MERIDEN CODE § 213-76
1:738
ARTICLE XIII
Amendment Procedure
§ 213-77. Amendments authorized.
The districts established by this chapter or the boundaries thereof may be
changed or altered or any provision thereof may be changed, altered or
amended and any property within the City may be rezoned, reclassified or
established whenever the public necessity, convenience or general welfare
requires the same by the procedure set forth in this section.
§ 213-78. Initiation of procedure.
Any such change, amendment, alteration, rezoning or establishment (singly
or collectively referred to herein as an "amendment") may be initiated by:
A. The filing of a verified petition of one or more persons having a legal or
equitable interest in the property affected by the proposed amendment,
which petition shall be filed in triplicate with the City Clerk and which
shall contain reasons why the change of zone is being sought and shall
be accompanied by three copies of a map of the property at a scale of
100 feet to the inch showing a radius of 500 feet and the names of all
property owners, including addresses, within the radius, to comply with
Title 8, Chapter 124, of the Connecticut State Statutes, and by a fee of
$200. A petition for a zoning text amendment shall be accompanied by a
fee of $100. [Amended 8-21-1989]
B. Where the interests of the City are concerned, a petition by a proper
official shall be filed in duplicate with the City Clerk.
§ 213-79. Public hearings; notice.
A. Public hearing and notice. The City Council, acting as the Zoning Commission, shall
hold a public hearing on all proposed amendments to this chapter or the Zoning
Map, and the City Clerk shall publish a notice of said hearing in a newspaper having
a substantial circulation in the municipality at least twice at intervals of not less
than two days, the first not more than 15 days nor less than 10 days and the last not
less than two days before such hearing.
B. Additional notice.
(1) In addition, for proposed Zoning Map amendments, the Council shall give notice of such hearing at least 10 days prior to the date of the hearing to the applicant filing application and to the property owners whose property is located within, abutting directly across the street from all boundaries of the proposed Zoning Map change.
(2) The applicant shall provide the names of abutting property owners from the latest of Meriden Assessor's records. Abutting property owners are considered to include
those across a street.
(3) Further, the petitioner shall erect or cause to have erected a sign on the premises
affected by the proposed amendment at least 10 days prior to the pubic hearing on such
variance or special exception. Said sign shall be a minimum of four feet by five feet with
black lettering no smaller than three inches by 1/2 inch on a white background. Said
sign shall be weather-resistant, securely fastened or staked, be clearly visible from street closest to the affected property and be maintained as such until the day following
the public hearing.
§ 213-77 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-79
1:739
(a) The sign shall contain the following information:
Public Notice
A petition for an amendment to the Zoning Map has been filed with the City Council
acting as the zoning commission. A public hearing will be held on said petition on (date
of hearing) in City Hall.
(b) The sign shall also contain a summary of the petitioner's application.
(4) A report from the Zoning Enforcement Officer attesting to whether the above-described
sign was erected and maintained as required shall be made part of the record at the
public hearing. Failure of a petitioner to comply with this requirement may be grounds
for automatic denial of the amendment, with consideration being given to cases where
weather conditions or acts of vandalism have destroyed a properly posted sign.
§ 213-80. Consideration by Planning Commission.
Prior to the aforesaid hearing, the Planning Commission shall consider
the proposed amendment and make a report of its findings and
recommendations with respect to the proposed amendment and shall
submit to the Zoning Commission by filing with said Commission an attested
copy of such report within 35 days after receipt of the proposed change.
Failure of the Planning Commission to report within said period shall be
deemed to be an approval by the Planning Commission of the proposed
amendment.
§ 213-81. Consideration by City Council.
Upon filing of such report by the Planning Commission or upon the
expiration of said 35 days as aforesaid and after notice has been given as
provided in § 213-79A hereof, the City Council shall hold a public hearing
and hear and consider said matter, at which time the statement of the
vote of the Planning Commission approving, disapproving or proposing
modification of such proposal shall be publicly read or, in the alternative,
a public statement made by the Planning Commission, as filed, to report
on the proposal. Where a proposed amendment is by petition, within 65
days following the conclusion of said hearing the City Council, acting as the
Zoning Commission, shall act on the petition. If the Planning Commission
reports negatively, the City Council, acting as the Zoning Commission,
would require a 2/3 vote to approve a zone change.
§ 213-79 MERIDEN CODE § 213-81
1:740
ARTICLE XIV
Repealer; Severability; Effective Date
§ 213-82. Repealer.
The Zoning Ordinance of the City of Meriden, 1966, as amended, and all
other ordinances and parts of ordinances of said City in conflict with this
chapter, to the extent of such conflict and no further, are hereby repealed,
provided that nothing herein contained shall be deemed to repeal or amend
any ordinance of said City requiring a permit or license, or both, to carry on
any business, trade or occupation.
§ 213-83. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter is
for any reason held by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid,
such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of
this chapter. The City Council hereby declares that it would have passed
this chapter and each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase
hereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections,
sentences, clauses or phrases are declared invalid.
§ 213-84. Effective date.
The effective date of this chapter shall be July 7, 1983.
§ 213-82 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-84
1:741